City of Winooski Municipal Code
Table of Contents
For the official copy of the Municipal Code, please visit the Winooski City Clerk’s
Office on 27 West Allen Street.
CH 1 General Provisions
CH 2 Abandoned Vehicles
CH 3 Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
CH 4 Buildings and Building Regulations
CH 5 Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
CH 6 Criminal Offenses
CH 7 Garbage and Refuse
CH 8 Hazardous Material Response
CH 9 Housing
CH 10 Reserved
CH 11 Landfill Operations
CH 12 Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
CH 13 Motor Vehicles and Traffic
CH 14 Open Burning
CH 15 Parking
CH 16 Parks and Recreation
CH 17 Public Building Registry
CH 18 Public Health
CH 19 Reserved
CH 20 Regulating Truck Traffic
CH 21 Sewers and Sewage Disposal
CH 22 Streets and Sidewalks
CH 23 Storm Water Management
CH 24 Water Use
CH 25 Reserved
CH 26 Event Permits and Regulations
CH 27 Reserved
CH 28 Fees
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
1
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the rules of construction of the Winooski
City Code and the procedure for enforcing same.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 1.01 How Code designated and cited
Section 1.02 Rules of construction and definitions
Section 1.03 Scope and purpose of provisions
Section 1.04 Ordinances repealed
Section 1.05 Effect of repeal of ordinances
Section 1.06 Severability of parts of Code
Section 1.07 Catchlines of sections
Section 1.08 Copy of Code to be signed and kept in clerk's office;
ordinances to be furnished upon request
Section 1.09 Altering Code
Section 1.10 Supplementation of Code
Section 1.11 General penalty; continuing violations
Section 1.12 Prosecution where different penalties exist for same
offense
Section 1.13 Disposition of fines and penalties
Charter Cross-references: § 19-401; § 19-402
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 1971 et seq.
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1.01 - HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Winooski City Code," and shall be so cited.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
2
SECTION 1.02 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
A. In the construction of this Code and all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the city council:
COMPUTATION OF TIME. When time is to be determined from a date or
day an act is done, such date or day when such act is done shall not be
included in the computation unless otherwise provided. When the last
day so computed falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the act
may be done on the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department, Division Director, or Chief of the city to do
some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize
such person to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to
perform the required act or make the required inspections unless the
terms of the provision or section specifically designate otherwise.
INTERPRETATION. In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater
restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions
imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or
regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to each meaning.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
3
B. In the construction of this Code and all ordinances, unless specified
otherwise, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY. Whenever the word "city" is used within this Code, it shall mean
the City of Winooski, Vermont. Unless otherwise stated, the authority of
the “city” rests with the city manager who may designate or appoint
any authorized municipal official or designee as needed.
CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS, CITY LIMITS. Whenever the
term "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" is used, it
shall mean the legal boundary of the City of Winooski.
COUNCIL. The word "council" shall mean the city council of the City of
Winooski.
COUNTY. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County
of Chittenden in the State of Vermont.
MANAGER or CITY MANAGER. The term "manager" or "city manager"
shall mean the city manager of the City of Winooski.
MONTH. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
OWNER. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as
well as to individuals.
PREMISES. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place
or places, to include a building or facility, including the fenced or walled
(or demarcated or segregated) space surrounding it.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
4
PUBLIC PLACE - Public place shall mean any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has
access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful
purpose. A public place shall also include but not be limited to any store,
shop, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping
center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of
the general public.
SEAL. Whenever the word "seal" is used, it shall mean the city seal.
SIDEWALK. Shall mean that improved portion of a street between the
curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of
Vermont.
STREET. The word "street" shall include the entire width between
property lines of every way used for vehicular and pedestrian travel
which has become public by authority of the law, and such ways in
public places other than highways as the public is permitted to use for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TENANT, OCCUPANT. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease
or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either
alone or with others.
V.S.A.(VSA). The abbreviation “VSA” shall mean the most current edition
of the Vermont Statutes Annotated, as amended.
WEEK. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days.
YEAR. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise
stated.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
5
SECTION 1.03 - SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS
The ordinances contained in this Code of Ordinances are intended to
encompass and promote the general health, welfare, peace and good order of
the community at large. Said ordinances have been codified herein for the
purpose of facilitating the enforcement thereof.
SECTION 1.04 - ORDINANCES REPEALED
Subject to the limitations of section 1.05, all ordinances of the city heretofore
in force are hereby repealed.
SECTION 1.05 - EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES
A. The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before
or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed, nor any right accrued
or acquired.
SECTION 1.06 - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
6
SECTION 1.07 - CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface are
intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the
sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
SECTION 1.08 - COPY OF CODE TO BE SIGNED AND KEPT IN CLERK’S OFFICE;
ORDIANCES TO BE FURNISHED UPON REQUEST
A. A copy of the Code of Ordinances shall be signed by the Mayor, city
council and the city clerk, kept up-to-date by the city clerk and kept in the
office of the city clerk subject to inspection by citizens.
B. All ordinances hereafter enacted shall be published by the city clerk in a
convenient form and in different numbers to supply all persons who may
reasonably desire them.
SECTION 1.09 - ALTERING CODE
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Winooski to be misrepresented thereby.
B. A violation of this section shall be a civil violation and subject to civil
penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of
Winooski City Code.
SECTION 1.10 - SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE
A. By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city
council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
7
permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or
adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also
include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the
supplement.
B. In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
C. When preparing a supplement of this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement)
may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do
so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
1. Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
2. Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement,
and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
3. Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code, and where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision
numbers;
4. Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case
may be, or to "sections....to...." (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
5. Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
8
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code;
but in no case shall the codifier made any change in the meaning
or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or
already embodied in the Code.
SECTION 1.11 - GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS
A. Criminal violation. The violation of a criminal ordinance or rule adopted
by the city as provided for in 24 V.S.A § 1974 shall be a misdemeanor.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, the penalty for a violation of
any criminal ordinance or rule adopted by the city shall be a fine not
less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a first offense, a fine of
not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second
offense and the maximum penalty provided for by State Statutes for a
third or subsequent offense. Each day any violation of any provision of
this Code or any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
B. Civil Offenses. All civil ordinance violations, except municipal parking
violations, and all continuing civil ordinance violations, where the
penalty is no greater than provided for in 24 V.S.A. § 1974 (a), shall be
brought before the judicial bureau pursuant to Chapter 29 of Title 4
and Chapter 59 of Title 24. If the penalty for all continuing civil
ordinance violations is greater than provided for in 24 V.S.A § 1974 (a),
or injunctive relief, other than as provided in subsection (c) of 24 V.S.A.
§ 1974 (a), is sought, the action shall be brought in superior court,
unless the matter relates to enforcement under Chapter 117 of Title 24,
in which instance the action shall be brought in environmental division.
Civil ordinance violation citations can be issued by any authorized
municipal official. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Except as otherwise expressly provided, the penalty for a violation of
any civil ordinance or rule adopted by the city shall be a fine not less
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a first offense, a fine of not
less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second offense
and the maximum penalty provided for by State Statutes for a third or
subsequent offense.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
9
D. Issuance of City Ordinance Violation. Any law enforcement officer who
cites an accused for violation of any city ordinance which is punishable
as a criminal offense shall issue a "Notice of Ordinance Violation" unless
instructed by the city attorney, an assistant city attorney or city grand
juror to issue a standard superior court citation.
1. The ticket shall be a citation to appear in Superior Court, Criminal
Division as contemplated by Vermont Rules of Criminal
Procedure, Rule 3 (V.R.Cr.P. 3) and shall contain the name of the
accused, the ordinance(s) violated, the date and time to appear
in court, and any other information required by law for a valid
citation.
2. The ticket shall also contain a "Notice of Ordinance Violation"
section which shall allow and inform the accused of the
following:
a. The option for the accused to waive process and
prosecution by paying a waiver fee of between one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each count to the city within ten (10)
days of issuance.
b. That upon full and timely payment of the waiver fee the
accused shall not be required to appear in court and the
citation portion of the ticket shall be null and void.
c. That if the accused elects not to make full and timely
payment of the waiver fee, he or she shall appear in court
on the date and time indicated on the ticket for
prosecution.
3. Should the waiver not be exercised and prosecution be had, this
subsection in no way alters or pre-empts any fine, penalty or
other remedy as provided by this ordinance.
Statutory Cross-References: 24 V.S.A. § 1974 and 1974a; 24 V.S.A. § 2291(15)
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
10
SECTION 1.12 - PROSECTION WHERE DIFFERENT PENALTIES EXIST FOR
SAME OFFENSE
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable, or shall be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the city
grand juror may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one (1)
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
Statutory Cross-References: 24 V.S.A. § 1974 and 13 V.S.A. § 5504
Charter Cross-Reference: § 19-506.
SECTION 1.13 - DISPOSITION OF FINES AND PENALTIES
All fines and penalties for the violation of any ordinance or the order of any
board lawfully established thereunder, or the order of any person who has
been given lawful authority to issue such order, or the order of the city
council, shall, when recovered, inure to the city, and be paid into the city
treasury, unless otherwise directed by the laws of the state or the ordinances
of the city.
6697585_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
1
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of and visitors to the City of Winooski pursuant to the authority contained
in the Winooski City Charter and 24 VSA § 2291.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Regulations
Section 2.01 Definitions
Section 2.02 Storing, Parking or Leaving Dismantled, unregistered or
Uninspected Motor Vehicles Prohibited; Declared a
Nuisance; Exceptions
Section 2.03 Notice of Removal
Section 2.04 Manner of Giving Notice to Remove from Private Property
Section 2.05 Content of Notice to Remove
Section 2.06 Responsibility for Removal
Section 2.07 Request for Hearing
Section 2.08 Removal of Motor Vehicle from Private Property
Section 2.09 Notice of Removal by City
Section 2.10 Disposition of Vehicles
Section 2.11 Redemption of Seized Vehicles
Section 2.12 Liability of Owner or Occupant
Article IV Penalties
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
2
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 2.01 - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean any motor vehicle, boat, RV
(recreational vehicle, trailer, motorcycle), which is found to be unattended for
a period of more than five (5) days.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean a discarded, inoperative, junked or
dismantled (wholly or partially), wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicle, or
parts thereof, or one other than an on-premise utility vehicle. Any motor
vehicle which is not inspected pursuant to 23 V.S.A. §1222 (or the analogous
law of any other jurisdiction) shall be considered a junked motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE shall include all vehicles propelled or drawn by power other
than muscular power, except farm tractors, vehicles running only upon
stationary rails or tracks, motorized highway building equipment, road making
appliances, or electric personal assistive mobility devices.
PRIVATE PROPERTY shall mean any real property within the city which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY shall mean any street or highway and shall include the
entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for
the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
3
SECTION 2.02 - STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED,
UNREGISTERED OR UNINSPECTED MOTOR VEHICLES
PROHIBITED; DECLARED A NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS
A. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle, whether attended or
not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of
time in excess of five (5) days. The presence of an abandoned or junked
motor vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby
declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance
with the provisions of this article. This section shall not apply to any
vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle
held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the
city, and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant
to the zoning laws of the city.
B. Motor vehicles that are neither registered nor inspected shall not be
stored on any unpaved portion of a residence’s front yard, or any
portion of a yard that is clearly visible to a public road. Violation of this
section will result in a fine of $50.00 to the vehicle owner for each day
the violation exists. If, after (5) five days of proper notice to the vehicle
owner the violation remains, the city or its designee shall undertake
removal of the vehicle with the cost of removal to be levied against the
vehicle owner.
SECTION 2.03 - NOTICE TO REMOVE
A. Any duly appointed law enforcement officer or code enforcement
officer may remove any abandoned or junked motor vehicle found upon
any public property within the city. Notice of removal shall be placed
upon the abandoned or junked motor vehicle no less than five (5) days
prior to removal. The removal of an abandoned or junked motor vehicle
from public property will not be subject to the notification provisions of
section 2.10.
B. Any vehicle removed from public property by a law enforcement officer
or code enforcement officer pursuant to this section shall be subject to
the provisions of sections 2.11 and 2.12.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
4
SECTION 2.04 - MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE TO REMOVE FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY
The code enforcement officer shall give notice of removal to the owner of any
abandoned or junked motor vehicle, and notice to the owner or occupant of
the private property where it is located, at least five (5) days prior to action by
the city to remove said vehicle. The cost of removal of the vehicle will be the
responsibility of the vehicle owner or occupant/owner of the property where it
is located. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of the same is
posted in a conspicuous place upon private property on which the vehicle is
located and duplicate copies are sent by 1st class mail to the owner of the
abandoned or junked motor vehicle and to the owner or occupant of the
private property at his/her last known address.
SECTION 2.05 - CONTENT OF NOTICE TO REMOVE
The notice to remove required by section 2.04. of this article shall contain the
request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice
shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or
its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be
levied against the owner or occupant of the property.
SECTION 2.06 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned
or junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property on
which the same is located shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of
removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private
property where the same is located, shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
5
SECTION 2.07 - REQUEST FOR HEARING; REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY
The persons to whom the notice to remove abandoned or junked motor
vehicles from private property are directed, pursuant to this article, or their
duly authorized agents may file a written request for a hearing before the city
council within the five (5) day period of compliance prescribed in section 2.04
for the purpose of defending the charges by the city.
SECTION 2.08 - PROCEDURE FOR HEARING
The hearing authorized by this article shall be held as soon as practicable after
the filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed
shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least seven (7) days in
advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the
notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as
either party deems necessary.
SECTION 2.09 - REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
If the violation described in the notice required by this article has not been
remedied within the thirty (30) day period of compliance, or in the event that
a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the
existence of the violation is affirmed by the city council, the code enforcement
officer or designee, shall have the right to take possession of the abandoned
or junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful
for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or
persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle
under the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 2.10 - NOTICE OF REMOVAL BY CITY
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of a vehicle pursuant to this
chapter, the code enforcement officer shall give notice to the registered
owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the
private property from which the vehicle was removed, that said vehicle has
been removed and stored for violation of this chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
6
The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle is stored, the costs
incurred by the city for removal and a statement that the city intends to
dispose of said vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless
it is redeemed.
SECTION 2.11 - DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES
A. Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 2.09, the city
shall after ten (10) days cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle is
appraised at five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, the code
enforcement officer shall execute an affidavit so attesting and
describing the vehicle, including the license plates, vehicle identification
number, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the
vehicle. The code enforcement officer, after complying with the above,
may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale.
If the vehicle is appraised at over five hundred dollars ($500.00) the
code enforcement officer shall give notice of public sale not less than
seven (7) days before the date of the proposed sale.
B. The notice of sale given pursuant to subsection (a) shall state:
1. That sale is of property seized under the provisions of this article
and in the possession of the city;
2. A description of the vehicle, including the make, model, license
number and any other information which will accurately identify
the vehicle;
3. The terms of the sale; and
4. The date, time and place of the sale.
C. The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of
payment of the purchase price, the code enforcement officer shall
execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which is to be
given to the purchaser and the copy thereof to be filed with the clerk of
the city. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability
shall be limited to the return of the purchase price.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 2 - Abandoned Vehicles
7
SECTION 2.12 - REDEMPTION OF SEIZED VEHICLES
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may
redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the sale or
destruction thereof, upon proof of ownership and payment to the city the
actual expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses,
plus reasonable storage fees per day for storage for each vehicle redeemed.
SECTION 2.13 - LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT
The owner or occupant of property on which abandoned vehicles have been
removed by the city shall pay to the city the expenses incurred by the city in
such removal.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Any person who interferes with the lawful authority of the city, or its agents,
granted under this chapter, shall be subject to criminal penalties and such
penalties shall be enforced as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the
Winooski City Code.
6697586_4:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
1
Chapter 3 - Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
ARTICLE I – PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate the keeping of dogs and wolf hybrids.
To provide for their leashing, muzzling, restraint, impoundment and destruction and
to prevent their running at large, so as to protect the public health and safety of the
City of Winooski and the quiet enjoyment of its residents’ homes and properties
under authority of 20 V.S.A. § 3529, 22 V.S.A. §§ 2291 (10), (12), and (15), and 22
V.S.A. Chapter 59.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Regulations
Section 3.01 Definitions
Section 3.02 Ownership; termination
Section 3.03 Keeper; termination
Section 3.04 Exposure to public prohibited if infected with contagious disease
Section 3.05 Running at large, use of sidewalks and streets, etc.; regulations
Section 3.06 Exemptions
Section 3.07 Investigation of vicious domestic pets or wolf hybrids; order
Section 3.08 Confinement of animals in vehicles
Section 3.09 License Required; fees; inspection by Code Enforcement
Section 3.10 License fee imposed; Dogs and Wolf-Hybrid
Section 3.11 Provisional surcharges
Section 3.12 Leashes and collars required; dogs running at large
Section 3.13 Nuisances
Section 3.14 Impoundments
Section 3.15 Notice of Impoundment and Release
Section 3.16 Quarantine
Section 3.17 Duty of Animal Control Officer, City to designate Kennel Facility
Article IV Penalties
Statutory Cross-Reference: 20 V.S.A.§ 3321 et seq.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
2
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 3.01 - Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter the following words have the meanings
indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:
ANIMAL means every species of Kingdom Animalia, excluding human beings.
AT LARGE means off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of the owner, a member of his immediate family or the keeper, either
by leash, collar, or chain.
CAT means both male and female of the genus Felis.
DOG means both male and female of the genus Canis.
DOMESTIC QUADRUPED means animal used by man for labor, transportation
or riding, including but not limited to cows, goats, horses, pigs, sheep and
rabbits.
HUMANE OFFICER or OFFICER means any law enforcement officer as defined
in 23 V.S.A. § 4(11), any humane society officer, employee or agent; any
elected animal control officer appointed by the municipality, local board of
health officer or agent.
KEEPER means any person other than the owner who has the possession and
control of an animal.
KENNEL means an enclosure or structure, other than a building used as a
human residence, an animal hospital, or pet shop, used to confine two (2) or
more dogs or cats.
OWNER means any person owning, keeping and/or harboring an animal.
POULTRY means domesticated birds used by man as a source of food, either
eggs or meat, or for their feathers.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
3
WILD ANIMAL means an animal which is not, by custom in the state, devoted
to the service of man, excluding birds, fish, guinea pigs, hamsters, small
amphibians, turtles, and earthworms. An exotic wild animal is a wild animal
not indigenous to the state.
WOLF-HYBRID means an animal which is the progeny or descendant of a
domestic dog (Canis familiaris) and a wolf (Canis lupus or Canis rufus). "Wolfhybrid"
also means an animal which is advertised, registered, licensed or
otherwise described or represented as a wolf-hybrid by its owner, or an
animal which exhibits primary physical and behavioral wolf characteristics.
SECTION 3.02 - OWNERSHIP; TERMINATION
A person who is the owner of an animal shall be deemed to continue to be its
owner until he/she has sold or donated his right, title and interest in such
animal to another person, or, in the case of an indigenous wild animal, until
the animal has escaped and has returned to its natural state.
SECTION 3.03 - KEEPER; TERMINATION
A person who is the keeper of an animal shall be deemed to continue to be its
keeper until he/she has returned such animal to the custody and control of its
owner, and in the case of an indigenous wild animal, until it has been returned
to the custody and control of the owner or has escaped and returned to its
natural state.
SECTION 3.04 - EXPOSURE TO PUBLIC PROHIBITED IF INFECTED WITH
CONTAGIOUS DISEASE
An owner or keeper of an animal infected with a contagious or infectious
disease shall not expose such animal in a public place whereby the health of
other animals or humans is affected, nor harbor an animal under quarantine,
pursuant to section 3.16 of this chapter, in or on any part of any premises
open to public visitors.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
4
SECTION 3.05 - RUNNING AT LARGE; REGULATIONS
It shall be unlawful to permit any dogs, domestic quadrupeds, poultry, exotic
wild animals or indigenous wild animals to run at large in the city. Any such
animal found running at large may be impounded. This section shall not be
applicable to any city park, or portion thereof, designated as an “off-leash
area” pursuant to Chapter 16, section 16.11 of these Ordinances.
SECTION 3.06 - EXEMPTIONS
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a public officer or
employee or to a common carrier, while carrying out a duty imposed by
law, or while an animal is in transit under control of a common carrier,
or while an animal is being transported through the city under control of
the person so transporting.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to indigenous wild
animals, except when such animals are owned by a person.
SECTION 3.07 - INVESTIGATION OF VICIOUS DOMESTIC PETS OR WOLF
HYBRIDS; ORDER
A. When a domestic pet or wolf-hybrid has bitten a person while the
domestic pet or wolf-hybrid is off the premises of the owner or keeper,
and the person bitten requires medical attention for the attack, such
person may file a written complaint with the legislative body of the
municipality. The complaint shall contain the time, date and place
where the attack occurred, the name and address of the victim or
victims, and any other facts that may assist the city council in
conducting its investigation required by subsection (b) of this section.
B. The city council, within seven (7) days from receipt of the complaint,
shall investigate the charges and hold a hearing on the matter. If the
owner of the domestic pet or wolf-hybrid which is the subject of the
complaint can be ascertained with due diligence, said owner shall be
provided with a written notice of the time, date and place of hearing
and the facts of the complaint.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
5
C. If the domestic pet or wolf-hybrid is found to have bitten the victim
without provocation, the municipal officials shall make such order for
the protection of persons as the facts and circumstances of the case
may require, including, without limitation, that the domestic pet or
wolf-hybrid is disposed of in a humane way, muzzled, chained, or
confined. The order shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
D. The procedures provided in this section shall apply if the domestic pet
or wolf-hybrid is not a rabies suspect. If the appointed animal control
officer determines that the animal is a rabies suspect, the provisions in
the rules of the Department of Health shall apply.
E. A person who, after receiving notice, fails to comply with the terms of
the order shall be subject to criminal penalties, and they will be
enforced as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski City
Code.
SECTION 3.08 - CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS IN VEHICLE
A. A person shall not leave an animal unattended in a standing or parked
motor vehicle in a manner that would endanger the health or safety of
the animal.
B. Any humane officer or member of a fire and rescue service may use
reasonable force to remove any such animal from a motor vehicle. The
officer so removing an animal shall deliver the animal to a designated
veterinarian or authorized kennel facility for the city. If the owner of the
animal cannot be found, the officer shall place a written notice in the
vehicle, bearing the name of the officer and the department and
address where the animal may be claimed. The owner shall be liable for
reasonable expenses, and a lien may be placed on the animal for these
expenses. The officer may not be held liable for criminal or civil liability
for any damage resulting from actions taken under subsection (A) of
this section.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
6
SECTION 3.09 - LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES; INSPECTION BY CODE
ENFORCEMENT
A. No domestic quadrupeds, poultry, bees, exotic wild animals or
indigenous wild animals shall be kept within the city, unless the owner
or keeper thereof has been granted a license by the city to keep such
animals in or on specifically defined premises.
B. The license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) annually, for a maximum of
eight (8) in the case of poultry, ten dollars ($10) annually for each
beehive, and ten dollars ($10.00) annually for each animal in the case
of a domestic quadruped or wild animal.
C. A license to keep an animal under this section shall not be granted until
the city has inspected the premises in or on which the animal is to be
kept. The city will determine that such keeping will not constitute a
nuisance and will not be detrimental to the health or peace of the
inhabitants living nearby. The application shall also be referred to the
zoning administrator to determine whether the proposed use is
permitted under the zoning ordinances of the city.
D. It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor an animal required to be licensed
under provisions of this section, unless it has been licensed in
accordance with such provisions, such license is valid and in effect and,
where applicable, the animal has received its aniti-rabies serum.
SECTION 3.10 - LICENSE FEE IMPOSED; DOG OR WOLF-HYBRID
A. State and Local license fees shall apply.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, his agent or
any officer to remove a license tag from a dog.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
7
SECTION 3.11 - PROVISIONAL SURCHARGE
If the license fee for any dog is not paid by April first (1st), its owner or keeper
may thereafter procure such license for that license year by paying a fee of
fifty (50) percent in excess of that otherwise required.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 20 V.S.A. 3581(a)
SECTION 3.12 - LEASHES AND COLLARS REQUIRED; DOGS RUNNING AT
LARGE
A. Each person who keeps a dog contrary to the license provisions of
this article shall be guilty of a violation of this code. All unlicensed dogs
found within the limits of the city shall be impounded as provided
herein.
B. All dogs kept or harbored within the city shall wear a collar or
harness which shall have firmly attached thereto the dog's registration
tag, name, address of its owner and its current rabies tag.
C. All dogs shall be restrained by leash, chain or other device whenever
the dog is off the property of the dog's owner or keeper. No owner shall
permit or cause any dog to go at large within the city. Any dog that
enters the property of another other than its owner, or roams the
streets idly, or causes property damage, or creates a nuisance shall be
deemed to be running at large, and its owner shall be held to have
permitted such dog to go at large.
1. Each time a dog is found to be in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate violation of this ordinance.
2. The provisions of this section may be enforced by any law
enforcement officer or any duly appointed animal control or code
enforcement officer for the city.
3. Any dog used to assist law enforcement officers in the City of
Winooski shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
8
SECTION 3.13 - NUISANCES
A. An owner of a dog shall not allow, permit, or suffer such dog to create a
nuisance. The following activities shall be deemed nuisances:
1. A dog that defecates in any public area or on the private premises of
another person and whose owner does not immediately remove the
fecal material and dispose of it in a sanitary manner.
2. A female dog in heat not confined to a building or other secured
enclosure, except while under the direct control of the owner.
3. A dog that disturbs the quiet, comfort and repose of others by
barking, whining, calling, or howling for a continuous period of 30
minutes or more. This regulation shall not apply to dogs in a
kennel/boarding facility which has received a zoning permit under
the city’s zoning regulations. The zoning permit will govern the use
of the kennel/boarding facility.
SECTION 3.14 - IMPOUNDMENT
Any dog that is determined by a humane officer to be a potentially vicious
dog, which presents an imminent danger to people or other animals, has
reportedly bitten a person off or on the premises of its owner, or is in violation
of city licensing requirements or 20 V.S.A. § 3806 may be immediately
impounded.
SECTION 3.15 - NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; RELEASE
A. The officer who impounds a dog shall, within twenty-four (24) hours,
give notice to the owner thereof, either personally, by telephone call, or
by written notice at the owner’s dwelling. Such notice shall inform the
owner of the nature of the violations, the location of the dog and the
steps that are necessary to have it returned to the owner.
B. If the owner of the dog is unknown, the officer who impounds a dog
shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of impoundment, post a public
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
9
notice. Notification shall be posted in the city clerk’s office and other
usual places for public notice for a ten (10) day period. The public
notice shall include a description of the dog, including any significant
marks of identification, when and where it was impounded or found by
the person placing the dog in the city’s custody, and declare that unless
the owner claims the dog and pays all expenses incurred by the city for
treatment, boarding and care of the dog, any applicable penalties and
takes all necessary remedial action within ten (10) days following
posting, the city may place the dog in an adoptive home, transfer it to a
humane society or rescue organization. If the dog cannot be placed in
an adoptive home or transferred to a humane society or rescue
organization, it may be destroyed in a humane way.
C. Impounded dogs shall be released to the owner only after payment of
all penalties and impoundment fees (including but not limited to
boarding, food, and veterinary expenses), the final disposition of a
potentially vicious dog or vicious dog hearing if applicable, and after all
necessary remedial action is taken by the owner. Remedial action shall
include, but is not limited to, such actions as providing a collar and
current license, and verification of certification of current vaccination
against rabies.
D. If the owner of a dog impounded under the provisions of this ordinance
refuses to take the remedial action necessary to secure the dog’s
release within ten (10) days following notice of impoundment or gives
notice either personally, by telephone call, or in writing to the city of
forfeiture of ownership before that time, the dog may be placed in an
adoptive home, transferred to a humane society or rescue organization,
or if the city is unable to transfer the dog it may be humanely
destroyed. The owner of a dog transferred or humanely destroyed shall
remain liable for all expenses incurred by the city for treatment,
boarding and care of the dog for the duration of its impoundment and
any expenses associated with its transfer or humane disposal.
E. The procedures provided in this section shall only apply if the dog is not
a rabies suspect. If an official designated by the city manager to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance determines that the dog is a
rabies suspect, the designated officer shall immediately notify the city
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 3 – Animals, Domestic Pets and Wolf Hybrid
10
health officer who shall proceed in accordance with the rules of the
Vermont Department of Health.
SECTION 3.16 - QUARANTINE
A. Whenever an animal of a species, subject to rabies, bites a person, the
city's animal control officer and health officer shall be notified. If on
investigation it is found that the animal did bite a person, the animal
shall be quarantined by its owner or keeper for a period of ten (10)
days, unless such animal develops active signs of rabies within that
time, in which case the animal shall be killed under direction of the
health officer or animal control officer. At the end of ten (10) days, the
animal shall continue to be quarantined until the animal control officer
or health officer has determined that it is free from rabies.
B. Animals ordered to be quarantined under this section shall be confined
in an animal hospital or in a secure enclosure approved by the animal
control officer or the health officer as being so constructed and
maintained that the animal cannot escape.
SECTION 3.17 - DUTY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER TO MAKE
ARRANGEMENTS
A. The animal control officer shall make all necessary and appropriate
arrangements for the impounding of animals liable to be impounded.
B. The city shall designate an authorized kennel facility for this
purpose.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 1972a
6697549_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
1
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of the building code is to provide for the safety, health and public
welfare through structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light
and ventilation, and protection to life and property from fire and hazards incident to
the design, construction, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings and
structures.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 4.01 How Chapter Cited
Section 4.02 Scope of Code
Section 4.03 Definitions
Section 4.04 Building Code Adopted
Article IV Administration and Enforcement
Section 4.05 Building Inspector to be Appointed
Section 4.06 Enforcement of Building Code; Authority of Inspector to
Enter Buildings
Section 4.07 Inspections
Section 4.08 Appeals
Article V Permits, Certificates and Fees
Section 4.09 Permit Required
Section 4.10 Application Form
Section 4.11 Plans to Accompany Application
Section 4.12 Action on Application
Section 4.13 Conditions to Issuance of Permit
Section 4.14 Revocation of Permit
Section 4.15 Compliance with Permit
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
2
Section 4.16 Duration of Permit
Section 4.17 Permit for Moving Buildings
Section 4.18 Certificate of Occupancy; Changes
Section 4.19 Fees
Article VI Dangerous Building
Section 4.20 "Dangerous Buildings" Defined
Section 4.21 Building standards
Section 4.22 Inspector to Check Reported Dangerous Buildings;
Notification of Owner and Occupants
Section 4.23 Notice to Nonresident Owners
Section 4.24 Removal of Dangerous Building
Section 4.25 Appointment of Board to Review Property; Report of
Board
Section 4.26 Appeal from Decision of Board
Article VII Penalties
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A.§ 3101.
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 4.01 - HOW CHAPTER CITED
This chapter shall be known as the "Winooski Building Code," and may be so
cited.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
3
SECTION 4.02 - SCOPE OF CODE
The provisions of the building code shall apply to the construction, alteration,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures and to appurtenances such as vaults, areaways and street
encroachments, hereafter erected and, where expressly stated, existing on
land or over water and to buildings, structures and equipment for the
operation thereof hereafter moved or demolished in the city. The provisions of
this code based on occupancy shall also apply to existing buildings and
structures, or portions thereof, converted from one occupancy classification to
another.
SECTION 4.03 - DEFINITIONS
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the definitions as given in the edition of the
building code adopted by this chapter shall be used for the purpose of this
chapter.
SECTION 4.04 - BUILDING CODE ADOPTED
Construction, reconstruction, or material alteration of buildings and
maintenance and operation of premises shall be in accordance with the
building code standard adopted by the State of Vermont.
ARTICLE IV - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 4.05 - BUILDING INSPECTOR TO BE APPOINTED
The city manager shall appoint a qualified person or persons to be the building
inspector of the city and such deputy building inspectors as is necessary to
perform the functions required by the office.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 3102 et seq.
Charter Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. App. § 19-506.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
4
SECTION 4.06 - ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING CODE; AUTHORITY OF
INSPECTOR TO ENTER BUILDING
A. The city building inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to
enforce all codes relating to the construction, equipment,
management and condition of all buildings and structures within the
city and to supervise the issuance of permits for the construction,
reconstruction or removal of all buildings.
B. In the course of his/her duties the building inspector shall have the
authority to enter any building, structure or premises in the city
within reasonable hours.
SECTION 4.07 - INSPECTIONS
Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made
by the building inspector or his/her duly appointed assistant. The building
inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services,
after investigation of their qualifications and reliability.
SECTION 4.08 - APPEALS
A. An owner, occupant or person interested who is aggrieved by any
order made under the building regulations may appeal to a board of
arbitrators appointed as provided by 24 V.S.A. § 3109-3110, or to
the Criminal Division of the Superior Court at their election. The
board of arbitrators or such court shall have the power to annul,
amend, modify or affirm such order of the building inspector. Such
appeal shall be taken within five (5) days after receipt of the
inspector's notice and order by the aggrieved party, his architect or
builder. Such notice of appeal shall specify the appellant's election of
the tribunal to which the appeal is taken. In case of an election to
appeal to a board of arbitrators, it shall be deemed perfected by a
written notice of appeal left with the building inspector personally or
at his office. In case of an election to appeal to the court, a copy of
such notice, with an affidavit of service thereon upon the inspector
or his deputy shall be filed with the clerk of such court or judge
thereof, and thereupon such appeal shall be deemed perfected.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
5
If there is no such court having jurisdiction, appeal may be to a
superior judge.
B. The board of arbitrators shall be composed of two (2) disinterested
persons, residents of the city, one (1) of whom shall be appointed by
the appellant and one (1) by the building inspector. If such
arbitrators cannot agree, a third member shall be chosen by them.
On failure to agree as to such third member, s/he shall be appointed
by a Judge of the Criminal Division of Superior Court. A decision of a
majority of the board of arbitrators thus composed, when reduced
to writing sworn to and filed in the inspector's office, shall be final
and conclusive upon the parties. The expense of such arbitration
shall be paid by the appellant.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 3109
ARTICLE V - PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND FEES
SECTION 4.09 - PERMIT REQUIRED
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, add to, alter, remove or demolish, or to
commence the construction, addition, alteration, removal or demolition
of a building or structure, or install equipment for the operation of a
building or structure without first filing with the building inspector an
application in writing and obtaining a formal permit.
B. In the application for any permit required under the provisions of this
section, the following additional provisions shall apply to any application
for a permit
1. Plans and specifications as deemed necessary by the building
inspector shall be submitted and approved concerning the
proposed improvements prior to granting of any building permit.
2. An applicant must be in compliance with all regulations duly
adopted by the city prior to or contingent upon approval of any
permit.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
6
SECTION 4.10 - APPLICATION FORM
An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the building
inspector may prescribe. Such application shall contain the full names and
addresses of the applicant and of the owner, and, if the owner is a corporate
body, of its responsible officer. The application shall also describe briefly the
proposed work and shall give such additional information as may be required
by the building inspector for an intelligent understanding of the work
proposed.
SECTION 4.11 - PLANS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by drawings of the proposed
work, drawn to scale, showing when necessary, floor plans, sections,
elevations, structural details, computations and stress diagrams as the
building inspector may require.
SECTION 4.12 - ACTION ON APPLICATION
The building inspector shall examine applications for permits within a
reasonable time after filing. If, after examination, s/he finds no objections to
the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the
laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work
will be safe, s/he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the
proposed work as soon as practicable. If his examination reveals otherwise,
s/he shall reject such application, note his/her findings in a written report to
be attached to the application and deliver a copy to the applicant.
SECTION 4.13 - CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
A permit required by this article shall not be granted until the required fee is
paid to the city and until the building inspector is satisfied from an
examination of the plans and specifications or the detailed memoranda of the
proposed building or alteration, that such structure when completed will be
safe and secure and built in a good manner to escape the dangers of fire,
explosion and disease.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
7
SECTION 4.14 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT
The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued in case where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact
in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
SECTION 4.15 - COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT
All work performed under a permit issued by the building inspector shall
conform to the approved application and plans, and approved amendments
thereto. The location of all new construction, as shown on the approval plot
plan or an approved amendment thereto, shall be strictly adhered to.
SECTION 4.16 - DURATION OF PERMIT
No permit granted hereunder shall be valid after one (1) year from its day of
issuance, unless a substantial portion of the work to be done under it shall
have been completed during such period.
SECTION 4.17 - PERMIT FOR MOVING BUILDINGS
A. The owner of a building or structure shall not move or cause to be
moved, such building or structure until a permit has been obtained from
the building inspector.
B. No permit to remove a building or structure shall be issued until notice
of application thereof shall have been given to the owners of property
adjoining the property upon which said building or structure is to be
moved and to the owners of wires or other impediments the temporary
removal of which will be necessary, and an opportunity has been given
said owners to be heard upon such application; nor until a bond in an
adequate sum has been filed with the officer of proper authority, to
indemnify and save harmless the city from damage.
SECTION 4.18 - [RESERVED]
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
8
SECTION 4.19. - FEES
A. Every person applying for a permit shall first pay to the city a fee for
such permit in accordance with the Winooski fee schedule for such
estimated cost of the work and construction as the building inspector
may approve.
B. On the completion of construction, the owner shall furnish the building
inspector with a correct statement of the total actual cost of the
construction, including the cost of all materials, labor, plumbing, heating
and lighting, and shall then pay to the city an additional fee at a rate in
accordance with the Winooski fee schedule, applied to the excess of
such total actual cost of the work above the estimated cost on which a
fee was first paid, and in case the actual cost of the construction upon
the completing thereof is less than the estimated cost upon which the
first fee was paid, the city shall refund to the person who paid the first
fee, the proportionate part thereof represented by the excess of the
estimated cost over the actual cost provided that such refund does not
reduce the fee to less than the minimum provided for in the Winooski
fee schedule.
C. If a building or alteration or extension of a building is begun without the
payment of such fee or without such certificate or permit, or the
building inspector is not furnished upon the completion of the work with
the required statement of the actual cost thereof and any additional fee
required on such case is not paid, the builder and owner shall both be
deemed to have violated the provisions of this code.
ARTICLE VI - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. §§ 3113-3117.
SECTION 4.20 - “DANGEROUS BUILDINGS” DEFINED
Buildings having the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
9
A. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general
health and welfare of the occupants of the city;
B. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential
to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are
likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein;
C. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human
beings who live or may live therein;
D. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of communication;
E. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure members of the public or property; and
F. Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of the city.
SECTION 4.21 - BUILDING STANDARDS
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all standards to be met shall be those set
forth in accordance with the adopted building code. Compliance with all
sections of the adopted building code is mandatory.
SECTION 4.22 - INSPECTOR TO CHECK REPORTED DANGEROUS BUILDING;
NOTIFICATION OF OWNER AND OCCUPANTS
A. Upon being informed by report or otherwise, that a building is a
dangerous building, the building inspector shall inspect the same. If the
building is found by him/her to be a dangerous building s/he shall notify
in writing the owner, agent and any person having an interest therein to
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
10
remove it or make it safe and secure commencing within twenty-four
(24) hours from the date of the notice. Said repairs shall be completed
within a period of time to be specified by the building inspector.
B. Upon finding a dangerous building the building inspector shall notify, by
registered mail, all occupants of the building to vacate the same within
fifteen (15) days or have the building secured or made safe.
SECTION 4.23 - NOTICE TO NONRESIDENT OWNERS
If an owner, agent or person interested in the property resides out of the state
then service upon him/her shall be made in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 3118
or by first class mail sent to the last known address of record with the city.
SECTION 4.24 - REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS BUILDING
A person notified as provided in section 4.22 or 4.23 shall, before 12:00 noon
of the day following receipt of the notice, commence to secure or remove
such structure. Upon failure of the person so notified to do so the inspector
shall immediately enter upon the premises and take such steps as are
necessary to secure the building or demolish the building in order to protect
the public.
SECTION 4.25 - APPOINTMENT OF BOARD TO REVIEW PROPERTY; REPORT
OF BOARD
A. If an owner, agent or interested person of a building deemed to be a
dangerous building refuses or neglects to comply with the orders of the
building inspector to secure and repair the building, a survey of the
property shall be made by a
board consisting of the chief of the fire department, the city manager
and one (1) disinterested person appointed by the building inspector. A
report of such survey shall be made in writing by each member of said
board. A copy of the reports shall be sent to all interested parties by
registered mail.
B. If the reports of the board declare the building to be dangerous and if
the owner, agent or person interested continues to refuse or neglects to
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 4 - Buildings and Building Regulations
11
repair and make safe the building as required by the building inspector,
the inspector shall cause the building to be taken down or otherwise
made safe and the cost and charges incurred shall constitute a lien upon
the property and shall be enforced within the time and in the manner
provided for the collection of taxes on the land.
SECTION 4.26 - APPEAL FROM DECISION OF BOARD
An owner or interested person, who feels aggrieved by the order of the board,
may appeal as provided in the case of a person aggrieved by an order of the
building inspector in accordance with 24 V.S.A.§ 3109.
ARTICLE VII - PENALTIES
A. Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation
and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
B. For each day that the owner, occupant or responsible person fails to comply
with an order issued under this chapter, they shall be subject to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day. Each day’s refusal or neglect shall constitute a
separate offense for this purpose.
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city
from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair conversion,
maintenance or use, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any
premises.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. §1974a
6697556_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
1
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits, and Regulations
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
To maintain order, protect property, promote fair business standards, and support
the safety and welfare of the public, the City of Winooski requires certain businesses
to be licensed and regulated. This Chapter includes provisions for obtaining approval
of certain businesses to operate within the City of Winooski and contains special
regulation and enforcement standards for these businesses.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 5.01 Definitions
Section 5.02 Fees
Article IV Regulations
Section 5.03 General Provisions
Section 5.04 License for Alcohol
Section 5.04.01 Issuance of Liquor Licenses
Section 5.04.02 Revocation and/or Suspension of Liquor License
Section 5.04.03 Restaurants and Cabaret Exception; Outside Consumption
Section 5.05 Issuance of Entertainment Permits
Section 5.05.01 Revocation and/or Suspension of Permit
Section 5.06 Restaurant License
Article V Other Permits
Section 5.07 Peddlers Permit
Section 5.08 Itinerant Vendor Permit
Section 5.09 Sidewalk Usage Permit
Section 5.10 Permit Application
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
2
Section 5.10.01 Permits Restricted
Section 5.10.02 Standards for Issuance
Section 5.10.03 Liability of Permittee
Section 5.10.04 Permits to be Produced Upon Request
Section 5.10.05 Revocation of Permit
Article VI Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 5.01 - DEFINITIONS
CITY RIGHT OF WAY - Shall mean any and all city property including streets,
sidewalks, and parks.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - Shall mean any law enforcement officer as defined in
23 V.S.A. § 4(11), or duly appointed code enforcement officer for the City of
Winooski.
ITINERANT VENDOR - shall mean any person vending, selling or peddling goods
from a vehicle or other mobile apparatus. It should include ice cream trucks,
lunch wagons, or any other apparatus designed to travel through the
neighborhoods to sell goods.
LICENSE - The word “license” or “licensed” as used in this chapter shall mean a
license granted by the city council.
PEDDLER - shall mean any person vending, selling, or peddling goods from a
fixed location within the city’s right of way, excluding persons selling farm
produce.
PERSON - as used in this ordinance shall mean and include any person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCESS - means any place of business, commerce, banking,
financial service, or other service-related activity, whether publicly or privately
owned and whether operated for profit or not, to which the general public has
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
3
access or which the general public uses, including buildings, offices, means of
transportation, common carrier waiting rooms, arcades, restaurants, bars and
cabarets, retail stores, grocery stores, salons, laundromats, shopping malls,
museums, art galleries, nursing homes, hospitals, resorts and hotels and motels
including the lobbies, hallways, elevators, restaurants, restrooms and cafeterias
thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE - public place shall mean any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall
also include but not be limited to any store, shop, bowling alley, cafe, theater,
drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted to
amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front
or immediate areas of the above. For the purposes of this chapter, no licensed
establishment that sells malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises shall be considered as public.
PUBLICLY OWNED BUILDINGS AND OFFICES - publicly owned buildings and
offices means enclosed indoor places or portions of such places owned, leased, or
rented by state, county or municipal governments, or by agencies supported by
appropriation of, or by contracts or grants from, funds derived from the collection
of federal state, county or municipal taxes.
SIDEWALK - shall mean that improved portion of a street between the curb lines
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use, or routinely used, by pedestrians.
SECTION 5.02 - FEES
Licensing and permit fees for all activities regulated in this chapter are described
below and summarized in Chapter 28 of Winooski Municipal Code. All fees are
required annually and must be paid to the city clerk’s office at the time of license
or permit issuance. All fees are non-refundable.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
4
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS
SECTION 5.03 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. All applications for licensing or permits regulated by this chapter must
be received in the city clerk’s office not later than March 31 of each
year. Licenses and permits cover the period of May 1 through April 30
of the following calendar year. Neither license/permit duration nor
associated fees are prorated for late applications or out-of-cycle
applications.
B. It shall be a standard condition of each license and/or permit that the
applicant shall comply with all city ordinances and regulations and all
state liquor law statutes and regulations. Any of the following may be
grounds for disapproval of the application:
1. The application must be complete and cannot contain any
material misrepresentation.
2. The application must show adequate measures for the
protection of the public health, safety or welfare of persons
on site and in the areas surrounding the premises.
3. The business premises must comply with all applicable city
ordinances and state laws.
SECTION 5.04 - LICENSE FOR ALCOHOL
A. Licensing for any business requesting to sell alcohol will be as set forth
in statute. However, before a license shall be granted in the city, the
application shall be filed with the city clerk. For the purpose of
determining eligibility to obtain a liquor license from the city, criminal
record and motor vehicle record checks will be required on the
following:
1. Individual, partners, directors and stockholders (shareholders)
listed on the license application; and
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
5
2. The general manager, if known at the time of the application. If
not known at time of application, the licensee will be required to
provide all information about the general manager to complete a
criminal and motor vehicle record check as soon as the general
manger is known.
SECTION 5.04.01 - ISSUANCE OF LIQUOR LICENSES
A. Prior to the issuance of any liquor license, applicants must meet the
following criteria:
1. All city obligations that the applicant is responsible for must be
satisfied, such as, but not limited to, unpaid taxes, utility bills or
fines levied by the city for violations of city ordinances; and
2. All applicants must request and receive a Life Safety inspection
by the Winooski Fire Marshal. Requests for inspections must be
made no less than thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of the
license.
B. All applicants requesting a special event permit or catering permit must
submit the permit application no less than ten (10) days prior to the
event and receive approval from the city clerk. All fees must
accompany the application and shall be paid to the Dept. of Liquor
Control. Any event of more than 200 people or that requires closure of
a city street requires that the application be submitted no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the event and must be approved by the Liquor
Control Board.
SECTION 5.04.02 - REVOCATION AND/OR SUSPENSION OF LIQUOR LICENSE
A. The Winooski Liquor Control Board may suspend or revoke any license
for any of the following reasons:
1. The owner of the license is in violation of any ordinance or law,
including Vermont Liquor Control laws and regulations, or any
other condition of the license;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
6
2. The owner of the license has misrepresented or failed to disclose
any material information on the application to the Liquor Control
Board;
3. The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in any
increase in disturbances on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity of the premises, in the sole opinion of the Liquor Control
Board; and/or
4. The owner of the license shall be given notice of any action to
suspend or revoke the license and shall have the opportunity to
be heard prior to the imposition of any penalty.
SECTION 5.04.03 - RESTAURANT AND CABARET EXCEPTION; OUTSIDE
CONSUMPTION
A. The owner/requestor will:
1. Be a licensed restaurant or cabaret;
2. At the time of request, provide a completed Vermont Department
of Liquor Control Outside Consumption Permit form for approval;
and
3. In writing and with an accompanying diagram, describe
appropriate controls, maintenance procedures and barriers to
ensure the requested sidewalk area can be adequately
supervised and controlled. The requestor will:
a. Use and maintain the approved public right-of-way
sidewalk area in accordance with the approved Outside
Consumption Permit descriptions. No change to layout or
conditions will be made without prior written approval
(with a new plan attached) from the Winooski Liquor
Control Board;
b. Provide trash containers and ashtrays and ensure litter
and refuse is not subsequently dumped into the city’s litter
containers;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
7
c. Ensure that tables, chairs, or other apparatus/furniture are
well-maintained, appropriately stored, and secured.
Unless approved otherwise, furniture will not be set-up
more than one hour before approved opening hours and
will be removed and stored within one hour of closing
time. For the purposes of safety, all furniture (including
umbrellas) will be of a weight and/or design that will insure
that the wind cannot move the furniture;
d. Be required to pick-up and sweep the approved areas
each day of operation; and
e. Pay a sidewalk license fee.
SECTION 5.05 - ISSUANCE OF ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
A. A permit from the Liquor Control Board must be obtained prior to the
presentation of any live public music or performance on the premises of
any bar, cabaret, club, hotel or restaurant that holds a first and/or third
class liquor license. “Live public music or performance” includes but is
not limited to bands, DJs, karaoke, stand-up comedy, dancers, fashion
shows, poetry or other readings or lectures. Whether an activity is “live
public music or performance” is based on the activity itself and not
whether an admission price is charged, the performer is paid or unpaid,
or the event is advertised or not. All applicants must acknowledge and
agree to the following restrictions or conditions which will be contained
in all entertainment permits issued by the city:
1. No musical instrument, phonograph, sound-making device or
sound producing system or vocal activity shall exceed 100
decibels as recorded from the curb line outside of the licensed
establishment;
2. Licensees will not permit exhibitions of nudity for the purposes of
private or public entertainment in any licensed establishment;
3. All music in a licensed establishment which is amplified will cease
at 2:00 a.m.;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
8
4. Licensees will be required to secure all doors and windows of the
licensed establishment after 10:00 pm Sunday thru Thursday and
Midnight on Friday and Saturday while providing entertainment
or amplifying sound; and
5. The city, through the Liquor Control Board, reserves the right to
establish any additional restrictions that may be necessary, in its
sole opinion, to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
public.
SECTION 5.05.01 - REVOCATION AND/OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT
A. The Winooski Liquor Control Board may suspend or revoke any license
and/or permit for any of the following reasons:
1. The owner of the license or permit is in violation of any ordinance
or law, including Vermont Liquor Control laws and regulations, or
any other condition of the license and/or permit;
2. The owner of the license or permit has misrepresented or failed
to disclose any material information on the application to the
Liquor Control Board;
3. The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in any
increase in disturbances on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity of the premises, in the sole opinion of the Liquor Control
Board; or
4. The owner of the license or permit shall be given notice of any
action to suspend or revoke the license and/or permit and shall
have the opportunity to be heard prior to the imposition of any
penalty.
SECTION 5.06 - RESTAURANT LICENSE
No person will serve food to be consumed on premises at a place of business
without a restaurant license.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
9
ARTICLE V - OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 2291.
SECTION 5.07 - PEDDLERS PERMIT
Peddlers requesting the use of city property (sidewalks, parks, streets, etc.)
must receive a permit from the city each year.
SECTION 5.08 - ITINERANT VENDOR PERMIT
No itinerant vendor will use city property to include roads, sidewalks, and
parks to sell consumer products without a permit.
SECTION 5.09 - SIDEWALK USAGE PERMIT
Any resident Winooski business may request the use of adjacent city sidewalk
and green space for the purposes of selling merchandise, dining, advertising,
or as any other normal extension of their approved business.
SECTION 5.10 - PERMIT APPLICATION
A business seeking issuance of a permit required by this article shall file an
application with the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the desired date
of activity on forms provided by the city. The city council shall vote for
approval or disapproval and their decision shall be final.
SECTION 5.10.01 - PERMITS RESTRICTED
The city council may, if it finds it to be in the best interest of the city, restrict
the number of permits issued under the provisions of this chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
10
SECTION 5.10.02 - STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE
A. For all requests other than alcohol sales, the owner/requestor
will:
1. Be a licensed business as either an owner of property or
having a valid lease;
2. In writing, describe appropriate controls, maintenance
procedures and barriers to ensure the requested sidewalk
area can be adequately supervised and controlled;
3. Use and maintain the approved public right-of-way
sidewalk area. No change to layout or conditions will be
made without prior written approval (with a new plan
attached) from the city council;
4. Provide trash containers and ashtrays and ensure litter
and refuse is not subsequently dumped into the city’s litter
containers;
5. Ensure that tables, chairs, or other apparatus/furniture are
well-maintained, appropriately stored, and secured.
Unless approved otherwise, furniture will not be set-up
more than one hour before approved opening hours and
will be removed and stored within one hour of closing
time. For the purposes of safety, all furniture (including
umbrellas) will be of a weight and/or design that will
ensure that the wind cannot move the furniture;
6. Be required to pick-up and sweep the approved areas
each day of operation;
7. Pay any applicable fees at the time of application. Owner
understands that there may be times that the permitted
area will not be available because of construction or other
use and that no portion of this fee is refundable; and
8. Must comply with all Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
requirements.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 5 - Business Licenses, Permits and Regulations
11
SECTION 5.10.03 - LIABILITY OF PERMITTEE
The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or
injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of the negligence of the
person to whom such permit shall have been issued.
SECTION 5.10.04 - PERMITS TO BE PRODUCED UPON REQUEST
No person shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the city they claim
to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the
same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
SECTION 5.10.05 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT
The city shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of a
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown, including, but
not limited to, the following:
1. The owner of the permit is in violation of any ordinance or
law, or any other condition of the permit;
2. The owner of the permit has misrepresented or failed to
disclose any material information on the application; and/or
3. The activities governed by the permit have resulted in any
increase in disturbances on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity of the premises, in the sole opinion of the city.
ARTICLE V – PENALTIES
A. Any first (1st) or second (2nd) violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation
and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section 1.11(B) of the Winooski City Code.
B. All third (3rd) and subsequent violations of this chapter will be a criminal
violation and subject to criminal penalties and enforcement as provided for in
Chapter 1, Section 1.11(A) of the Winooski City Code.
6697558_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
1
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
Certain activities require regulation and enforcement to maintain order, protect
property, promote business, and support the safety and welfare of the public. This
chapter includes provisions to control and prohibit activities that affect the quality of
life of Winooski citizens and shall apply at all times within the general limits of the
City of Winooski.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose and Applicability
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 6.01 Definitions
Article IV Regulations
Section 6.02 Abandoned Airtight Containers
Section 6.03 Unlawful Mischief
Section 6.04 Destruction of Trees on Public Grounds
Section 6.05 Trespass of Motor Vehicles
Section 6.06 Open Container
Section 6.06.01 Restaurant and Cabaret Exception
Section 6.06.02 Non-Applicability
Section 6.07 Possession by a Minor
Section 6.08 Disturbing Meeting; Aiding or Abetting Disturbance
Section 6.09 Discharging Firearms
Section 6.10 Disorderly Conduct
Section 6.11 Use of Building by Disorderly Persons
Section 6.12 Loitering
Section 6.13 Indecent Exposure
Section 6.14 Aggressive Begging/Panhandling Repeal October 01, 2018
Section 6.15 Possession of Fireworks
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
2
Section 6.15.01 Permits
Article V Truancy/Disturbing Schools
Section 6.16 Truancy
Section 6.17 Truancy Process
Section 6.18 Disturbing Schools
Article VI Excessive Noise
Section 6.19 Intent
Section 6.20 Noise Abatement Period 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM
Section 6.21 Noise Regulation at all Times
Section 6.22 Exceptions to Noise Regulations
Article VII Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 6.01 – DEFINITIONS
ABANDONED AIRTIGHT CONTAINER - Unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or
other device thereon for the purpose of locking the same without first removing
the snaplock, other device or door from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - The following persons certified pursuant to 20
V.S.A. § 2358: sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, constables whose authority has not been
limited under 24 V.S.A. § 1936a, police officers, state's attorneys, capitol police
officers, motor vehicle inspectors, liquor investigators, state game wardens, and
state police.
EXPLOSIVE - Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
3
percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life or limb.
FIREWORKS - The term "fireworks" means any combustible or explosive
composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy
cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, balloons that are
propelled by explosives, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles,
cherry bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, except sparklers. The term "fireworks" does
not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps
containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are
so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place
for use, and toy pistol paper caps that contain less than 0.2 grains of explosive
mixture. The term "fireworks" does not include fixed ammunition for firearms, or
primers for firearms. The term "sparkler" means a sparkling item that is in
compliance with the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission
regulations and is one of the following:
(1) A hand-held wire or wood sparkler that is less than 14 inches and has
no more than 20 grams of pyrotechnic mixture; or
(2) A snake, party popper, glow worm, smoke device, string popper,
snapper, or drop pop with no more than 0.25 grains of explosive
mixture.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 20 VSA § 3131
MINOR - Any person who has not yet attained the age of 21 shall be
considered a minor for the purposes of this ordinance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
4
OPEN BEVERAGE CONTAINER - A malt or spirituous container, bottle, can or
vessel which is opened and from which the contents may be consumed or
poured.
PERSON - As used in this chapter shall include a corporation, association, copartnership,
company, firm or other aggregation of individuals.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE - Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or
her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if a sound source is a portable
or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the
enforcement officer need not determine the title of a song, specific words, or
the artist performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic base component
of the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
PREMISES - Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean place or
places, to include a building or facility, including the fenced or walled (or
demarcated or segregated) space surrounding it.
PUBLIC PLACE - Public place shall mean any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place
shall also include but not be limited to any store, shop, bowling alley, cafe,
theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted
to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the
front or immediate areas of the above. For the purposes of this chapter, any
licensed establishment that sells malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises shall be considered as public.
SIDEWALK - Shall mean that improved portion of a street between the
curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines
intended for the use, or routinely used, by pedestrians.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
5
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS
SECTION 6.02 - ABANDONED AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of, abandon or have in his
possession, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned airtight container
as defined in section 6.01 above.
SECTION 6.03 - UNLAWFUL MISCHIEF
A person, who, having no right to do so or any reasonable ground to believe
that s/he has such a right, does any damage to any personal or real property
which is valued in an amount not exceeding $1000.00 shall be in violation of
this ordinance.
SECTION 6.04 - DESTRUCTION OF TREES ON PUBLIC GROUNDS
No person shall cut down, remove, mutilate or otherwise injure or destroy any
fruit, shade or other ornamental tree growing in any public ground in the city,
without the permission of the city.
SECTION 6.05 - TRESPASS OF A MOTOR VEHICLE
No person shall enter or remain in or on a motor vehicle without legal
authority or the consent of the person in lawful possession of the motor
vehicle. Motor vehicle shall include all vehicles propelled or drawn by power
other than muscular power, to include tractors used entirely for work on the
farm, vehicles running only upon stationary rails or tracks, motorized highway
building equipment, road making appliances or snowmobiles, or implements of
husbandry.
SECTION 6.06 - OPEN CONTAINER
It shall be prohibited, under the terms of this ordinance, to carry, hold or have
on one’s person on the streets, sidewalks, or on or within public places of the
city, open containers of malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages that are not
specifically licensed.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
6
SECTION 6.06.01 - RESTAURANT AND CABARET EXCEPTION
Notwithstanding the section 6.06 above, it shall not be unlawful to possess an
open beverage container in sidewalk areas that have been appropriately
requested, permitted, designated, and approved for outside consumption by
the Winooski Liquor Control Board of Commissioners.
SECTION 6.06.02 - NON-APPLICABILITY
The terms of this ordinance shall not apply to certain social functions, affairs
or meetings of a public or private nature where prior approval has been
granted by the Mayor and city council to consume or have open beverage
containers on or within a public place.
SECTION 6.07 - POSSESSION BY A MINOR
It shall be prohibited, under the terms of this ordinance, for any minor to
purchase, possess or consume any malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages
within the city. The odor or presence of malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages
upon the breath of any minor shall be prima facia evidence of possession for
the purpose of this ordinance.
SECTION 6.08 - DISTURBING MEETING; AIDING OR ABETTING DISTURBANCE
No person shall willfully disturb or annoy a lawful assembly, collection of
persons or organized meeting of any kind, or cause the same to be done, in
any manner or by any unlawful means whatsoever; nor shall any person
make, aid or abet the making of any disturbance, riot or disorder, at, in or
about any building or other place whatever.
SECTION 6.09 - DISCHARGING FIREARMS
No person shall, except in the performance of some duty required by law,
discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within the limits of the city.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
7
SECTION 6.10 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT
No person shall engage in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening
behavior, which causes public inconvenience or annoyance, or recklessly
creates a risk thereof; or obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
SECTION 6.11 - USE OF BUILDINGS BY DISORDERLY PERSONS
No person shall permit his/her buildings or other places to be used, frequented
or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, or by any vagrant, gambler or
common prostitute, or shall suffer or permit any boisterous, riotous or
disorderly conduct therein or thereabout.
SECTION 6.12 - LOITERING
No person shall remain upon a sidewalk or upon a doorstep, portico or other
projection from any house or other building, or in the entrance or hallway of
any building, to the inconvenience or disturbance of any person.
SECTION 6.13 - INDECENT EXPOSURE
A. No person ten (10) years old or older shall expose to view any penis,
vagina or female breasts of a human body, in any public place. As used
in this section, "public place" means any place where the conduct may
reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. "Public place" does not
include a private residence where the conduct is not easily visible from
a public place or from another private place.
B. This ordinance shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of live nude
models or partially nude models, in a place where models can be seen
only by artists and art students, including part time or amateur
students. This ordinance shall not prohibit the natural act of "breast
feeding" within a public place as defined.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
8
SECTION 6.14 - AGGRESSIVE BEGGING/PANHANDLING
No person shall approach another in an aggressive or threatening manner, for
the purpose of begging or panhandling on any street or other public place
within the city.
Repeal October 01, 2018
SECTION 6.15 - POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS
Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, copartnership
or corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or
wholesale, possess, use or explode any fireworks; and it shall also be unlawful
for any person, firm, co-partnership or corporation to transport fireworks
except in interstate commerce.
SECTION 6.15.01 - PERMITS
Permits for supervised public displays shall be granted in accordance with Title
20, § 3132 (b)-(d) of Vermont Statutes Annotated.
ARTICLE V - TRUANCY/DISTURBING SCHOOLS
SECTION 6.16 - TRUANCY
A. That no person who is legally registered as a student within the
Winooski School District, any other established school or recognized
educational program shall be absent from school and at large within the
community during the lawfully established hours of the particular
educational institution:
1. Pupils Under Sixteen - A person having the control of a child who
allows such child to become enrolled in a public school, shall
cause such child to attend such school continually for the full
number of school days of the term in which s/he enrolled, unless
the child is mentally or physically challenged and unable to
continue or complete the tenth (10th) grade, or excused in
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
9
writing from the Superintendent of Schools or a majority of the
School Board. In case of such enrollment, such person, and the
teacher, child, superintendent and school board shall be under
the laws and subject to the penalties relating to the attendance
of children between the ages of six and sixteen years.
2. Pupils Over Sixteen - A person having the control of a child over
sixteen years of age who allows such child to become enrolled in
a public school, shall cause such child to attend such school
continually for the full number of school days of the term in
which s/he is enrolled, unless the child is mentally or physically
challenged and unable to continue or complete the tenth (10th)
grade, or excused in writing from the Superintendent of Schools
or a majority of the School Board. In case of such enrollment,
such person, and the teacher, child, superintendent and school
board shall be under the laws and subject to the penalties
relating to the attendance of children over sixteen years of age.
3. Exception: This section shall not apply to any student whose
educational plan calls for alternative schooling times or any
student who is excused from school due to illness, physician
appointments, family emergency, etc. by an authorized school
district representative.
SECTION 6.17 - TRUANCY PROCESS
A. Failure to attend; notice by teacher - When a pupil between the ages of six
and sixteen years, who is not excused or exempted from school
attendance, fails to enter school at the beginning thereof, or being
enrolled, fails to attend the same, and when a pupil who has become
sixteen years of age and enrolls in a public school and fails to attend, the
teacher or principal shall notify the superintendent or school board, and the
designated truant officer, unless the teacher or principal is satisfied upon
information that the pupil is absent on account of sickness.
B. Notice of Complaint; Penalty - The truant officer, upon receiving the notice
provided above, shall inquire into the cause of the non-attendance of the
child. If the truant officer finds that the child is absent without cause, s/he
shall give written notice to the person having the control of the child that
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
10
the child is absent from school without cause, and s/he shall notify that
person to cause the child to attend school regularly thereafter.
C. Failure to Comply - When, after receiving such notice, a person fails,
without legal excuse, to cause a child to attend school as required by this
section, such person shall be cited as provided by Chapter 1, section 1.11.
Additionally, the truant office shall enter a complaint to the city grand juror
and shall furnish him/her with a statement of evidence upon which the
complaint is based, and the city grand juror shall prosecute the person. In
the prosecution, the complaint, information or indictment shall be deemed
sufficient if it states that the respondent having control of a child of school
age, neglects to send that child to an approved public school or an
approved or reporting private school or a home study program as required
by law.
SECTION 6.18 - DISTURBING SCHOOLS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or unnecessarily:
1. Interfere with or to disturb in any way or in any place the students
or teachers of any school within the city;
2. Loiter about such school except on business, without the permission
of the principal or his/her designee;
3. Act in an obnoxious manner on school property; and/or
4. Taunt, harass, or use hate speech toward a student or staff member
which interferes in the educational process of that student or staff
member.
ARTICLE VI - EXCESSIVE NOISE
SECTION 6.19 - INTENT
The intent of this article is to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce
unnecessary noises that are physically harmful or otherwise detrimental to the
enjoyment of life, property and maintenance of business. This ordinance shall
not apply to commercial or industrial land uses regulated under the Winooski
Zoning Ordinance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
11
SECTION 6.20 - NOISE ABATEMENT PERIOD 10:00PM TO 7:00AM
A. No person may create, cause, or produce, disturbing sounds or noise
on or in any land, building, part of a building, domicile, common
area, roads or public area or space between the hours of 10:00 PM
in the evening and 7:00 AM in the morning. This noise abatement
period covers trucking, hauling, delivery vehicles,
trash/rubbish/garbage pick-ups, construction, demolition, repairs,
gatherings, social activities, and any other disturbing noiseproducing
activities.
B. EXCEPTIONS. Trucking and hauling shall only be on approved
designated routes during this period or as may be licensed by the
city council.
SECTION 6.21 - NOISE REGULATION AT ALL TIMES
A. The following acts are declared to be loud, objectionable, unnecessary
noises, and are therefore a public nuisance, and are prohibited by this
ordinance at all times when declared as plainly audible as defined in
section 6.01. The creation of, permitting or operation of any of the
above sets, instruments, devices or vehicles causing said noise in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from a building,
structure, land or vehicle from which noise emanates shall be prima
facie evidence of a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance.
1. Defect in vehicle or operation of vehicle. The operation of an
automobile or motorcycle, which creates abnormal or unusual
engine revving, squealing, squealing of tires, loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, exploding-type, rattling or other
noises.
2. Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle
except as a danger warning; the creation, by means of other
signaling device, of unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of any such device for unnecessary and/or
unreasonable periods of time.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
12
3. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle; except as a danger warning; so that
the sounding of any such device is for unnecessary and/or
unreasonable periods of time.
4. The creation, by means of other signaling devices of
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such
device for unnecessary and/or unreasonable periods of time.
5. Radios, Phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to
be played, used or operated, of any radio or television receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sounds in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the
room, vehicle, or chamber in which such a machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
6. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises there from.
7. Dogs, cats and other animals. The keeping of any dog, cat or
other animal, which shall become a nuisance to another person in
the vicinity where such dog, cat or other animal is kept, by
frequent or continued barking, howling, yelping or screaming or
other animal noise and vocalizations.
8. Vocal disturbances. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing or
making any other loud vocal or noise disturbance, including
parties and other social events so as to disturb, destroy, or
endanger the peace of persons in the immediate vicinity of the
noise or disturbance. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit a vocal disturbance, whether or not it is electronically
amplified, by spectators or participants in an athletic event or
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
13
assembly sponsored by a public or private school, or recognized
organized recreational activities.
9. Noises emanating from the excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of buildings, structures, or property.
10. Noise in General. Any noise, which is deemed objectionable
because of volume, frequency, or beat and is not muffled or
otherwise controlled.
11. Music, noise, vocalizations which disturbs or interferes with the
peace or health of persons and is plainly audible through the
walls of a building or the same building or from another property
or from the street is also covered by this ordinance
SECTION 6.22 - EXCEPTIONS TO NOISE REGULATIONS
A. Any person or organization that has obtained a noise waiver from the
city (i.e. parade, block party, etc.).
B. Any vehicle owned by and operated by government or a utility in the
performance of its duties.
C. Noise associated with routine snow removal activities where customary
practices and equipment are used.
D. Any government or utility emergency repair. Any construction activity,
other than government or utility emergency repairs, that has obtained
approval of the city to occur between the hours of 10:00 PM and 7:00
AM that is deemed in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. Any siren or other warning device used for public safety, including
railroad signals.
F. Noise associated with a bona fide response to an emergency situation
that poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 6 - Criminal Offenses
14
ARTICLE VII - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a criminal violation and
subject to criminal penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section
1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 1974.
6697561_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 7 – Garbage and Refuse
1
Chapter 7 – Garbage and Refuse
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
and welfare of all the citizens of the City of Winooski through the establishment of
enforceable standards for safe and sanitary disposal of solid waste, and to establish
measures to assure compliance of persons within the city limits and of collectors and
haulers operating within the city.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Regulations
Section 7.01 Definitions
Section 7.02 Placing Garbage and Offensive Matter on Streets
and Other Property Prohibited
Section 7.03 Garbage Collectors to be licensed
Section 7.04 Number of Licenses May be Restricted
Section 7.05 License May be Subject to Restrictions
Section 7.06 Revocation of License
Section 7.07 Fee for Collector's License
Section 7.08 Requirements for Collection Vehicles
Article IV Penalties
Statutory Cross-References: 24 V.S.A. § 2291(12); 24 V.S.A. § 2201.
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 7.01 - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
given herein:
GARBAGE shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
REFUSE shall mean all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes and solid market and
industrial wastes.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 7 – Garbage and Refuse
2
RECYCLABLE WASTES, REFUSE OR RUBBISH shall mean matter that is capable
of being salvaged, that has resale value, that is ultimately brought to a
recycling center, and that constitutes the totality of that which is being
collected.
RUBBISH shall mean non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting
of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SECTION 7.02 - PLACING GARBAGE AND OFFENSIVE MATTER ON STREETS
AND OTHER PROPERTY PROHIBITED
A. No person shall deposit, throw, cause to be deposited or thrown, or
permit to remain on any public or privately-owned property in the
city, any garbage, rubbish or refuse.
B. It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to deposit,
throw, cause to be deposited or thrown any garbage, rubbish or
refuse in a dumpster or trash receptacle other than that owned or
rented by such person.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 2201.
SECTION 7.03 - COLLECTORS TO BE LICENSED
No person shall carry on the business of collecting garbage, refuse or rubbish
or collecting or disposing of refuse, waste or rubbish that is recyclable, within
the city unless licensed by the city.
SECTION 7.04 - NUMBER OF LICENSES MAY BE RESTRICTED
The city council may, if it finds it to be in the best interest of the city, restrict
the number of licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 7.05 - LICENSE MAY BE SUBJECT TO RESTRICTIONS
All licenses required by section 7.03 will be subject to all conditions imposed
by the council at the time of issuance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 7 – Garbage and Refuse
3
SECTION 7.06 - REVOCATION OF LICENSE
The city council shall have the power to revoke at any time any license
required by section 7.03.
SECTION 7.07 - LICENSE FEE
The annual fee for a license required by section 7.03 shall be as prescribed in
Chapter 20 of the Winooski Municipal Code.
SECTION 7.08 - CONDITION OF COLLECTION VEHICLES
All vehicles used in the collection of garbage, refuse, or rubbish shall be kept
well painted and shall be washed after each day's use. Such vehicles shall be
equipped with close-fitting covers or constructed so as to prevent, as far as
possible, the emission of offensive odors and the dropping of garbage, refuse,
or rubbish.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
A violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and subject to civil penalties and
enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski Municipal
Code.
6697563_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 8 – Hazardous Material Response
1
Chapter 8 - Hazardous Material Response
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to provide for the orderly and expeditious control
and clean-up of any hazardous materials which are a threat to health and safety of
people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property, water ways or the environment; that
may escape from the control of the person or persons having possession of them,
and thereby pose a threat to the City of Winooski. Further, it is the purpose of this
ordinance to require that any person possessing any such hazardous material shall
compensate the city for all services provided by the city in relation to the control,
containment or cleanup of hazardous materials and to reimburse the city for any
costs or damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the city as a result of its efforts to
contain, control or clean up such hazardous material.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 8.01 Application of Article
Section 8.02 Definitions
Section 8.03 Duties of Person(s) Possessing Hazardous Materials
Section 8.04 Control, Containment and Clean-Up
Section 8.05 Liability and Cost
Section 8.06 Enforcement of Article
Article IV Penalties
Article V Severability
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 8 – Hazardous Material Response
2
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 8.01 - APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
This ordinance applies to all incidents involving hazardous materials within the
boundaries of the City of Winooski, and to all persons who may possess such
materials found within the boundaries of the City of Winooski, except as state
or federal law and/or regulation may take precedence and authority over any
such incident or person. This ordinance shall be in addition to any and all
provisions of said state or federal law and/or regulation.
SECTION 8.02 – DEFINITIONS
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - Those substances or materials in such quantity and
form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property,
which may include but are not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
etiologic agents, flammable liquids or solids, combustible liquids or solids,
poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and compressed gases which are
listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau of the United States Department
of Transportation in Title 49 the Code of Federal Regulation and any
amendment thereto, or those materials the disposal of which is regulated
under 9 V.S.A.§ 2821 et seq., 10 V.S.A.§ 6601 et seq., and 10 V.S.A. § 7001 et
seq.
PERSON - Shall mean any individual, corporation or other entity having the
recognized legal status of a person (i.e., association) or any partnership, trust
or other legal entity as distinguished from the individual members thereof.
POSSESSION - Shall mean to possess, own, hold or have within his/her or its
control any material defined as hazardous. In the case of any corporation or
other legal entity, in addition to the legal responsibility for the control of said
entity shall be deemed to be in possession. It is the intention of this ordinance
to include within the concept “person in possession” not only the legal owner
but also any and all other persons who may at any time come within the chain
of control without regard to the issue of legal title. Person in possession shall
include not only the owner but any agent, consignee, employee, contractor, or
representative within a chain of control.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 8 – Hazardous Material Response
3
SECTION 8.03 - DUTIES OF PERSON(S) POSSESSING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
The person or persons in possession of any hazardous material shall have the
duty to prevent its discharge or release and to assure that any such material is
used in a manner which will prevent its escape from safe containment, in any
manner which poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife,
vegetation, property or the environment. No person in possession shall dump,
discharge, deposit, release or dispose of any hazardous material within the
city. In the event of the discharge or relapse of any hazardous material from
safe containment, the person in possession at the time of discharge, shall
immediately report the same to the Winooski Fire Department Dispatch
Center.
SECTION 8.04 - CONTROL, CONTAINMENT AND CLEAN-UP
The city shall take such action as necessary to protect public health, safety,
welfare, property and the environment.
SECTION 8.05 - LIABILITY AND COST
The person(s) in possession of any hazardous materials which are accidentally
discharged or released shall be strictly liable to the city for all costs incurred in
the control, containment, and clean-up of hazardous materials. For this
purpose, all of the possessors of any hazardous materials shall be jointly and
severally liable and all costs may be recovered from any one of them by a suit
in any court with jurisdiction over the parties and the amount claimed.
SECTION 8.06 - ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE
Code Enforcement shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Any person who fails to report, intentionally releases, or causes another to discharge
or release, any hazardous materials from their safe container, in any manner which
poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property,
or the environment, shall be assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed one thousand
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 8 – Hazardous Material Response
4
dollars ($1,000.00) including all cost of material, labor, and equipment used or
solicited by the city.
ARTICLE V - SEVERABILITY
If any action, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this ordinance shall be
held invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end, the provisions of
this ordinance are severable.
6697566_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
1
Chapter 9 - Housing
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the minimum housing requirements
for the City of Winooski.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Definitions
Section 9.01 Short Title
Section 9.02 Definitions
Article IV Administration and Enforcement
Section 9.03 Administration of Code; Authority of Building
Inspector
Section 9.04 Conflicts
Section 9.05 Inspection of Dwellings, Dwelling Units, Rooming
Units and Premises.
Section 9.06 Service of Notice of Violations.
Section 9.07 Refusal to Obey Inspection Order; Survey
Section 9.08 Order
Section 9.09 Certificate of Fitness and Maximum Occupancy Load
Section 9.10 Recording of Orders
Section 9.11 Declaring Dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation
Section 9.12 Copy of Order to be Furnished to Grantee
Section 9.13 Relocation
Section 9.14 Security Deposits
Article V Appeals
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
2
Article VI Minimum Housing Standards and Requirements
Section 9.15 Conformance to Standards Required
Section 9.16 Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and
Facilities
Section 9.17 Minimum Standards for Light, Ventilation and
Heating
Section 9.18 General Requirements Relating to the Safe, and
Sanitary Maintenance of Parts of Dwellings and
Dwelling Unit
Section 9.19 Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
Section 9.20 Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
Section 9.20.01 Painted Surfaces
Section 9.21 Authority to Raze Building/Structure
Article VII Penalties
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 5001 et seq.
ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS
SECTION 9.01 - SHORT TITLE
This chapter may be referred to as the "Winooski Minimum Housing Code."
SECTION 9.02 - DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
Whenever the term "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming unit," "house" or
"premises," is used in this chapter, it shall be construed as though followed by
the words "or any part thereof."
BASEMENT shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
3
BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the legally designated building inspector of
the city or his/her designated assistant.
CELLAR shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS shall mean the written approval, signed by the code
enforcement officer, or duly authorized municipal official, setting forth that
the building, structure and premises comply with duly adopted life safety and
housing codes. This Certificate of Fitness is required prior to a dwelling unit or
a public building being occupied.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY shall mean the written approval of the zoning
administrator certifying that a newly constructed structure, addition and/or
alterations to an existing structure, or an existing structure undergoing a
change in use is in full compliance with the zoning provisions of municipal bylaws,
ordinances and codes adopted under the authority of the City Charter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean the director of code enforcement or
duly authorized municipal official.
DWELLING shall mean any building which is used or intended to be used in
whole or in part for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that
temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT shall mean one (1) or more rooms arranged for the use of one
(1) or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EXTERMINATION shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Building Inspector and the Vermont Department of
Health.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
4
FIRE CHIEF shall mean the legally designated fire chief of the city or his/her
designated assistant.
GARBAGE shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
hallways, closets, recreation rooms (but not excluding living rooms), private
workshops or hobby rooms and storage spaces.
INFESTATION shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
OCCUPANT shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or
having the actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR shall mean any person who has the charge, care or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or
lessor estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building or any duly authorized agent thereof.
PERSON INTERESTED shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, company or organization of any type.
PLUMBING shall mean and include all the following supplied facilities and
equipment: Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PUBLIC BUILDING as defined in Title 20 § 2730 of Vermont Statute Annotated.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
5
RUBBISH shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting
of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SUPPLIED shall mean installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator
at his expense.
TEMPORARY HOUSING shall mean any tent, trailer or similar structure which is
used for human shelter.
ARTICLE IV - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 9.03 - ADMINISTRATION OF CODE
It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to administer the housing
code. Said officer is authorized to inspect all dwelling structures and to order
any repairs or additional facilities necessary to meet code standards. He is
authorized to condemn dwellings that are unfit for human habitation, and in
that situation, the owner of the condemned building must comply with the
minimum standards, or cease using the building for dwelling purposes.
SECTION 9.04 - CONFLICTS
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, health or other ordinance or
code of the city, the provision which established the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
6
SECTION 9.05 - INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS, DWELLING UNITS, ROOMING
UNITS AND PREMISES
The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the city, in order that s/he may perform
his/her duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of
dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises.
SECTION 9.06 - SERVICE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS
Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, s/he shall give notice of such
violation to the owner and occupants of said building by letter sent by
registered mail to the last known address of said owner and occupants, and
any holder of any recorded interest in said property, listing the defects, the
necessary repairs which are to be made and giving the owner a stated period
of time to make these repairs. Said notice shall also notify the occupants of
the building that it will be necessary for them to vacate the building if the
necessary repairs are not made. Each occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall give the owner thereof, or his/her agent or employee, access to any part
of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs and/or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 9.07 - REFUSAL TO OBEY INSPECTION ORDER; SURVEY
When an owner, agent or other person interested in property deemed unfit by
an inspection as set forth in sections 9.05 and 9.06, and notified as provided
therein, fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of such
order within the time limited, a careful survey of the premises shall be made
by a board consisting of the chief of the fire department, the city health
officer and one (1) disinterested person to be chosen by the other two (2)
board members and who shall be a person
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
7
knowledgeable in at least one (1) area in which the property is deficient. A
report of such survey shall be made by each member of the board to the
director of code enforcement and copies of such reports shall be forwarded to
the owner and occupants of the building, by registered mail.
SECTION 9.08 - ORDER
Upon completion of the survey and sending of the reports, as set forth in
section 9.06, the code enforcement officer shall, if such action is indicated as
necessary by the survey, order the occupants of said building to vacate the
building, and take such other actions as are necessary to bring about
compliance with said order.
SECTION 9.09 - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, FITNESS AND MAXIMUM
OCCUPANCY LOAD
A. All existing rental properties and public buildings as defined under
Vermont State Statues will be required to have a "Certificate of
Occupancy" issued by the City filed in the land records before it can
be occupied once it has become vacant, changed occupants, use
and/or ownership.
B. No new structure or addition can be occupied without first obtaining
a "Certificate of Fitness" from the code enforcement officer, or
successor, and a "Certificate of Occupancy" from the city zoning
administrator.
C. All existing rental properties and public buildings not having a
"Certificate of Fitness" on file in the city land records shall be
inspected by the city, upon a vacancy, change of use or ownership,
and/or a complaint concerning health and safety issues, from, but
not limited to, the occupant, neighbors, landlord or property owner.
D. A property owner or his/her agent shall notify, during normal
working hours the city that a rental dwelling unit and/or a public
building vacancy exists and shall schedule an inspection.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
8
E. The city code enforcement officer, shall inspect for compliance
under the adopted Winooski Municipal Code, the specified rental
dwelling unit, and/or a public building upon an agreed scheduled
time during the normal working hours of the city code enforcement
officer unless such agreement and arrangement causes undue
hardship upon the property owner or his agent, in which case the
agreement and arrangement for the inspection may be mutually
agreed upon. Failure to mutually agree upon and arrange for the
inspection shall be construed that the property owner or his/her
agent has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter and
will be in violation of Winooski Municipal Code.
F. Upon completion of the inspection, the code enforcement officer
shall:
1. Cause an inspection report citing specific violations of this
chapter and any other city ordinance to be sent to the last
known address of the property owner or his agent.
G. If an inspection report citing a violation is issued for health, safety,
inhabitability or imminent danger, occupancy of the dwelling shall
not be permitted until such time as to the issuance of a Certificate of
Fitness and maximum occupancy load is issued by the city.
H. Any aggrieved person shall follow the appeal procedures as outlined
in Title 24 § 5005 of Vermont Statutes Annotated.
SECTION 9.10 - RECORDING OF ORDERS
Any order provided for in this chapter shall be recorded in the office of the city
clerk and indexed as a part of the land records. The order shall thereby be
effective against any purchaser, mortgagee, attaching creditor, lienholder or
other person whose claim or interest in the property arises subsequent to the
recording of the order. The code enforcement officer, upon finding that any
order issued under this chapter has been complied with, shall issue forthwith a
cancellation of the order. The cancellation shall be seconded in the office of
the city clerk and indexed as a part of the land records.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
9
SECTION 9.11 - DECLARING DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
A. Whenever any dwellings or dwelling premises are found by the code
enforcement officer to be unfit for human habitation because of
defects which constitute a serious hazard or immediate peril to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling or the
public, the code enforcement officer may:
1. Order the dwelling or dwelling premises to be vacated and
secured until such time as s/he determines that the dwelling is
again fit for human habitation;
2. Order the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
or dwelling premises except that the owner shall have the
right to vacate and secure the dwelling or dwelling premises
within seven (7) days after receipt of the order by the owner
or the owner's agent; or
3. Initiate demolition proceedings pursuant to Chapter 83 of
Title 24 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated.
SECTION 9.12 - COPY OF ORDER TO BE FURNISHED TO GRANTEE
The owner of any dwelling which has been found by the code enforcement
officer to be unfit for human habitation shall not sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose thereof until the owner has furnished the intended
grantee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of the order and has notified the
code enforcement officer, in writing, of his/her intent to sell, transfer,
mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of the dwelling, or until the code
enforcement officer has found that the conditions causing the dwelling to be
unfit for human habitation have been corrected. A transferee, mortgagee or
lessee who has received actual notice or constructive notice shall be bound by
the order on the date of the transfer, mortgage or lease without service of
further notice upon him/her by the city.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
10
SECTION 9.13 - RELOCATION
A. In the event that any person is displaced from a dwelling or dwelling
unit by enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to any
suspension or revocation of certificate pursuant to this chapter unless it
is reasonably determined by the enforcing agency that the tenant is
responsible for the circumstance(s) that led to the order for relocation,
the owner shall be responsible for paying the costs of relocation of the
displaced person or persons.
B. Notice of the displacement and relocation costs shall be given to the
owner, or to the agent, administrator or executor of the owner, in the
same manner as that provided for service of orders of this chapter.
C. Costs shall include all reasonable costs of relocation of the displaced
person or persons, including, but not limited to, moving expenses,
required security deposits, required utility deposits and pro rata portion
of any rent paid by the tenant for the month during which the
relocation occurs.
D. If the owner fails to pay the relocation costs within three (3) business
days from the date of receipt of the notice of the costs or the date of
posting of the costs, whichever is earliest, the city shall pay such costs
and the costs and charges incurred shall constitute a lien upon the land
upon which the dwelling or dwelling unit is situated, and shall be
enforced within the time and in the manner provided for the collection
of taxes on land.
SECTION 9.14 - [RESERVED.]
ARTICLE V - APPEALS
All appeals will be in accordance with the provisions of Title 24 § 5005 of Vermont
Statutes Annotated.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 5005
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
11
ARTICLE VI - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 9.15 - CONFORMANCE TO STANDARDS REQUIRED
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the requirements of this article.
SECTION 9.16 - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES
A. COOKING FACILITIES; SINK. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room
or space for a stove or other cooking facilities, space for dry food
storage and space for refrigerated food storage, and shall include a
kitchen sink installed. The sink shall be in good working condition
and properly connected to a hot and cold running water system
under pressure and a sewer system, said sink and systems shall be
installed and maintained in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules
and regulations of the city.
B. BATHROOM FIXTURES. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with a
complete bathroom fixture group consisting of a flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower in one (1) room in good
working condition, and installed and maintained in a manner
prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Said
fixture group shall be properly connected to an approved sewer
system and to an approved hot and cold running water system
under pressure, except that the flush water closet shall be
connected to an approved sewer system and to an approved cold
running water system under pressure. The flush water closet,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower need not be installed in the
same room, but said room shall afford privacy to a person within
said room.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
12
C. GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND SANITARY
1. Facilities
a. Garbage and rubbish that is placed outside a dwelling
or rooming house shall be stored in durable, cleanable,
watertight receptacles with properly fitting covers.
b. The owner of any dwelling or rooming house shall
provide and maintain appropriate receptacles for the
removal of garbage and rubbish.
2. Collection of Garbage and Rubbish
a. The owner of any dwelling or rooming house shall
assure that arrangements are made for the removal of
garbage and rubbish.
b. Garbage and rubbish shall be removed from dwellings
and rooming houses as often as is necessary to
maintain a sanitary structure, not less than once every
week.
3. Responsibilities
a. Owner Responsibilities: The owner of every dwelling or
rooming house shall be responsible for maintaining in a
clean and sanitary condition free of garbage or rubbish
all common areas as well as any other part of the
premises not used as a dwelling space.
b. Occupant Responsibilities: The occupant of every
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be responsible for
maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition and free
of garbage or rubbish that part of the premises which
he or she exclusively occupies.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
13
D. WATER HEATERS. The water heating facilities necessary to provide
the hot water required under this chapter shall be properly installed and
connected to the hot waterlines required under these subsections; shall
be maintained in safe and good working conditions; and shall be
capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink,
lavatory, basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit.
SECTION 9.17 - MINIMUM STANDARS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND
HEATING
A. LIGHTING. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window of
approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every
habitable room shall be ten (10) percent of the floor area of such,
except in kitchens where artificial light may be provided in accordance
with the provisions of the basic building code.
B. VENTILATION. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1)
window which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total of the operable window area in
every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of
the minimum aggregate glass area of the window as required in this
section, except where there is supplied some other device affording
adequate ventilation and approved by the building inspector.
C. BATHROOM LIGHTING AND VENTILATION. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms contained in this section, except
where the bathroom of the water closet compartment is adequately
ventilated by a ventilation system which is kept in continuous or
automatic operation and approved by the code enforcement officer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
14
D. ELECTRICAL SERVICE. Every dwelling unit and all public and common
areas shall be supplied with electrical service, which shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in a good and safe working condition and
shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner required
by the National Electrical Code.
E. HEATERS. Shall comply with the current fire and building code as
adopted by the Vermont Department of Public Safety.
1. Every central heating unit and/or central hot water heating
unit shall comply with the current minimum housing code
adopted by the Vermont Department of Health.
F. SCREENING. Screening will be provided to meet the minimum housing
code adopted by the Vermont Department of Health.
G. SCREENING OF BASEMENT OR CELLAR WINDOWS. Every basement
or cellar window used or interested to be used for ventilation, and every
other opening to a basement which might provide entry for rodents or
other pests, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
SECTION 9.18 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO SAFE AND
SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF PARTS OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS
A. FOUNDATIONS, WALLS, ETC. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling
and roof shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent
proof, shall be capable of affording privacy and shall be kept in good
repair.
B. WINDOWS, DOORS, ETC. Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent
proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
C. GENERAL MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS. Every dwelling unit,
auxiliary building and every appurtenance to said dwelling unit or
auxiliary building shall be maintained and kept in sound condition
and good repair.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
15
D. PLUMBING FIXTURES AND PIPES. Every plumbing fixture and water
and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in a good
sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions
in accordance with the current minimum housing code adopted by
the Vermont Department of Health.
E. BATHROOM AND KITCHEN NON-ABSORBENT SURFACES. The floor
and counter surfaces of every bathroom and kitchen in dwelling
units and rooming houses shall be constructed and maintained to be
a smooth, non-corrosive, non-absorbent and waterproof covering.
This shall not prohibit the use of wood for floors in kitchens but must
have a water resistant finish and have no cracks to allow the
accumulation of dirt and food, or the harborage of insects.
F. DRAINAGE OF RAINWATER. All rainwater shall be so drained and
conveyed from every roof so as not to cause dampness in the walls,
ceilings or floors of any habitable room, bathroom or water closet
compartment.
G. EQUIPMENT TO BE MAINTAINED. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively,
and shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition.
H. SERVICES NOT TO BE CUT OFF. No owner, operator or occupant
shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is
required under this chapter to be removed from or shut off from or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the city.
The building owner will be responsible for continuing any service
required by this chapter.
I. LETTING, UNCLEAN, UNSANITARY PLACES PROHIBITED. No owner
shall occupy or let to any other occupant, any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
16
SECTION 9.19 - MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS
A. FLOOR SPACE IN SLEEPING AREAS. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes shall contain the following usable floor space:
1. Each room occupied for sleeping purposes must have a
minimum of 70 square feet, with an additional 50 square feet
each occupant in excess of two. If the occupancy of any room
or dwelling unit exceeds the minimum square footage
requirements, the Code Official may order the number of
persons sleeping or living in said room or dwelling unit to be
reduced.
2. Additional sleeping areas that meet the minimum of 70
square feet shall be allowable if approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any such approval shall be limited to
one (1) additional approved sleeping area, not to exceed two
(2) additional people and be limited to persons who have
lease rights in the premises. All other life safety and minimum
housing regulations apply.
B. CEILING HEIGHT. The ceiling height in any room shall not be less
than seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet.
C. USE OF CELLAR SPACE. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable
room or dwelling unit unless it conforms to established life safety
requirements.
D. FLOOR SPACE. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred
fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof
and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space
for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of the total habitable room area.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
17
SECTION 9.20 - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS
A. The following responsibilities of owners and occupants are in
addition to those specified elsewhere throughout this chapter:
1. Every owner of a public building as defined shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or common area of the dwelling and premises
thereof.
2. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a
clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof which s/he occupies and controls.
3. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of
all his/her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it
in the rubbish containers required by section 9.16(C).
4. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall comply
with current Chittenden County Solid Waste ordinances and
Universal Recycling Law for the State of Vermont.
5. Every owner or agent of any building containing any dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents, or other pests whenever any such infestation exists.
The owner shall ensure that any infestation is professionally
exterminated and that every effort is made to limit
reinfestation.
6. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing
fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper
use and operation thereof.
7. Every owner of a public building and/or rental dwelling unit
shall be ultimately responsible for the removal or disposal of
accumulated rubbish, garbage or organic wastes left or
accumulated on the premises after reasonable notice to the
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
18
owner that the condition exists by the code enforcement
officer. In the event of an owner's failure to comply with the
order of the code enforcement officer, to remove or dispose
of accumulated rubbish, garbage or organic wastes, the city
may abate or remove the accumulation and charge the costs
of said removal to the owner of the premises. Nothing in this
section is to prohibit tenants from making their own
arrangements to provide rubbish and garbage removal nor to
prohibit the landlord from charging tenants for the removal of
such materials if that arrangement is made between the
parties.
SECTION 9.20.01 - PAINTED SURFACES
A. In non-rental housing, no person shall disturb more than one (1)
square foot of lead-based paint by failing to use one (1) or more of the
following lead-safe work practices:
1. Limiting access to interior and exterior work areas;
2. Enclosing interior work areas with plastic sheathing or
other effective lead dust barrier;
3. Using protective clothing;
4. Misting painted surfaces before disturbing paint;
5. Wetting paint debris before sweeping to limit dust
creation; and
6. Any other measure required by the city or the Vermont
Department of Health.
B. The owner(s) of any rental/public building shall comply with all lead
abatement requirements of the federal Residential Lead-Based Paint
Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, as amended or replaced, and the
regulations of the Vermont Department of Health.
C. If a violation of this section is found, the code enforcement officer
shall issue an order to cease and desist the prohibited practice, remove
all visible paint chips and clean the affected area using the safe
cleaning methods approved by the Vermont Department of Health.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 9 – Housing
19
SECTION 9.21. - AUTHORITY TO RAZE BUILDING/STRUCTURE
Any building left in an extended state of gross disrepair and abandonment
(more than ninety days) may be torn down by the city at a cost to the owner.
In the event of a fire or other natural catastrophe, this ordinance may be
waived for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) days.
ARTICLE VII - PENALTIES
A. Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation
and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
B. For each day that the owner, occupant or responsible person fails to comply
with an order issued under this chapter, they shall be subject to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per day. Each day's refusal or neglect shall constitute a
separate offense for this purpose.
C. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city
from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair conversion,
maintenance or use, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any
premises.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 1974 a.
6697568_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 10 - Reserved
1
Chapter 10 - Reserved
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 11 – Landfill Operations
1
Chapter 11 - Landfill Operations
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the method of landfill operations and the
kinds of usable fill that alter the topography; that effectuate changes in the slope of
land or influence the natural flow of surface or subsurface waters; or that fill
depressions, of whatever kind, cellar holes or raise the topographic level of an area,
within the City of Winooski.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 11.01 Definitions
Section 11.02 Procedure
Section 11.03 Site Fill Operations
Section 11.04 Enforcement
Section 11.05 Revocation of Permit
Article IV Penalties
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 2202a.
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 11.01 - DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter the following shall be defined to mean:
COMBUSTIBLE SUBSTANCE shall mean all waste substances capable of
incineration or burning, but excluding explosive or highly flammable material.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 11 – Landfill Operations
2
FILL OPERATIONS shall mean those operations which involve landfill or
topographic changes to effectuate alterations in the slope of land, that
influence the natural flow of surface or subsurface waters, that fill ruts or
ravines, that fill cellar holes left after structure demolition, that fill depressions
of whatever kind, or that add fill to raise the topographic level of an area.
LIFT shall mean a layer of fill which shall be composed entirely of nondecayable
fill that has an accumulated depth of four (4) feet.
NON-DECAYABLE FILL shall mean fill that is in the nature of stone, sand, brick,
or dirt that will not decrease per unit volume due to decay, erosion,
disintegration or emulsion.
POTENTIALLY DECAYABLE FILL shall mean fill that may, in the course of
ordinary erosion and emulsion, decay, erode, or disintegrate so as to cause a
settling of the fill area. Such fill shall include wood refuse and wood byproducts,
stumpage, scrap building materials or other substances capable of
decay or disintegration per unit volume.
REFUSE shall include all waste substances including combustible and
noncombustible wastes.
SECTION 11.02 - PROCEDURE
A. Prior to any person commencing any fill operation, as defined by this
chapter, application shall be made to the director of public works,
the building inspector, and the director of code enforcement (or
designees) with the appropriate fee for a permit to conduct said fill
operations. The appropriate forms will be available at City Hall.
B. Applications so filed shall contain a description of:
1. The plot of land on which the disposal of refuse is proposed,
including soil conditions;
2. The sequence and plan of operation;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 11 – Landfill Operations
3
3. Type and capacity of equipment to be used for operations;
4. Fire prevention and control plans;
5. Nuisance and vermin control program;
6. Dust control plan to utilize water in settling dust and airborne
particulate, and removal of any refuse left on city streets
because of fill operations;
7. Existing topography and watercourses, together with a
diagram and written statement explaining proposed location
and extent of earth work and fill operations. Where the
installation of piping is necessary to route a natural waterflow
because of fill operations, provision shall be made for:
a) Adequate bed supply for piping;
b) Adequate size of piping based on estimation of water
basin or area runoff; and
c) Other information as required those city officials to
whom application is made, which may include:
(1) Profiles indicating final depth of the fill.
(2) Successive layers of fill and earth cover to arrive
at final grade.
(3) Drainage plan for finished area.
(4) Such other information as may be required by
the municipality or officials of the city to whom
application is made.
C. Applicants must receive zoning approval prior to any permit being
issued.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 11 – Landfill Operations
4
D. Approval may be given to an application made pursuant to the terms of
this chapter.
E. In the case of a permit denial, written explanation shall be given to the
applying individual(s) as to the reason for permit denial. Reapplication
may be made for such permit after modification to conform the
proposed operations to the terms of this chapter.
SECTION 11.03 - SITE FILL OPERATIONS
A. The following procedures and guidelines shall be observed in any fill
operations, as defined by this chapter, conducted within the City of
Winooski:
1. The filling of cellar holes left after structure demolition shall be
done only with dirt, sand, brick, stone or other noncombustible
substance that would pose no health hazard or future danger
because of settling or decay. The use of lumber, scrap, building
materials, stumpage or other fill composed of wood, shall be
prohibited in fill operations of cellar holes within city limits under
the terms of this chapter.
2. Where potentially decayable fill, as defined in this chapter, is
used as fill material, the following guidelines for site fill
operations shall apply:
a. Such fill shall be mixed with an equal volume of dirt,
sand, stone or brick or other non-decayable fill, or
similar substance of a compacted nature that will not
decay or disintegrate.
b. Fill will be spread in individual layers or cells that do not
exceed a lift of four (4) feet prior to compaction. After
each cell is spread, each layer will be thoroughly
compacted by equipment of sufficient weight and
capacity to carry out all necessary operations to the
satisfaction of the city and additional non-decayable fill
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 11 – Landfill Operations
5
will be added to raise the lift to four (4) feet.
c. There shall be no more than five (5) compacted layers
of cells which may be placed one on top of another.
d. A final cover shall be applied to any fill herein
mentioned that comprises the last and final lift for a
particular fill operation. Such final cover shall consist
of compacted soil to a minimum accumulated depth of
two (2) feet.
SECTION 11.04 - ENFORCEMENT
The director of public works, building inspector, or director of code enforcement
(or designees) of the city are hereby empowered to take such action as may be
necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
SECTION 11.05 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city
for any violation of any law or ordinance pertaining to the operation or
maintenance of such fill operation.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 VSA § 1974a.
6697569_5:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
1
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
Certain activities require regulation and enforcement to maintain order, protect
property, promote business, and support the safety and welfare of the public. This
chapter includes provisions to control and prohibit activities that affect the quality of
life of Winooski citizens and shall apply at all times within the general limits of the
City of Winooski.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Regulations
Section 12.01 Definitions
Section 12.02 Posting Bills or Advertising Prohibited
Section 12.03 Bows and Arrows, Air Guns and Slingshots
Restricted
Section 12.04 Throwing Stones and other Missiles
Section 12.05 Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar
Devices Restricted
Section 12.06 Skateboarding and Rollerblading Prohibited in
Certain Places
Section 12.07 Use of Vehicles Prohibited in Certain Places
Section 12.08 Public Urination or Defecating
Article IV Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 12.01 - DEFINITIONS
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - Any law enforcement officer as defined in 23 V.S.A.
§ 4(11), or duly appointed code enforcement officer for the City of Winooski.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
2
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - The following persons certified pursuant to 20
V.S.A. § 2358: sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, constables whose authority has not
been limited under 24 V.S.A. § 1936(a), police officers, state's attorneys,
capitol police officers, motor vehicle inspectors, liquor investigators, state
game wardens, and state police.
PREMISES - A place or places, to include a building or facility, including the
fenced or walled (or demarcated or segregated) space surrounding it.
PUBLIC PLACE - Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business,
entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall also include but
not be limited to any store, shop, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drug store, pool
room, shopping center and any other place devoted to service, amusement or
entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate
areas of the above. For the purposes of this chapter, any licensed
establishment that sells malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises shall be considered as public.
SIDEWALK - That improved portion of a street between the curb lines or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for use, or
routinely used, by pedestrians.
SECTION 12.02 - POSTING BILLS OR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED
No person shall post any show bills, advertisements or paper, or paint any
sign, advertisement or notice, or post any political signs on any public building,
fence, post, stone, tree or walk or on any other natural or artificial object
within a public right-of-way within the city, except as may be permitted by
the city council.
SECTION 12.03 - BOWS AND ARROWS, AIR GUNS, AND SLINGSHOTS
RESTRICTED
No person shall shoot or use a bow and arrow, slingshot, an air gun or any
similar devices within the city.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
3
SECTION 12.04 - THROWING STONES AND OTHER MISSILES
No person shall throw stones or other missiles in or upon a public street, lane,
alley or common in the city.
SECTION 12.05 - USE OF COASTER, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND
SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED
No person upon roller skates, rollerblades, skateboard or riding in or by means
of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway,
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such
person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians. No person shall coast or slide on a sled, sleigh or
other vehicle in a street or upon the sidewalks thereof, except such streets as
shall be designated by the city council.
SECTION 12.06 - SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERBLADING PROHIBITED IN
CERTAIN PLACES
The use of skateboards, rollerblades, scooters and/or other similar recreational
devices shall be prohibited from use on city sidewalks in the downtown area
(the area contained within the perimeter of the railroad tracks (north
boundary), Abenaki Way (east boundary), the Winooski River (south
boundary) and Mayo Street (west boundary)), parking garage and on all city
public recreational property that is not specifically designated for
skateboarding and rollerblading activities.
SECTION 12.07 - USES OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES
The use of motor vehicles, trail bikes, motor scooters, snowmobiles or other
such devices shall be prohibited on city public school property and city public
recreation property that is not used as a traveled roadway or parking area. A
person found operating a motor vehicle, trail bike, motor scooter, or
snowmobile on school property or city recreation property that is not a
traveled roadway, or parking area or access or egress to such traveled
roadway or parking area, may be found in violation of the terms of this
section.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous Civil Offenses
4
SECTION 12.08 - PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATING
No person shall urinate or defecate in any public place, street or park, except
in facilities specifically provided for that purpose.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. §1974a.
6697571_4:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
1
Chapter 13 - Motor Vehicles and Traffic
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation and use of vehicles of every
kind including the power: to erect traffic signs and signals; to regulate the speed of
vehicles subject to 23 V.S.A. Chapter 13, Subchapter 12; to establish rules for
pedestrian traffic on public highways and to establish crosswalks; and to set off
portions of public highways of the municipality for sidewalks and bicycle paths and to
regulate their use.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 13.01 Definitions
Section 13.02 Authority of Enforcement Officers
Section 13.03 Obedience to Law Enforcement Officers
Section 13.04 Scene of Fire
Section 13.05 Registration of Vehicle to Constitute Prima Facie
Evidence of Violations
Section 13.06 Towing of Vehicles
Article IV Traffic Control Devices
Section 13.07 Authority of City Manager to Install Traffic Control
Devices
Section 13.08 Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control
Devices
Section 13.09 Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices
Section 13.10 When Traffic Devices are Required for Enforcement
Purposes
Section 13.11 Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings
Prohibited; Declared a Nuisance
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
2
Section 13.12 Interference with Official Traffic Control Devices or
Railroad Signs or Signals
Article V Motor Vehicle Operations
Section 13.13 Marking Traffic Lanes; Driving Within Lanes
Section 13.14 Operation of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
Section 13.15 Operation of Vehicles Upon Approach of Authorized
Emergency Vehicles
Section 13.16 Following or Parking Near Fire Apparatus Prohibited
Section 13.17 Crossing Fire Hose
Section 13.18 Funeral Processions to be Identified
Section 13.19 Manner of Driving in Procession
Section 13.20 Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession
Section 13.21 Driving on Sidewalks Prohibited
Section 13.22 Stopping, Standing and Parking of Buses Regulated
Section 13.23 Stopping, Standing and Parking of Taxicabs
Regulated
Section 13.24 Restricted Use of Bus and Taxicab Stands
Section 13.25 Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands to be Designated
Section 13.26 Driving Unsafe Vehicles Prohibited
Section 13.27 Through Streets
Section 13.28 Erection of Stop Signs at Intersections
Article VI Rules for Driving
Section 13.29 Required Position and Method of Turning at
Intersection
Section 13.30 Turning on Crest of Hill
Section 13.31 Starting Parked Vehicle
Section 13.32 Driver's Signal
Section 13.33 Driving From Alleys, Driveways and Garages
Section 13.34 Right of Way
Section 13.35 Vehicle Turning Left
Section 13.36 Limitations on Turning Around
Section 13.37 Authority to Place and Obedience to Turning
Markers
Section 13.38 Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
3
Section 13.39 Obedience to No-Turn Signs
Section 13.40 U-Turns
Section 13.41 Driving on Right Side of Roadway
Section 13.42 Passing Vehicles
Section 13.43 Overtaking Vehicles
Section 13.44 Overtaking Vehicles on the Right
Section 13.45 Limitations on Overtaking on the Left
Section 13.46 One-Way Roadways and Rotary Traffic Islands
Section 13.47 Driving on Roadways Laned for Traffic
Section 13.48 Speed Restrictions
Section 13.49 Traffic Not to be Obstructed
Section 13.50 Bicycles and Motorcycles
Section 13.51 Unattended Vehicles
Section 13.52 Clinging to Vehicles
Section 13.53 Riding on Running Boards
Section 13.54 Obedience to Signal Indicating Approach to Railroad
Train
Section 13.55 Backing
Section 13.56 Restricted Access
Section 13.57 School Buses
Section 13.58 Vehicles to Stop at Signs; Yield Intersections
Section 13.59 Signs Indicating One-Way Streets
Section 13.60 Signs Indicating Dead-End Streets
Section 13.61 One-Way Streets Enumerated
Article VII Pedestrians
Section 13.62 City Manager to Designate Crosswalks
Section 13.63 Pedestrians Crossing Roadway
Section 13.64 Signals
Section 13.65 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way in Crosswalk
Section 13.66 Prohibited Crossings
Section 13.67 Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
Section 13.68 Pedestrians Soliciting Rides or Business
Section 13.69 Blind Pedestrians; Right-of-Way
Section 13.70 Drivers to Exercise Due Care
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
4
Article VIII Bicycles
Section 13.71 Application of Article
Section 13.72 Riding on Bicycles
Section 13.73 Clinging to Motor Vehicles
Section 13.74 Riding on Roadways and Bicycle Paths
Section 13.75 Carrying Articles
Section 13.76 Equipment on Bicycles
Section 13.77 Legal Guardian Responsible for Penalties
Article XIV Penalties
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 V.S.A. § 2201.
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 13.01 - DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words
or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein, but in the state laws
regulating the operation of vehicles, the state law definition shall apply.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE - shall mean vehicles of the fire and police
departments, public or private ambulances, and a vehicle to which a permit
has been issued pursuant to 23 V.S.A. § 1252(a)(1) or 23 V.S.A. § 1252(a)(2).
BICYCLE – shall mean every pedal-driven device propelled by human power
having one or more wheels on which a person may ride, including a so-called
pedal vehicle which may have an enclosed cab.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - shall mean every vehicle designed, maintained or
used primarily for the transportation of property.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
5
CROSSWALK – shall mean:
A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or in the absence of curbs
from the edges of the traversable roadway; and
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossings by lines or other markings on the
surface.
DRIVER - shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of
a vehicle.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - shall mean any law enforcement officer as defined
in 23 V.S.A. § 4(11), or duly appointed code enforcement officer for the City of
Winooski.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 V.S.A. § 4.
EXPLOSIVE – shall mean any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that
is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and
which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such
proportions, quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or
mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR – shall mean every motor vehicle designed and used primarily
as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other
implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS – shall mean any liquid which has a flash point of 70
degrees F. or less, as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test
device.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
6
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS – shall mean those substances or materials in such
quantities and form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety
or property when transported in commerce, by any and all modes. Hazardous
materials shall include, but not be limited to, explosives, etiologic agents,
radioactive materials, flammable liquid or solids, combustible liquid or solids,
poisons, toxins, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and compressed gases.
INTERSECTION – shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation of the
property lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not
such streets cross.
LANED ROADWAY – shall mean a street, the roadway of which is divided into
two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER – shall mean persons certified pursuant to 20
V.S.A. § 2358: sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, constables whose authority has not
been limited under 24 V.S.A. § 1936 (a), police officers, state's attorneys,
capitol police officers, motor vehicle inspectors, liquor investigators, state
game wardens, and state police.
LOADING ZONE – shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC – shall mean a maneuver executed by the drivers of
vehicles on converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry
into the junction thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is
required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a
collision with any other vehicles.
MOTORCYCLE - shall mean every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTOR VEHICLE - shall mean all vehicles propelled or drawn by power other
than muscular power, except farm tractors, vehicles running only upon
stationary rails or tracks, motorized highway building equipment, road making
appliances, or electric personal assistive mobility devices.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
7
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD - Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current
use in the city.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES - shall mean all signs, signals, markings
and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
OPERATE, OPERATING OR OPERATED – shall include, as applied to motor
vehicles, "drive," "driving" and "driven" and shall also include an attempt to
operate, and shall be construed to cover all matters and things connected with
the presence and use of motor vehicles on the highway, whether they be in
motion or at rest.
OPERATOR - shall mean every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the
owner thereof, or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or who is
in actual physical control of a vehicle regardless of ownership status.
PARK or PARKING - shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals
or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle caused by reasons beyond the
control of the operator of the vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN - shall mean any person afoot.
PERSON - shall include a corporation, association, co-partnership, company,
firm or other aggregation of individuals.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY - shall mean every way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RAILROAD - shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
8
RAILROAD TRAIN - shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor engine,
with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the
roadway.
ROADWAY - shall mean that portion of a street or highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways,
the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all
such roadways collectively.
SIDEWALK - shall mean that improved portion of a street between the
curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines
intended for use by pedestrians.
STOP - when required shall mean complete cessation of movement.
STOP, STOPPING or STANDING - when prohibited shall mean any stopping or
standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or a traffic-control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY - shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines
of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH HIGHWAY - shall mean every street or highway or portion thereof
at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or
highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same,
provided that such stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
TRAFFIC - shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles,
streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any
street for purposes of travel.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
9
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL - shall mean any device, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to
stop and to proceed.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY - when required by an official sign, shall mean the act
of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or
left, provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection.
SECTION 13.02 - AUTHORITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
A. Law enforcement officers may make arrests for violation of this
chapter.
B. Enforcement officers may direct, control and regulate traffic, and
make reasonable orders in enforcement of this ordinance or to
prevent, or alleviate traffic congestion, property damage or personal
injury. No person may knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of any enforcement officer.
SECTION 13.03 - OBEDIENCE TO LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
A. A person, while operating or in charge of a motor vehicle shall, upon
request by a law enforcement officer who reasonably suspects that
the person has committed or is committing a violation of this
ordinance or applicable state law, give his or her name and address
and the name and address for the owner of the motor vehicle and
produce his or her operator's license and registration certificate for
the motor vehicle. If the operator does not have a valid Vermont
operator's license, the operator shall produce other suitable forms of
identification. A person operating a motor vehicle shall promptly and
carefully stop when signaled to stop by a law enforcement officer
wearing insignia which identifies the officer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
10
B. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section
shall be committing a criminal act and shall be subject to the
penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of the Winooski City Code.
SECTION 13.04 - SCENE OF FIRE
The fire department officer in command, or any fire fighter designated by him,
may exercise the powers and authority of an enforcement officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to
an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene in
the absence of, or in assisting, the police. The fire department officer in
command, or his designee, shall be clearly identified, including, but not limited
to, badges, fire hat, or fire coat.
SECTION 13.05 - REGISTRATION OF VEHICLE TO CONSTITUTE PRIMA FACIE
EVIDENCE OF VIOLATIONS
The presence of any motor vehicle in or upon any public street in the city, or
in or upon any other place within the city where the parking or leaving of a
motor vehicle is regulated by this chapter, in violation of this chapter, shall be
prima facie evidence that the person in whose name such vehicle is registered
on the records of the commissioner of motor vehicles, committed or
authorized such violation.
SECTION 13.06 - TOWING OF VEHICLES
A. Any law enforcement officer, or duly appointed code enforcement
officer for the city, is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or
have removed and towed away by a commercial towing service: any
motor vehicle parked without authorization on publicly owned land
and including, by illustration and not limitation, public, municipal
parking lots, drives or ways; and any motor vehicle illegally parking
in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a
traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or may
obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
11
The police department shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the
owner prior to the towing of the vehicle.
B. The owner of the towed motor vehicle will be required to pay a
reasonable towing charge for such removal and a reasonable
storage charge for which a lien may be imposed against the motor
vehicle and/or its owner in addition to any applicable criminal or civil
penalty.
C. Motor vehicles so towed away shall be stored in a safe place and
shall be restored to the owner or operator of such motor vehicle
upon payment of all charges.
ARTICLE IV - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION 13.07 - AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER TO INSTALL TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICES
The city manager shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs,
signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other
ordinances or regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of this
chapter and said ordinances or regulations, and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as s/he may deem necessary to regulate
traffic under this chapter and other ordinances or regulations of the city or
under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
SECTION 13.08 - MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES
A. All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
manual and specifications approved by the National Joint Committee
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
B. All signs and signals required by this chapter for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location
throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be
official traffic control devices.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
12
SECTION 13.09. - OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter or
other ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by an enforcement
officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle by this chapter.
SECTION 13.10. - WHEN TRAFFIC DEVICES ARE REQUIRED FOR
ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an
official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place.
SECTION 13.11. - DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR
MARKINGS PROHIBITED; DECLARED A NUISANCE
A. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct
the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with
the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal.
B. No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.
C. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for
official signs.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
13
D. Every sign, signal or marking prohibited by this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction
over the highway where the sign, signal or marking is erected is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice.
SECTION 13.12 - INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact, alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad
sign or signal or any inscription or shield, or insignia thereon or any part
thereof.
ARTICLE V - MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION
SECTION 13.13 - MARKING TRAFFIC LANES; DRIVING WITHIN LANES
A. The city manager may cause to be marked traffic lanes upon the
roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of
traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle
within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully
passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
SECTION 13.14 - OPERATION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
A. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to
an emergency call, or when responding to but not upon returning
from a fire alarm, and a law enforcement officer operating an
authorized emergency vehicle in fresh pursuit of a suspected
violator of the law may:
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
14
1. park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
chapter;
2. proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe
operation;
3. exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;
4. disregard regulations governing the direction of movement
or turning in specified directions; and
5. shall come to a full stop when approaching a school bus
which is flashing red lights and may proceed only when the
flashing red lights are extinguished.
B. The exemptions granted to an authorized emergency vehicle apply
only when the vehicle is making use of audible or visual signals
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
C. The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver
from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of
others.
D. The operator of a school bus, upon the approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle as described in subsection (A) of this section,
shall take action immediately to get school children out of the public
highway and to a safe place and shall thereafter extinguish the
flashing red lights.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
15
SECTION 13.15 - OPERATION OF VEHICLES UPON APPROACH OF
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES
A. Upon the approach of a law enforcement vehicle which is sounding a
siren or displaying a blue or a blue and white signal lamp or both, all
other vehicles shall pull to the right of the lane of traffic and come
to a complete stop until such law enforcement vehicle has passed,
or until signaled by an enforcement officer; and provided further;
that upon the approach of ambulances, fire apparatus, vehicles
owned by volunteer firefighter, and motor vehicles used in rescue
operations as set forth in 23 VSA § 1252, which are sounding a siren
or displaying a red signal lamp, or both, all other vehicles shall pull
to the right of the lane of traffic and come to a complete stop until
such emergency vehicle has passed. Whenever enforcement officers
are stationed, they shall have full power to regulate traffic
irrespective of the foregoing provisions.
B. This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
SECTION 13.16 - FOLLOWING OR PARKING NEAR FIRE APPARATUS
PROHIBITED
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such a vehicle within the block where
any fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
SECTION 13.17 - CROSSING FIRE HOSE
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive over any unprotected hose of a fire
department when laid down on any street, private driveway or roadway to be
used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department
official in command.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
16
SECTION 13.18 - FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED
A procession of vehicles in connection with a funeral shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of pennant or other identifying
insignia, or by such other method as may be determined and designated by
the chief of police.
SECTION 13.19 - MANNER OF DRIVING IN PROCESSION
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practicable and safe.
SECTION 13.20 - DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles
are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This section shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or
police officers.
SECTION 13.21 - DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
SECTION 13.22 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES
REGULATED
A. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park any bus upon any
street at any place other than at a bus stand.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone, except in case of an emergency.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
17
C. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a
position with the right front wheel or such vehicle not more than
eighteen (18) inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of
other vehicular traffic.
SECTION 13.23 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF TAXICABS
REGULATED
The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park any taxicab upon any street
at any place other than in a taxicab stand. This provision shall not prevent the
operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
SECTION 13.24 - RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or
other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop has been officially
designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
SECTION 13.25 - BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS TO BE DESIGNATED
A. The city manager is hereby authorized to designate certain portions
of the city streets as taxicab stands.
B. The city manager, in consultation with the representatives of the
Chittenden County Transportation Authority, and its successors, is
hereby authorized to designate certain portions of the city streets as
bus stops.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
18
C. Said designated portions shall be clearly marked by erecting a sign
reading "Bus Stop - No Parking" or some such similar traffic control
device.
SECTION 13.26 - DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner of a vehicle to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle
or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger
any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required by State law.
SECTION 13.27 - THROUGH STREETS
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by regulation as
through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a
vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the rightof-
way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are
approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate
hazard, unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control
signal.
SECTION 13.28 - ERECTION OF STOP SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS
The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where particular hazards exist upon streets and to determine
whether vehicles shall stop at one (1) or more entrances to any such
intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is
required.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
19
ARTICLE VI. - RULES FOR DRIVING
SECTION 13.29. - REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT
INTERSECTION
A. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall
do so as follows:
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be
made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway.
2. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an
approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and
by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the
intersection. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall
be made such that the vehicle is positioned to the right of the
center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever
practicable, a vehicle making a left turn shall stay to the left
of the appropriate lane of travel, rather than moving to the
right, unless a wide turning radius is necessary.
3. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction
on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle
intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be
made such that the vehicle is positioned in the furthest left
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon
the roadway being entered. The driver of a vehicle about to
enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
20
SECTION 13.30 - TURNING ON CREST OF HILL
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred feet.
SECTION 13.31 - STARTING PARKED VEHICLE
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
SECTION 13.32 - DRIVER’S SIGNAL
A. No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or
attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a
manner as to apprise others who might be affected by his/her
action.
B. No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable
safety and then only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding
the horn if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, or
after giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided
in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such movement.
C. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not less
than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before
turning.
D. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the
hand and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a
vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then said
signals must be given by such a lamp or device.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
21
E. All signals herein required to be given by hand and arm shall be
given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left-turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally
2. Right-turn: Hand and arm extended upward
3. Stop or Decrease of Speed: Hand and arm extended
downward
SECTION 13.33 - DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS AND GARAGES
A. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk,
or across a sidewalk line projected across such alley, and shall
exercise extreme care in driving upon said sidewalk or across such
line.
B. No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, or at any time into or upon any
portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone.
SECTION 13.34 - RIGHT-OF-WAY
Except as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two vehicles enter an
intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on
the right.
SECTION 13.35 - VEHICLE TURNING LEFT
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction
which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an
immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a signal
when and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other
vehicles approaching the intersection
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
22
from said opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making
the left turn.
SECTION 13.36 - LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to maneuver such vehicle
by backing up and turning around so as to proceed in the opposite direction,
unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing into traffic
or otherwise interfering with traffic.
SECTION 13.37 - AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING
MARKERS
A. The city manager is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs
within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course
to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law, this chapter or other ordinances of the city.
B. When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such indications.
SECTION 13.38 - AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS
The city manager is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn, and shall place
proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited
between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which
event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or the signs may be
removed when such turns are permitted.
SECTION 13.39 - OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
23
SECTION 13.40 - U-TURNS
A. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction, commonly known as a U-Turn, at any point
on the streets of the city.
B. The provisions of subsection (A) shall not apply to the following:
1. Police vehicles;
2. Authorized construction, maintenance, repair and towing
vehicles; or
3. Ambulances, fire engines and other vehicles performing
official emergency functions.
C. In case of emergency, police officers in regulating traffic may depart
as far as may be necessary from this section.
SECTION 13.41 - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY
A. Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway except as follows:
1. When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction under the rules governing such
movement;
2. When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while
under construction or repair;
3. Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic
under the rules applicable thereon;
4. Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way
traffic; and/or
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
24
5. Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of
the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the
driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the
right-of-way on such pavement to the other vehicle.
SECTION 13.42 - PASSING VEHICLES
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
SECTION 13.43 - OVERTAKING VEHICLES
A. The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those
limitations, exceptions, and special rules hereinafter stated:
1. The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left
thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the
right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
2. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give
way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on
audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
SECTION 13.44. - OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON RIGHT
A. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
B. The driver of a vehicle may overtake, and allowing sufficient
clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
either upon the left or upon the right of a roadway with
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
25
unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for four or more lanes of
moving traffic when such movement can be made in safety. No
person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the
roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
C. The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right on a one-way street, or on any street on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement where the roadway is free
from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lanes of
moving vehicles.
SECTION 13.45 - LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT
A. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of
oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such
overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering
with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the
overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction.
B. No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
1. When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in
the highway, where the driver's view is obstructed within
sufficient distance as to create a hazard in the event
another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
2. When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or
traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
3. Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep
to the right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which
distinctive line also so directs traffic.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
26
4. The limitations in subparagraphs 1 and 2 of this paragraph
(B) shall not apply upon a one-way street or upon a street
with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or
more lanes of moving traffic in each direction when such
movement can be made with safety.
SECTION 13.46. - ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS
A. Upon a roadway designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
B. A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
on the right of such island.
SECTION 13.47 - DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC
A. Whenever any roadway has been divided into three or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others
consistent herewith shall apply:
1. A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely
within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that such movement
can be made with safety.
2. Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes a vehicle
shall not be driven in the center lane except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle where the
roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left
turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the direction that the
vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of
such allocation.
3. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic
to use a designated lane or allocating specified lanes to
traffic moving in the same direction and drivers of vehicles
shall obey the directions of every such sign.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
27
SECTION 13.48 - SPEED RESTRICTIONS
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the state, or the county, within the city at a speed in excess of
twenty-five (25) miles per hour. Provided that if the city manager by
regulation sets other limits as provided by statute after an engineering and
traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets
indicated in such regulation. Appropriate signs showing such speed limits shall
be posted.
SECTION 13.49 - TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
SECTION 13.50 - BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle or
motorcycle other than upon a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the
right or rear of the operator.
SECTION 13.51 - UNATTENDED VEHICLES
No person shall permit a motor vehicle to stand unattended without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition
and effectively setting the brake, air temperatures permitting, and, when the
vehicle is standing upon a grade, turning the front of the front wheels toward
the curb or side of the highway. This section does not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
SECTION 13.52 - CLINGING TO VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle or wagon to allow any
person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle, or any toy vehicle to cling to
or to attach himself or his vehicle to the motor vehicle or wagon.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
28
SECTION 13.53 - RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or
outside step of any vehicle.
SECTION 13.54 - OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH TO
RAILROAD TRAIN
A. Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop not less than fifteen (15) feet, and
within fifty (50) feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall
not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements
shall apply when:
1. A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
2. A crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a
railroad train;
3. A railroad train approaching within approximately fifteen
hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a
signal audible from such distance and such railroad train,
by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
4. An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
B. No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or bridge at a railroad grade crossing while such gate
or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
29
C. The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any
school bus carrying any school children, or any vehicle carrying
explosives, flammable liquid or other hazardous materials as cargo
shall stop such vehicle within fifty (50) feet but not less than ten
(10) feet from the nearest rail or the tracks and shall listen and look
in both directions along such track from which a train might come,
before proceeding across such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided
that no such stop need be made at any such crossing where a police
officer or a traffic-control signal directs traffic to proceed.
SECTION 13.55 - BACKING
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic.
SECTION 13.56 - RESTRICTED ACCESS
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited
controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are
established by public authority.
SECTION 13.57 - SCHOOL BUSES
The driver of a vehicle on a street or highway, upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual
signal as required by the statute for operation while the bus is transporting
pupils; however, the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which the
roadway for traffic moving in opposite direction is separated by a strip of
ground at least four feet wide, which is not surfaced or suitable for vehicle
traffic, need not stop his/her vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus
which is on the opposite roadway.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
30
SECTION 13.58 - VEHICLES TO STOP AT STOP SIGNS; YIELD INTERSECTIONS
A. When stop signs are erected as authorized by this division, at or
near the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall
stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection,
except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal.
B. No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating to safely
proceed. A driver may not proceed until the crosswalk and
intersection are clear of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
C. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to
the yield sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the
driver is moving across or within the intersection. However, if the
driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection,
after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-ofway.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
31
SECTION 13.59 - SIGNS INDICATING ONE-WAY STREETS
Whenever any provision of this chapter or other ordinance or regulation of the
city designates any one-way street, the city manager may so designate such
street, and the city shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no
such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
SECTION 13.60 - SIGNS INDICATING DEAD-END STREETS
The city shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating dead-end streets
at the entrance of those streets designated as dead-end streets by regulation.
SECTION 13.61 - ONE-WAY STREETS ENUMERATED
When signs are properly erected designating streets as “one-way,” vehicular
traffic shall move only in the indicated direction and movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
ARTICLE VII - PEDESTRIANS
SECTION 13.62 - CITY MANAGER TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS
The city manager is hereby authorized to designate and maintain by
appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of roadways, crosswalks
at intersections where in his/her opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as s/he may deem
necessary.
SECTION 13.63 - PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY
A. At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the
most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any
place other than a crosswalk s/he shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
32
B. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety
zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
SECTION 13.64 - SIGNALS
At intersections where traffic is directed by an enforcement officer or by a
stop-and-go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the
roadway other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the
lawful movement of traffic.
SECTION 13.65 - PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK
A. When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or
stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk; however, no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a
curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a
vehicle, which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to so
yield.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to
cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
C. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within
a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at any
intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
SECTION 13.66 - PROHIBITED CROSSINGS
A. Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a
crosswalk.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk or at
any intersection.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
33
SECTION 13.67 - PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS
A. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
B. Where sidewalks are not provided or are impassible, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only
on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which
may approach from the opposite direction. Pedestrians, when
walking in a roadway, shall walk no more than two (2) abreast.
SECTION 13.68 - PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
SECTION 13.69 - BLIND PEDESTRIANS; RIGHT-OF-WAY
Whenever a pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street or
highway, guided by a guide dog or carrying in a raised or extended position a
cane or walking stick, white in color or white tipped with red, the driver of
every vehicle approaching the intersection, or place where the pedestrian is
attempting to cross, shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop before arriving
at the intersection or place of crossing and before proceeding shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injuring the pedestrian.
SECTION 13.70 - DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
34
ARTICLE VIII - BICYCLES
SECTION 13.71 - APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
A. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward may not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any
of the provisions of this article.
B. This article applies whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles
subject to those exceptions stated herein.
C. Every person riding a bicycle is granted all of the rights and is
subject to all of the duties applicable to operators of vehicles, except
as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
SECTION 13.72 - RIDING ON BICYCLES
A. No person propelling a bicycle may ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. No person may use a bicycle to carry more persons at any one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
SECTION 13.73. - CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES
No person may attach themselves, or any bicycle, wagon, roller skates, sled or
toy vehicle upon which s/he is riding or will ride to any motor vehicle.
SECTION 13.74 - RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS
A. A person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
35
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway may not ride more than two
abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
C. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to
a roadway, bicycle riders may use only such path and may not use
the roadway.
SECTION 13.75 - CARRYING ARTICLES
No person operating a bicycle may carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
SECTION 13.76 - EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES
A. No person may operate a bicycle at nighttime unless it is equipped
with a lamp on the front, which emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front, and with a
red reflector on the rear, which shall be visible at least three
hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. Lamps emitting red lights
visible to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. No person should operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell
or other device capable of giving a signal audible for the distance of
at least one hundred (100) feet. No person may equip a bicycle with
any siren or whistle, or any device simulating a siren of an
authorized emergency vehicle, nor may he operate a bicycle so
equipped.
C. No person may operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a brake
which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on
dry, level, clean pavement.
D. No person may operate a bicycle with equipment that interferes
with the normal and safe operation of the bicycle or in any other
way is hazardous to the operator, other persons or property.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
36
E. No person may operate a bicycle unless:
1. it is equipped with handlebars that are affixed to the
frame in a tight and secure manner;
2. it is equipped with a permanent and regular seat attached
in a secure manner; and
3. it has a frame that is not cracked, broken, or bent.
SECTION 13.77 - LEGAL GUARDIAN RESPONSIBLE FOR PENALTIES
A parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of sixteen years shall be
held directly responsible for the violation of any provision of this Article.
ARTICLE XIV - PENALTIES
The provisions of the chapter shall be civil offenses enforced pursuant to 23 V.S.A.
Chapter 23.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 13 – Motor Vehicles and Traffic
37
ADDENDUM TO CHAPTER 13 - ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED BY CITY
MANAGER
A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets are designated
as one-way and vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction and
movement in the opposite direction is prohibited:
1. Bellevue Street going east from Franklin Street to Russell Street;
2. Follett Street going north from West Canal Street to West Allen Street;
3. West Center Street going west from Weaver Street to Mayo Street and
going east from Weaver Street to Main Street;
4. Railroad Lane going west from Weaver Street to Mallett's Bay Avenue;
5. Center Street going west from Main Street to West Allen Street;
6. Main Street traffic circle (rotary) from West Canal Street and Winooski Falls
Way to East Allen Street and West Allen Street (right turns only and counters
clockwise on the right side of Commons Park);
7. Mayo Street going south from West Allen Street to Canal Street;
8. West Allen Street going east from Malletts Bay Avenue to Main Street;
9. West Canal Street going west from Main Street to Follett Street; and
10. Weaver Lane going south from East Allen Street.
6697572_4:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 14 - Open Burning
1
Chapter 14 - Open Burning
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to define and regulate outside burning within the City of
Winooski.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 14.01 Definitions
Section 14.02 Recreational Fires
Section 14.03 Cooking Fires
Section 14.04 Bonfires
Section 14.05 Permits
Section 14.06 Burning of Refuse or Use of Incinerators
Article IV Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 14.01. – DEFINITIONS
RECREATIONAL FIRES – shall mean the non-commercial burning of materials,
other than rubbish, for pleasure, where the fuel burned is not contained in an
incinerator, barbecue grill or barbecue pit and the TOTAL fuel area is not
exceeding three (3) feet in diameter and two (2) feet in height.
COOKING FIRES – shall mean fires that are kindled for the purpose of cooking
food. These fires are typically fueled by charcoal, liquefied propane gas, or
natural gas. Generally cooking fires shall be contained in a receptacle of a type
normally used for outdoor cooking purposes.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 14 - Open Burning
2
BONFIRES – shall mean ANY outside burn that exceeds the size limitations as
defined in “RECREATIONAL FIRES.”
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION (AHJ) – shall mean an organization, office,
or individual responsible for enforcing the requirements of a code or standard,
or for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a procedure.
SECTION 14.02 - RECREATIONAL FIRES
Recreational Fires shall NOT require a permit if property is owner-occupied.
Recreational Fires shall be permitted on non-owner occupied properties upon
issuance of a Recreational Fire permit, and written permission of the current
owner of record shall be provided. All Recreational Fires shall be subject to
the following requirements:
1. Recreational Fires shall not be kindled within ten (10) feet of any
structure. A fire shall not be kindled in a manner or in conditions that
may lead to an out of control burn. This includes the selection of a
location that is unsuitable for a controlled fire, burning during high
winds, or drought conditions.
2. Material to be burned shall be only natural wood products. The material
shall not be painted or treated. No burning of trash shall be permitted.
3. A garden hose attached to an active faucet shall be available to
extinguish a fire at all times.
4. All Recreational Fires shall be extinguished when not attended.
5. Recreational Fires shall only be kindled between the hours of 1600 hrs.
and 2300 hrs.
6. Recreational Fires can be ordered extinguished at any time by the AHJ if
s/he judges the fire or conditions under which the burning occurs to be
a threat to public safety, health or property.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 14 - Open Burning
3
SECTION 14.03 - COOKING FIRES
Cooking Fires shall NOT require a permit, and shall be subject to the following
requirement:
1. No fire for the purpose of cooking, or for any other purpose, shall be
kindled on any deck, porch, or platform or under any overhanging
portion or within ten (10) feet of any structure that is attached to a
building.
SECTION 14.04 - BONFIRES
Bonfires SHALL require issuance of permit, and shall be subject to the
following requirements:
1. Location shall be approved by AHJ.
2. Material(s) to be burned shall be inspected and approved by AHJ.
3. A garden hose attached to an active faucet shall be available to
extinguish a fire at all times.
4. All Bonfires shall be extinguished when not attended.
5. Bonfires can be ordered extinguished at any time by the AHJ if s/he
judges the fire or conditions under which the burning occurs to be a
threat to public safety, health or property.
SECTION 14.05 - PERMITS
1. Issued permits shall indicate dates, times and emergency contact
information.
2. Permits may be restricted by AHJ.
SECTION 14.06 - BURNING OF REFUSE OR USE OF INCINERATORS.
1. The burning of refuse or the use of any type of incinerator is strictly
forbidden within the city.
2. A violation of Section 14.06.1 will be a Criminal Offense and subject to
criminal penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section 1.11of the Winooski City Code.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 14 - Open Burning
4
ARTICLE IV. – PENALTIES
1. Unless otherwise stated, a violation of this Article shall be subject to civil penalties
and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
2. Fires started in violation of this article will be extinguished by the city and all costs
associated with the city response will be assessed to the homeowner or landlord.
3. There shall be a prima facie presumption that the owner, tenant or person in
charge of the premises where said fire is kindled, kindled the fire and is responsible.
6697575_1:10780-00007
6697575_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
1
Chapter 15 - Parking
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
Parking vehicles on city streets, in established city parking lots, and in the city
parking garage requires regulation and enforcement to maintain order, protect
property, promote business, and support the safety and welfare of the public. This
chapter includes provisions prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle and shall
apply at all times, at those times herein specified, or as indicated on official signs.
Exceptions to the rules and regulations contained herein are limited to times when it
is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic, when complying
with the directions of a police officer, or when official traffic-control devices dictate
otherwise. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places
or at specified times.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose and Applicability
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 15.01 Definitions
Section 15.02 Enforcement
Section 15.02.01 Signage
Section 15.03 Fines, Penalties, and Scofflaw
Section 15.03.01 Fines
Section 15.03.02 Penalties
Section 15.03.03 Scofflaw
Section 15.03.04 Authority to Remove and Store Vehicles
Section 15.03.05 Notification to Owner/Holder(s) of Security
Interest
Section 15.03.06 Form of Notice and Disposal of Unclaimed
Vehicles
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
2
Section 15.03.07 Notice Procedure if Owner/Holder(s) of
Security Interest Cannot be Identified
Section 15.03.08 Procedure to Reclaim Stored Vehicle
Article IV Regulation
Section 15.04 Parking Prohibited
Section 15.05 Minimum safe Distance
Section 15.06 Recreational, Trailer or Non-Motorized
Vehicle
Section 15.07 Manner of Parking
Section 15.08 Bus Stopping, Parking or Standing
Section 15.09 Parking on City Streets
Section 15.09.01 Resident Only Parking
Section 15.09.02 Permits
Section 15.10 City Parking Garage
Section 15.11 City Parking Lots
Article V Special Provisions
Section 15.12 Disability Parking Space Designation
Section 15.12.01 Disability Card or Placard Display
Section 15.12.03 Disability Parking Designation on City Streets
Section 15.13 Fire Lanes and Fire Hydrants
Section 15.14 Parking Ban Procedures for removal of
vehicles interfering with maintenance
activities and ticketing illegally parking
vehicles
Section 15.15 Delivery and Loading/Unloading Zones
Article VI Parking and Parking Meter Zones
Section 15.17 Parking Meter Zones
Section 15.18 Installation of Meters
Section 15.19 Hours of Use and Rates
Section 15.20 Location of Meters
Section 15.21 Spaces Delineated, Violation
Section 15.22 Time Violation
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
3
Section 15.23 Use of Slugs and Coins
Section 15.24 Removal of Vehicles Considered Abandoned
Article VII Appeals and Severability
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 15.01 - DEFINITIONS
DOWNTOWN ENFORCEMENT DISTRICT - shall mean those streets between
Mayo Street to the west and East Street to the east; the Railroad Bridge on
Main Street to the north and Winooski River Bridge on Main Street to the
south.
EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE – shall mean any work that cannot be scheduled
or delayed (i.e. snow removal) in order to assure the safest possible conditions
on streets and sidewalks.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - shall mean any law enforcement officer as defined
in 23 V.S.A. § 4(11), or duly appointed code enforcement officer for the City of
Winooski.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 V.S.A. § 4.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER – shall mean persons certified pursuant to 20
V.S.A. § 2358: sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, constables whose authority has not
been limited under 24 V.S.A. § 1936(a), police officers, state's attorneys,
capitol police officers, motor vehicle inspectors, liquor investigators, state
game wardens, and state police.
LOADING ZONE – shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
MOTOR VEHICLE - shall include all vehicles propelled or drawn by power other
than muscular power, except tractors used entirely for work on the farm,
vehicles running only upon stationary rails or tracks, motorized highway
building equipment, road making appliances or snowmobiles or implements of
husbandry.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
4
PARK or PARKING - shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or signals
or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of cause beyond the
control of the operator of the vehicle
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE – shall mean any work that can be scheduled and
that is required for upkeep or repair of city infrastructure including, but not
limited to streets, curbing, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, and or storm
water lines.
SECTION 15.02 - AUTHORITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
A. Law enforcement officers may make arrests for violation of this
chapter.
B. Enforcement officers may direct, control and regulate traffic and
parking. They may make reasonable orders in the enforcement of
this chapter, or to prevent or alleviate traffic congestion, property
damage or personal injury. No person may knowingly fail or refuse
to comply with any lawful order or direction of any enforcement
officer.
SECTION 15.02.01 - SIGNAGE
Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation, a city parking
time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, city
parking lots and/or in the parking garage, it shall be the duty of the Director of
Public Works to ensure appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof,
and no such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in
place at the time of any alleged offense.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
5
SECTION 15.03 - FINES, PENALTIES, and SCOFFLAW
Unless otherwise stated, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) and
no more Two Hundred and Fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. The fact
that an automobile which is illegally parked and is registered in the name of a
person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control
of the automobile at the time of such parking violation.
SECTION 15.03.01 - FINES
Based on the severity of the offense and the potential for disruption of
essential public activities and/or emergency services, the city hereby
establishes parking violations with a graduated scale of fines to be imposed.
Citations will be issued to violators, and fines will be paid to the city clerk’s
office within fourteen days of issuance. Fines not paid within the prescribed
time limit will be doubled. Overtime fines not paid within twenty one (21) days
will be doubled again to twenty dollars ($20.00). Overtime at a meter is
defined as two hours over the paid time. More than two hours over paid time
will be considered failure to pay and will be subject to the fine below.
Delivery Zone: $20
Overtime limit (in system): $5
Prohibited Area: $20
Left Side Curb: $20
Other Parking Violation: $20
Blocking Sidewalk: $20
Fire Hydrant/Lane: $35
Blocking Crosswalk: $20
Fire Lane: $35
Handicap Zone: $200
Resident Only: $50
Meter Not Paid (Not in system): $12
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, may set a fine greater
than the minimum base line penalty for any violation of this chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
6
SECTION 15.03.02 - AUTHORITY TO REMOVE VEHICLE
Enforcement officers may, at their discretion, have vehicles towed for any of
the following violations, under the following circumstances:
A. where the vehicle inhibits or prohibits public access or could interfere
with emergency service response activities.
B. Where the vehicle is parked in violation of parking ordinances and is
not properly registered, inspected, or has not been moved within five
(5) days of a previous violation.
C. Where the vehicle is parked without authorization on publicly or
privately owned land.
D. Where the vehicle is parked so as to interfere with the policing,
construction or maintenance of roadways, including the removal of
snow, provided that signs indicating that vehicles may be towed away
at the owner’s expense shall be posted conspicuously at or near all
areas affected.
SECTION 15.03.03 - SCOFFLAW
The chief of police (or authorized representative) shall create and maintain a
list of all vehicles which have accumulated: (1) $100.00 or more in overdue
fines of parking violations; or (2) more than three overtime violations, the
oldest of which is at least sixty (60) days past due. Before placing any vehicle
on said list, the chief of police shall attempt to notify the registered owner of
this proposed action. The notice will be sent first class mail, on forms
prescribed and provided by the city manager and shall (a) describe the year
and make of the vehicle, (b) contain a list of the unpaid tickets and the total
amount of accumulated charges, and (c) provide a warning that unless said
charges are paid within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice said vehicle
will be placed on the scofflaw list forthwith.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
7
SECTION 15.03.04 - AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND STORE VEHICLES
Any vehicle which has been placed on the scofflaw list and is parked on any
public street (or in/upon any other place within the city where the parking or
leaving of said vehicle is governed by city ordinance) may be removed and
stored and/or immobilized until the charges for all outstanding parking
violations have been paid.
SECTION 15.03.05 - NOTIFICATION TO OWNER/HOLDER(S) OF SECURITY
INTEREST
The city shall notify by first class mail, the registered owner of the stored
vehicle and any holder(s) of a security interest therein (if the identity of same
can be readily ascertained) within five (5) business days of the removal and
storage of said vehicle.
SECTION 15.03.06 - FORM OF NOTICE AND DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED
VEHICLES
The notice referred to above shall be tendered on forms prescribed and
provided by the city and shall (a) describe the year, make and serial number of
the stored vehicle, (b) identify the vehicle's storage location, (c) define the
requirements for the vehicle's release, (d) include the right to reclaim said
vehicle within ninety (90) days of the date of the notice, and (e) declare that
failure to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed to
transfer all rights, title and interest in said vehicle to the City of Winooski.
Upon the failure of the registered owner or the holder(s) of a security interest
to reclaim the vehicle within the time prescribed, the city may dispose of said
vehicle in any manner not prohibited by law. However, no unclaimed vehicle
shall be retained for a period of time longer than two hundred and ten (210)
days from the date of notice.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
8
SECTION 15.03.07 - NOTICE PROCEDURE IF OWNER/HOLDER(S) OF
SECURITY INTEREST CANNOT BE IDENTIFIED
If the city is unable to ascertain the identity of the registered owner or the
holder(s) of a security interest therein, the notice described shall be published
once a week on the same day of the week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice shall be deemed complete
on the last date of publication.
SECTION 15.03.08 - PROCEDURE TO RECLAIM STORED VEHICLE
A. Before the owner or holder(s) of a security interest is permitted to
reclaim a vehicle which has been removed and stored and/or
immobilized pursuant to this ordinance, he/she/it shall:
1. Furnish satisfactory evidence to the city of their identity
and of ownership of said vehicle;
2. Pay to the city all charges for violations of this ordinance
and all other charges related to the collection of the
outstanding fines; or post a bond which is equal to the
amount of these charges; and
3. Obtain a property release form from the city, present said
form to the authorized tower, and pay the tower all fees
for the removal and storage of said vehicle.
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS
SECTION 15.04 - PARKING PROHIBITED
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle:
1. On a sidewalk;
2. In front of a public or private driveway, lane or alley;
3. Within an intersection;
4. On a crosswalk;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
9
5. Within twenty-five (25) feet of a crosswalk or an
intersection;
6. Within twenty-five (25) feet upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop sign, slow sign or traffic control
signal located at the side of a roadway;
7. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail or a railroad
crossing;
8. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
9. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street; or
10. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway, unless otherwise marked or specified.
SECTION 15.05 - MINIMUM SAFE DISTANCE
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
SECTION 15.06 - RECREATIONAL, TRAILER or NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE
PARKING.
A. No person shall park any recreational vehicle, trailer or motorized
vehicle to include but not limited to, motor home, motor boat, etc., in a
roadway or sidewalk, for more than five (5) days without prior
permission from the city (see below). The movement of said vehicle
from one location to another within the city, for no other purpose other
than long-term parking will not be permitted. A written notice of
violation shall be placed on any vehicle parked contrary to this section,
giving the owner five (5) days to remove said vehicle from the roadway
or sidewalk.
B. Between the dates of May 15th to September 15th, persons may park a
recreational, trailer or non-motorized vehicle, on the roadway for more
than five (5) days with prior permission of a code enforcement officer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
10
SECTION 15.07 - MANNER OF PARKING
No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, unless otherwise specified, headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the curb-side wheels of the motor vehicle
within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless otherwise
provided for by law, rule or regulation. Nor shall any person stop, stand or park a
motor vehicle in such a manner or under such conditions so as to create a road
hazard, obstruct the vision of other persons operating motor vehicles, or obstruct
the free movement or access of other motor vehicles.
SECTION 15.08 - BUS STOPPING, PARKING OR STANDING
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any bus, whether public or private,
attended or unattended, upon the paved portion of a highway or any portion of a
highway right-of-way except for the sole purpose of picking up or dropping off
passengers (no standing or parking) unless specifically designated otherwise.
SECTION 15.09 - PARKING ON CITY STREETS
A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, persons shall only park
vehicles in accordance with the parking regulations, prohibitions, hourly
specifications, and other parking limitations for all city streets or parts
of streets. The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police
and the director of public works shall have the authority to designate
parking spaces for:
1. Loading Zone
2. Time limited Parking
3. Handicapped Parking
4. Fire Lane
5. Bus Stop
6. Reserved for permanent or temporary permitted use,
including Resident Only Area
B. The city manager can create other “no parking zones” as deemed
necessary.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
11
C. A citizen, business owner, or representative group may request changes
in parking through the city manager. Should a request not be granted,
that person or group may appeal to the city council. The decision of the
city council is final.
D. The city, through its city council, reserves the right to charge for
parking. The city council will adopt a policy designating such areas.
E. The city manager, or authorized agent, can restrict parking on any city
street or parking area for routine or emergency maintenance. This may
include the need to restrict parking for street cleaning operations.
SECTION 15.09.01 - RESIDENT ONLY PARKING
The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police and the neighborhood
residents, shall determine areas set aside as resident only parking.
SECTION 15.09.02 - PERMITS
A. The city shall issue resident parking permits only to residents of streets,
or portions thereof, that are designated "resident parking only" for
parking on that street pursuant to Section 15.09.01. In addition the city
shall issue resident parking permits to car share organizations for
parking on all streets, or portions thereof, that are designated "resident
parking only" pursuant to Section 15.09.02.
1. Except as otherwise required by the City, the holder of the
permit shall receive a residential street sticker unless the holder
does not own a vehicle, in which case no sticker will be issued.
2. A maximum of 2 guest parking cards shall be issued to each
eligible household for which a permit has been issued.
B. Specific conditions.
1. Proof of residency. Proof of residency shall include a valid
Vermont driver's license with an address on the designated
street, section of street or abutting corner parcel, and a valid
Vermont registration for the vehicle(s) involved. For students,
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
12
proof of residency shall include a valid current student
identification card, a valid driver's license, vehicle registration
from Vermont or another state, and proof of residency on the
designated street, section of street or abutting corner parcel.
Residents without a license can prove residency on the
designated street by showing a valid written lease, current
utility bill, or by being listed on the official voter registration
list for the city.
2. Small businesses. Upon showing of proof of business
occupancy, owners and employees of small businesses on
streets designated "residential parking" only will be considered
residents and issued a resident parking permit if sufficient offstreet
parking or metered long-term parking at the business
location is not available. The conditions of the business's
zoning permit must be used to determine if a business has
sufficient, available off-street parking at its location. The
owner or employee(s) will be issued a choice of a residential
street sticker or a guest parking card. Customers of these small
businesses may legally park on the street under the authority
of the permit.
3. Display of stickers. Residential street stickers shall be affixed
to vehicles on the left-hand side of the rear bumper and shall
be visible without obstruction at all times. In order to be valid
the sticker must have the resident street name affixed to it.
4. Car share organizations. Valid car share organizations shall
meet the following criteria:
a. Require users to be members of the car share
organization;
b. Provide ubiquitous self-service access to all, or most, of
a shared fleet of automobiles at locations not staffed by
the car-share service organization;
c. Encourage short-term, local trips and discourage users
from driving more than necessary;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
13
d. Provide its members automobile insurance that exceeds
the State-mandated minimum when its members are using
car share vehicles and shall assume responsibility for
maintaining car share vehicles;
e. Upon showing proof of a valid Vermont registration for
the vehicle(s) involved, car share organizations meeting the
appropriate criteria will be issued one residential street
sticker per vehicle. This sticker will be valid on all streets,
or portions thereof, that are designated "resident parking
only."
5. Guest parking cards. Guest parking cards are only for use by
persons visiting a residence. All guest parking cards shall be
displayed at all times without obstruction on the lower lefthand
corner of front window of guest's vehicle.
6. Non-street resident property owner. A non-street resident
property owner on a designated street will be issued a resident
parking permit and a choice of a residential street sticker or
guest parking card upon presentation of a property tax bill,
valid driver's license and valid vehicle registration.
7. No permits will be issued to an individual or car share
organization with outstanding parking tickets, unless the ticket
is being contested.
SECTION 15.10 - CITY PARKING GARAGE
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, persons shall only park vehicles in
accordance with the parking regulations, prohibitions, hourly specifications, and
comply with other parking limitations or fees. Operation, regulation and
enforcement of the Municipal Parking Garage shall be controlled through the city
manager and the director of public works. Enforcement will be in accordance with
Section 15.02 above.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
14
SECTION 15.11 - CITY PARKING LOTS
A. City parking lots have been constructed and maintained to support
specific needs and are normally open to the public. No vehicles will be
parked in city-owned parking lots/areas between the hours of 12 A.M.
and 7 A.M. Exceptions are as follows:
1. City employees engaged in city business;
2. General public when official, approved activities are ongoing
at the respective facility, i.e., late night meetings at City Hall,
approved softball or other recreational activities at Landry
Field, etc.;
3. Vehicles with overnight parking privileges as regulated by the
city manager and issued by the police department;
4. The O’Brien Community Center parking lot between March 15
and December 1. Winter parking restrictions will be in effect
from 2 am and 6 am between December 1 and March 15.
ARTICLE V - SPECIAL PARKING PROVISIONS
Special parking for people with disabilities shall be in accordance with State law,
which provides as follows:
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 VSA § 304a.
SECTION 15.12 - DISABILITY PARKING SPACE DESIGNATION
Any parking facility on the premises of a building open to and used by the public,
whether the building is constructed with public or private funds, shall contain at
least one (1) parking space for every fifty (50) spaces and in any event shall
contain at least one (1) parking space, as free designated parking for person with
ambulatory disability or blind persons patronizing the building. The space or
spaces shall be accessibly and proximately located to the building.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
15
Consideration shall be given to the distribution of spaces in accordance with the
frequency and persistency of parking needs. Such spaces shall be designated by
the international symbol of access and the words "handicapped parking only" and
shall be in accordance with the standards for parking spaces established under.
SECTION 15.12.01 - DISABILITY CARD OR PLACARD DISPLAY
Vehicles with special registration plates or removable windshield placards from
any state or which have a handicapped parking card issued by the Commissioner
of Motor Vehicles may use the special parking spaces when the card or placard is
displayed in the lower right side of the windshield or the plate is mounted as
provided in 23 V.S.A. § 511 or as provided by the law of the state where the
vehicle is registered.
SECTION 15.12.03 - DISABILITY PARKING DESIGNATION ON CITY STREETS
The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police, shall determine the
location of parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities on city streets.
SECTION 15.13 - FIRE LANES AND FIRE HYDRANTS
A. The city manager, in consultation with, the city fire chief/fire marshal
shall study and determine what locations would benefit from the
establishment of fire lanes or fire access roads, to aid in the
extinguishing of fires and movement of emergency vehicles. A fire
lane/fire access road is defined by the National Fire Protection
Association Uniform Fire Code, as the road or other means developed to
allow access and operational setup for fire-fighting and rescue
apparatus.
B. Once determined, all fire lanes and fire access roads shall be marked
and posted "No Parking, Fire Lane."
C. A person who parks a vehicle in a designated fire lane or fire access
road or within the designated area of a fire hydrant shall be fined in
accordance with Section 15.03.01. Police officers or code enforcement
officers may also fine and cause the removal of a vehicle parked in
violation of the following:
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
16
1. Within fifteen (15) feet right and left of the center of a fire
hydrant;
2. In front of a marked fire lane or fire access road as to interfere
with the arrival and exiting of all emergency vehicles; or
3. In the entrance to the fire station that is designated by the
hash striping in front of the fire station that will interfere with the
arrival and exiting of all emergency vehicles.
SECTION 15.14 - PARKING BAN PROCEDURES FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
INTERFERING WITH MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES AND TICKETING
ILLEGALLY PARKING VEHICLES.
A. Interference with Routine or Emergency Maintenance.
1. The City Manager or designee may restrict parking in any area
of the City for the purposes of routine or emergency
maintenance. Emergency orders shall require notice using the
City’s Notification Policy at least twelve hours in advance of a
closure. Maintenance related closures shall require seventy
two (72) hours under the same policy.
(a) The Chief of Police, the Director of Public Works,
or their agents are authorized to remove, or cause
to be removed, any vehicle found parking on any
street in the city as to interfere with the plowing or
removal of snow and/or any routine or emergency
maintenance activity from any such street so
restricted.
(b) Parking restricted. Between December 1 and March
31, No person shall park a vehicle in the Central
Business District between the hours of 2:30 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians
on emergency calls; Central Business District being
the streets between Mayo Street and Barlow Street
and West Allen Street to Winooski Bridge. Parking
of any vehicle is prohibited in the City Parking
Garage on the open or North portion of deck 4 and
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
17
on deck 7 (entirety) between the hours of midnight
and 6:00 a.m. The Director of Public Works and/or
Chief of Police is authorized to alter such dates
when, in his/her opinion, such change is in the best
interest of the public. The Director of Public Works
and Chief of Police agree to notify local media of
any alteration in dates.
SECTION 15.15 - PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal
purpose of:
1. Displaying the vehicle for sale or rent, or for the purpose of
displaying or advertising the same for sale or rent; or
2. Greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated
by an emergency.
SECTION 15.16 - DELIVERY AND LOADING ZONES
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle so as to stand or park a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is actually necessary for the
loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, or for the
person operating a freight-carrying motor vehicle to stand or park such motor
vehicle for a period of time longer than is actually necessary to load, unload,
and deliver goods, materials, or services, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in
any place designated by the city manager or the city council as a loading
and/or delivery zone or designated parking meter zone.
ARTICLE VI - PARKING AND PARKING METER ZONES
SECTION 15.17 - PARKING METER ZONES
The on-street parking meter zones within the city are those portions of public
streets so designated by resolution of the city council, as may be amended, as
well as all city-owned off-street parking lots and facilities.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
18
SECTION 15.18 - INSTALLATION OF METERS
Parking meters may be installed in all or parts of such parking meter zones by
direction of the city council.
SECTION 15.19 - HOURS OF USE AND RATES
A. Parking meters installed in metered zones, except for 24-hour parking
lots, within the city, shall be used between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and
8:00 P.M., Monday through Saturday, except for legal holidays. It shall
be unlawful for the operator or owner of a motor vehicle to park at a
meter within the metered zone, except for 24-hour parking lots, for
more than the maximum allowable time that shall be posted on each
meter between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. any day except
Sundays and holidays, unless otherwise specified by the city council.
B. The legal parking rates for metered parking within the meter zones shall
be as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.
The time limitation and the cost of time units shall be clearly indicated
on all parking meters by appropriate signs posted.
C. Free parking zones may be established by the city council from time to
time. Such zones shall have the amount of time allocated for free
parking visibly posted within the zone.
SECTION 15.20 - LOCATION OF METERS
Parking meters installed in the established meter zones shall be placed as directed
by the city manager and the director of public works. Each parking meter shall be
placed or set in such manner as to be reasonably visible to all designated parking
spaces.
SECTION 15.21 - SPACES DELINEATED, VIOLATION
The director of public works shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon
the curb and/or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purposes
of designating the parking space for which said meter is to be used and each
vehicle parking adjacent to or next to any parking meter shall park within the
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
19
lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
ordinance to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park said
vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so
designated by such lines or marking.
SECTION 15.22 - TIME VIOLATION
When a vehicle shall be parked in any space with a parking meter in accordance
with the provisions of this ordinance, the operator of said vehicle shall, upon
entering said parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the
necessary funds indicated by such parking meter. Failure to deposit such funds or
put the meter in operation shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. If said
vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking time
limit fixed for such parking space, such vehicle shall be considered to be parked
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time and the parking of a vehicle
overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in any such part of the street
where any such meter is located shall be a violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 15.23 - USE OF SLUGS AS COINS
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this ordinance to deposit or
cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slugs, device or metallic
substance, or any other substitute for the coin or coins indicated on said meter.
SECTION 15.24 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES CONSIDERED ABANDONED
A. Any vehicle or conveyance found in a public parking lot for seventy-two
(72) consecutive hours, and parked contrary to the times and rates set
forth in this Article for seventy-two (72) hours, shall be immediately
removed by the owner.
B. Any vehicle or conveyance found in a public parking lot for more than
twelve (12) hours following a snow storm, or after notice is given to
remove the vehicle, shall then be immediately removed by the owner.
C. Vehicles parking in free public parking lots are limited to no more than
twelve (12) hours of free parking. Signs shall be posted at the entrance
of free parking lots indicating the restriction.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 15 - Parking
20
D. Any vehicle or conveyance found parked contrary to this section shall
be removed immediately by the owner. Should the owner fail to
remove the vehicle, then a police officer shall cause the vehicle to be
removed at the expense of the owner. Such vehicle shall not be
released to the owner or person responsible for it at the time removal
was ordered until all such expenses have been paid. The police
department shall make all reasonable attempts to locate the owner
prior to having the vehicle removed.
ARTICLE VII - APPEALS AND SEVERABILITY
All appeals to violations and associated fines or penalties will be forwarded to the
city grand juror. Should any provision of these provisions, rules, and regulations be
declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of other
provisions, or of these provisions, rules, and regulations as a whole, it being the
intent that the provisions, rules, and regulations contained therein shall be severable
and remain valid notwithstanding such declaration.
6697577_5:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
1
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that the parks of the city will be clean,
safe and enjoyable places for people to engage in the recreational pursuits of their
choice.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 16.01 Definitions
Section 16.02 Authority to Enforce Chapter
Section 16.03 Authority to Eject persons from Parks
Section 16.04 Hours of Operation
Section 16.05 Closed Areas
Section 16.06 Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco Products
Prohibited
Section 16.07 Hunting Prohibited
Section 16.08 Removal of Natural Resources Prohibited
Section 16.09 Damaging Natural Resources Prohibited
Section 16.10 Littering
Section 16.11 Dogs; “Off Leash Area”
Section 16.12 Horseback Riding
Section 16.13 Erection of Structures
Section 16.13.01 Camping
Section 16.14 Motorized Vehicles
Article IV Permits
Section 16.15 Permits Required
Article IV Penalties
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
2
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 16.01 - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
DIRECTOR - shall mean the appointed head of the Community Service
Department of the city.
EVENT – shall mean any meeting, promotional activity, private party, parade,
celebration, or any function not otherwise regulated herein.
PARK – shall mean all recreation facilities and lands in which the City of
Winooski holds a legal interest for open space and recreation use, whether
such lands are developed or undeveloped. “Park” includes, but is not limited
to, playgrounds, open spaces, conservation areas, recreation and bicycle
paths, trails, beaches, pathways, as well as public parks. “Park” shall also
include property regarding which another person holds a legal interest and at
such time provides the city council with written authority to regulate conduct
on such property and the council by resolution accepts said authority.
Recreation and bicycle paths shall not include roadways identified by the city
as “bicycle routes” where a bicycle path or lane is not specifically defined on
such roadway.
PERSON - shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
SECTION 16.02 - AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE CHAPTER
The Director and/or authorized representatives shall, in connection with their
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
SECTION 16.03 - AUTHORITY TO EJECT PERSONS FROM PARKS
The Director and any authorized representative shall have the authority to
eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
3
SECTION 16.04 - HOURS OF OPERATION
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the
public every day of the year from dawn to dusk unless otherwise approved by
the city. The city reserves the right to designate specific operating hours for
individual parks as it deems appropriate.
SECTION 16.05 - CLOSED AREAS
A. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public
by the Director, or authorized representative, at any time and for
any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated
intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain
uses, as the Director shall find reasonably necessary.
B. No person shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor
shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of
posted notices.
SECTION 16.06 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of
alcoholic beverages or consume any alcoholic beverage at any time in a
park except where the city has approved an Event Permit allowing such
use, as governed in Chapter 26 of the Winooski Municipal Code.
B. The use of lighted tobacco products and e-cigarettes shall be
prohibited in Landry Park, Myers Memorial Pool, and West Allen Park at
all times.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
4
SECTION 16.07 - HUNTING OR TRAPPING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap,
chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall
they remove or have in their possession the young of any wild animal, or the
eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird unless given written prior approval
of the city.
City Ordinance Cross Reference--Discharging firearms within city prohibited.
SECTION 16.08 - REMOVAL OF NATURAL RESOURCES PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or remove any soil, rock, stone, tree,
shrub or plant, down-timber or any other wood or material, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency without
prior approval of the city.
SECTION 16.09 - DAMAGING NATURAL RESOURCES PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve, transplant
or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or
seeds, of any tree or plant, to attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant in a park.
B. No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any
other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
City Ordinance Cross Reference--Destruction of trees prohibited.
SECTION 16.10 – LITTERING
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
glass, ashes, paper, cans, dirt, rubbish, wastes, garbage, refuse or other trash
in or on any park property, except in containers provided for such use.
SECTION 16.11 - DOGS; “OFF-LEASH AREA”
The city council may designate any city park as an “off-leash area” regulated
by rules adopted by the city and under the control of the Director.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
5
SECTION 16.12 - HORSEBACK RIDING
A. Horseback riding shall be prohibited except on designated bridle
trails.
B. Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly
restrained, ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
SECTION 16.13 - ERECTION OF STRUCTURES
No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except with special written
permit issued hereunder.
SECTION 16.13.01 - CAMPING
No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or
the like, except with special written permit issued hereunder.
SECTION 16.14 - MOTORIZED VEHICLES
Motorized vehicles of any type are allowed only within the areas provided for
public parking, except by written permission from the city. No vehicle shall be
parked in any public park between 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM and may be towed
away at the owner's expense.
ARTICLE IV - PERMITS
SECTION 16.15 - PERMITS REQUIRED
A permit shall be obtained from the city before conducting any event or use of
a park facility, for which a permit is required by the city as governed in
Chapter 26 of the Winooski Municipal Code.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
6
ARTICLE V - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 1974a
ADDENDUM TO CHAPTER 16 - GENERAL RULES FOR ALL AREAS DESIGNATED AS
OFF-LEASH DOG AREAS
(1) A person taking a dog into an off-leash area shall have control of the dog by
means of physical restraint (leash, cord, chain, etc.) when entering and leaving
the off-leash area.
(2) A person taking a dog into an off-leash area shall maintain voice, hand or
other appropriate control over the dog at all times while the dog is in the offleash
area. Such person shall also have in their possession at all times a means
of physical restraint.
(3) A person taking a dog into an off-leash area may only do so during the times
set forth by these rules.
(4) All dogs present in an off-leash area shall be licensed and vaccinated and shall
display valid license and vaccination tags attached to a dog collar.
(5) A dog present in an off-leash area shall be the responsibility of a person who
is present in the area with that dog. A person responsible for a dog in an offleash
area shall not leave the dog unattended in the off-leash area. A person
responsible for a dog in an off-leash area shall be legally responsible for its
actions.
(6) A person shall not take a female dog in heat into an off-leash area.
(7) A person taking a dog into an off-leash area is responsible for removing that
dog’s feces from the off-leash area. A person taking a dog into an off-leash
area shall carry equipment for removing such feces and shall place feces
deposited by such animal in an appropriate receptacle.
(8) A person taking a dog into an off-leash area shall stop that dog from digging
holes and shall fill in any hole created by the dog prior to exiting the area.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 16 - Parks and Recreation
7
(9) A person may not take more than three (3) dogs at a time into an off-leash
dog area without special written permission given by city. Professional dog
trainers shall not use off-leash dog areas for their commercial activities
without special written permission from the city.
(10) Vicious dogs as defined by Winooski City Code, Chapter 3, Section 3.07 are
not allowed in an off-leash area.
(11) There shall be no eating or smoking in the off-leash area.
(12) Glass containers shall not be allowed in an off-leash area.
(13) Any gate to an area shall be closed upon entry and exiting.
(14) Person in control of a dog in an off-leash area shall not permit the dog to
engage in excessive barking, howling, or other noise.
(15) Persons under the age of thirteen (13) years shall not be allowed in an offleash
area without the accompaniment of someone at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
6697578_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
1
Chapter 17 - Public Building Registry
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordnance to set forth the type of buildings, schedule,
certificate(s) and fees required for those buildings subject to the Public Building
Registry.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Definitions
Article IV Public Building Registry
Section 17.01 Registry Required
Section 17.02 Administration
Section 17.03 Registry Information Required
Section 17.04 Inspection Cycle
Section 17.05 Inspection Requirements
Section 17.06 Scheduling Inspection
Section 17.07 Certificate of Fitness
Section 17.08 Issuance of Certificates and Terms of Inspections
Section 17.09 Issuance of a Conditional Certificate
Section 17.10 Fees
Section 17.11 Fines and Penalties
ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS
BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the duly appointed building inspector of the City or
his/her designated assistant.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean the Director of Code Enforcement or duly
authorized municipal official.
CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS shall mean the written approval, signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or duly authorized municipal official, setting forth that
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
2
the building, structure and premises comply with duly adopted life safety and
housing codes. This Certificate of Fitness is required prior to a dwelling unit, or a
public building, to be occupied.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY shall mean the written approval of the Zoning
Administrator certifying that a newly constructed structure, addition and or
alterations to an existing structure, or an existing structure undergoing a
change in use is in full compliance with the zoning provisions of Municipal By-laws,
Ordinances and Codes adopted under the authority of the City Charter.
OWNER shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lessor
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building
or any duly authorized agent thereof.
PUBLIC BUILDING is as defined in 20 V.S.A. § 2730.
ARTICLE IV - PUBLIC BUILDING REGISTRY
SECTION 17.01 - REGISTRY REQUIRED
A. The City of Winooski Code Enforcement Department is responsible
for ensuring that all public buildings, as defined in 20 V.S.A. § 2730,
in the City of Winooski are maintained at established and adopted
standards to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
occupants.
B. The Winooski Minimum Housing Code requires that a Certificate of
Fitness be issued prior to the occupancy of any public building or
residential rental dwelling unit within the city. All public building
and/or residential rental property owners shall file a yearly Registry
Application identifying their public buildings subject to the inspection
requirements in the City of Winooski.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 20 V.S.A. § 2730.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
3
SECTION 17.02. - ADMINISTRATION
A. Administration and enforcement is the responsibility of the Winooski
Code Enforcement Office. Enforcement will be provided by any duly
authorized municipal official.
B. All records, including inspection reports, records of complaints
received and investigated, and plans for inspections of public
buildings, shall be available for public inspection.
SECTION 17.03 - REGISTRY INFORMATION REQUIRED
A. Public building property owners must provide the following
information to the department:
1. The address of the property.
2. The number of units at that address.
3. The mailing address of each unit.
4. The number of bedrooms, if applicable.
5. The name, address and phone number of the property
owner, corporation, or registered corporate agent.
6. The name, address and phone number of any managing
agent.
7. The name, address and phone number of a local
emergency contact located in Chittenden County and/or a
designated person within the state responsible for services
on the property.
B. Upon purchase or transfer of each property containing one or more
residential rental units, the purchaser shall file a new landlord
registration application.
C. Prior to occupancy of any newly constructed rental unit or any
conversion of the use to a rental unit, the owner shall file an
application for landlord registration with the enforcement
department.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
4
D. It shall be a violation of City codes for an owner of any public
building within the city to fail to register as required by this section.
E. Property owners shall have a continuing obligation to notify the City
of any changes in the information required above during the periods
between filings of the landlord registration application.
SECTION 17.04 - INSPECTION CYCLE
A. All public buildings are subject to inspection pursuant to this Chapter.
Every four (4) years, a life safety and housing code inspection for
each residential rental dwelling unit is required. A Certificate of
Fitness will be issued based on the results of the inspection, as
appropriate.
B. All other public buildings, as defined, will be inspected on an annual
basis.
SECTION 17.05 - INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make scheduled, periodic
inspections of all public buildings and/or residential rental dwelling
units within the city.
B. The following buildings may be excluded from periodic inspection
with approval of the City:
1. Public Buildings owned by a government agency that
conducts annual inspections under the HUD (Housing and
Urban Development) Program.
2. Buildings owned by nonprofit organizations under housing
requirements and inspected by another government
authority.
3. Buildings owned by individuals, corporations, partnerships
or organizations that are subject to inspections by another
government authority.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
5
C. All buildings that are excluded from this program as pursuant to
Section 13.05(B) shall provide an inspection report, which has been
performed by a Certified Fire Inspector I or equivalent, to the City for
approval. The issuance of a Certificate of Fitness for these structures
and such documents shall be recorded in the City Land Records.
SECTION 17.06 - SCHEDULING INSPECTION
A. The Code Enforcement Office shall schedule with the property
owner or his / her agent the date and time of the life safety and
housing code inspection. The owner or the agent shall arrange for
the inspection within sixty days of the initial request, and shall
provide the occupant(s) with notice of an inspection not less than
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the actual inspections as provided in 9
V.S.A. § 4460 for residential rental units. During the inspection, the
owner shall provide access to the rental units and all common areas,
including basements and other spaces.
B. If an inspection does not occur within two months of the first (1st)
request for any reason other than delay on the part of the Code
Enforcement Office, it shall constitute a violation of this ordinance
subject to forfeiture and / or withdrawal of any Certificate of
Fitness.
C. If the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that an
emergency situation exists tending to create an immediate danger
to the health, welfare or safety of the occupants of any dwelling unit
or the general public, he/she may enter, examine and inspect the
public building unit at any time.
D. Persons requesting inspections for buildings lacking a valid
Certificate of Occupancy recorded in the land records in order to
refinance or to transfer ownership of the property will do so in
writing. These out-of-cycle inspections will be scheduled as soon as
possible and no later than sixty (60) days from receipt of a written
request.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
6
SECTION 17.07 - CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS
A. It shall be a violation of the Winooski Minimum Housing Code for an
owner of a public building unit within the city that is subject to
inspections pursuant to this chapter to rent or allow any person to
occupy any public building without a Certificate of Fitness.
B. Certificates of Occupancy will not be issued for public buildings
without current Public Building Registry Applications and a current
Certificate of Fitness on file in the land records.
SECTION 17.08 - ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES AND TERMS OF INSPECTIONS
A. Upon completion of the initial inspection, if a public building is found
to be in compliance with the life safety and housing codes and all
other adopted applicable Federal, State, and Municipal Codes, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Certificate of Fitness, which
shall expire four (4) years from the date of issuance for residential
rental dwelling units and every year for all other public buildings.
B. Upon completion of the initial inspection of a residential rental
dwelling, if an individual unit is cited for five (5) or less minor non
life-threatening violations of the life safety and housing codes, and
if violations have been corrected within the time set for compliance,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Certificate of Fitness
which shall expire four (4) years from the date of issuance.
C. Upon completion of the initial inspection of a residential rental
dwelling, if any individual unit is cited for more than five (5) minor
non life-threatening violations of life safety and housing codes, the
department shall issue a conditional Certificate of Fitness for that
public building, which shall expire within, and no more than one (1)
year from the date of issuance.
D. There shall be no fee for follow-up inspections for verification by the
Code Enforcement Officer that corrective actions have been
completed.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
7
E. Upon completion of the initial or any subsequent inspection of a
public building, if any individual unit is cited for any of the following
conditions the Code Enforcement Officer shall declare the dwelling
unit uninhabitable and deny the issuance of a Certificate of Fitness:
1. The physical condition or use of any public building
constitutes a public nuisance;
2. Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any public
building or its appurtenances that is considered an
attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited
to, abandoned vehicles, appliances, basements and unsafe
fences and structures;
3. Any public building that has unsanitary sewage or
plumbing facilities;
4. Any public building that is designated as unsafe for human
habitation or use;
5. Any public building that is manifestly capable of being a
fire hazard or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured so as to
endanger life, limb or property;
6. Any public building dwelling from which the plumbing,
heating, fire protection systems, fire detection systems, or
other facilities required by law have been removed, or
from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed,
removed, or rendered ineffective, or the required
precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
7. Any public building that is unsanitary or which is littered
with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled
growth of weeds, or which has nests or exhibits insects,
pests, or rodents;
8. Any public building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded;
open, vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent
of not providing shelter; in danger of collapse or failure
and dangerous to anyone on or near the dwelling.
9. Any public building that is determined to be a health
hazard, i.e., high carbon monoxide levels, unmitigated lead
paint hazard, poisons present, and improper storage of
flammables.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
8
F. The department shall issue a Certificate of Fitness for a term of four
(4) years for a newly constructed residential rental dwelling unit and
one (1) year for all other public buildings, upon final inspection of the
duly authorized municipal official.
G. Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of said public
building more frequently than the term of the Certificate of Fitness.
H. A Certificate of Fitness may be revoked if a subsequent inspection
finds that any public building unit is no longer in compliance with the
provisions of the Minimum Housing Code.
I. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Fitness, all registration and
additional inspection fees shall be paid to the City.
J. The City retains the right to require public buildings be subject to a
more frequent inspection cycle for repeat violations and
noncompliance.
SECTION 17.09 - ISSUANCE OF A CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE
The City may issue a Conditional Certificate of Fitness whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer is unable to inspect a public building unit after the
expiration of an existing certificate, or more time is required to remedy a
minor code violation cited on an inspection report, when the inability to
inspect is not due to obstruction by the property owner or agent.
SECTION 17.10 - FEES
As prescribed in Winooski City Ordinance, Chapter 28; Code Enforcement
Department.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 17 – Public Building Registry
9
SECTION 17.11 - FINES AND PENALTIES
A. Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this Chapter shall be a civil
violation and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for
in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 1974a
B. In addition, if the City determines that a person has failed to pay the
registration fee due under this section, the City of Winooski shall mail to
such person a statement showing the balance due and shall add thereto
a twenty-five ($25.00) late payment fee plus interest at a rate of
twelve (12%) percent per year. The unpaid balance and penalty shall be
subject to interest at a rate of twelve (12%) percent per year from the
due date until the date of payment.
C. The charges levied in this chapter shall constitute a lien upon the
property on which the rental unit is situated and may be enforced
within the time and manner provided for collection of taxes on property
6710475_3:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
1
Chapter 18 - Public Health
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to protect public health and enforce the health
regulations of the City of Winooski and the State of Vermont.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Regulations
Section 18.01 Health Department to be Established; Health Officer
Section 18.02 Duties of Health Officer, Generally
Section 18.03 Orders of the Health Officer
Section 18.04 Health Officer to Perform Work Required by Order
Article IV Health Nuisances Created by Noxious Plants or Weeds
Section 18.05 Definitions
Section 18.06 Nuisances Declared
Section 18.07 Rank Weeds Prohibited; Removal Required
Section 18.08 Notice and Order
Section 18.09 Abatement
Section 18.10 Entry to Abate
Section 18.11 Special Assessment
Section 18.12 Scope of Article
Article V Smoking in Public Places
Section 18.13 Purpose
Section 18.13.01 Smoking Prohibited
Section 18.13.02 Exceptions
Section 18.13.03 No Smoking Signs
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
2
Article VI. Penalties
Section 18.14 Criminal Penalties
Section 18.14.01 Failure to Comply with Order
Section 18.15 Civil Penalties
Statutory Cross-References:
18 V.S.A. § 601 et. seq.; 24 V.S.A. § 2291(13); 24 V.S.A. § 2291(14).
ARTICLE III - GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 18.01 - HEALTH DEPARTMENT TO BE ESTABLISHED; HEALTH
OFFICER
There shall be a public health department for the city which shall be
administered by the department head who shall be the health officer of the
city.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 18 V.S.A. § 601.
SECTION 18.02 - DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT AND HEALTH OFFICER
GENERALLY
It shall be the duty of the health department and health officer to see that the
health regulations of the city are enforced and to take such steps as may be
necessary to abate or prevent an unhealthy condition.
SECTION 18.03 - ORDERS OF THE HEALTH OFFICER
An order of the health officer made in connection with the duties of his/her
office shall specify the time within compliance with same is required, and shall
be served by First Class Mail, return receipt, or by a constable, law
enforcement officer or duly appointed code enforcement officer for the city,
upon the person which the order is made.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
3
SECTION 18.04 - HEALTH OFFICER TO PERFORM WORK REQUIRED BY
ORDER
If a person shall neglect or refuse to obey a lawful and properly served order
of the health officer, the health officer in his/her discretion may, after the
expiration of the time specified in the order, do the work required by the
order, and the expense thereof with full costs may be recovered of the person
so neglecting or refusing, by lien against the property or other legal action
deemed appropriate.
ARTICLE IV - NUISANCES CREATED BY WEEDS OR NOXIOUS PLANTS
SECTION 18.05 - DEFINITIONS
The following terms, as used in this article, unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, are defined as follows:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - shall mean the duly appointed director of
code enforcement for the city or their designee.
CITY CLERK - shall mean the duly appointed clerk for the city or his/her
authorized subordinate representative.
GREEN BELT AREA - shall mean any green belt area which is between the city
curb or road and where there is no curb and the sidewalk is within the city
right-of-way.
NOXIOUS PLANTS - shall mean any plant capable of poisoning, including but
not limited to poison ivy, at any height or state of maturity.
OCCUPANT - shall mean any person who has a legal or equitable interest in a
parcel of real property other than a fee interest in a parcel of real property,
including a life tenant, tenant, lessee, tenant at will, tenant at sufferance, or
adverse possessor, as well as a person in possession or a person who has
charge, care or control of the parcel of real property, as the agent or personal
representative of the person(s) holding legal title to a fee interest.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
4
OWNER - shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others
shall have legal title to a fee interest in the parcel of real property, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof.
PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY - shall mean all property within the legal
description for that lot, tract or parcel of land.
PERSON - shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, cooperative or governmental agency.
RANK WEEDS - shall mean all vegetation twelve (12) inches or more in height,
which may emit unpleasant or noxious odors, or transmit pollen into the air at
any state of maturity; all vegetation, regardless of height, including thickets,
which may conceal or invite filthy deposits, harbor rodents, refuse or vermin,
create a fire hazard, or present a blighting effect on the neighborhood.
THICKETS - shall mean dense growth of wild shrubbery having stems or trunks
less than one (1) inch in diameter and briar patches.
SECTION 18.06 - NUISANCE DECLARED
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any parcel of real
property to allow grass twelve (12) inches or more in height, rank weeds and
noxious plants, as herein defined, which are allowed to stand at any season of
the year upon any lot, track or parcel of land, or unpaved alley, or along the
sidewalk, street or paved alley adjacent to such lot, tract or parcel of land.
SECTION 18.07 - RANK WEEDS PROHIBITED; REMOVAL REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any parcel of real
property to allow grass twelve (12) inches or more in height, rank weeds or
noxious plants, as defined herein, to grow or stand upon such parcel of real
property. It shall be the duty of such owner and/or occupant to immediately
cut, remove or destroy any and all weeds and noxious plants on such parcel of
real property.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
5
SECTION 18.08 - NOTICE AND ORDER
A. All notices and orders shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Set forth the alleged violations of this chapter;
3. Describe the parcel of real property where the violations are
alleged to exist or to have been committed;
4. Set the date, time and location of a hearing to be held before
the Board of Health not less than ten (10) days from the date
such notice is mailed, posted or served;
5. Advise that if the grass, rank weeds or noxious plants are not
cut down or removed, the code enforcement officer will order
the rank weeds, noxious plants or grass to be cut down and
removed with the cost thereof being specially assessed against
the property; and
6. Be served upon the owner and/or occupant of the premises by
either delivery of a copy of the notice on them personally or by
leaving such a copy at their usual place of abode with a member
of the family over the age of fifteen (15) years or by United
States mail, addressed to the owner and/or occupant, or an
agent authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the
owner or occupant. If one (1) or more persons to whom such
notice is addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do
so, service may be made upon such persons by posting the
notice on the parcel of real property described in the notice and
by causing such notice to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
6
SECTION 18.09 - ABATEMENT
Following a hearing before the Board of Health, the code enforcement officer
may declare the weeds to be a nuisance, and order such nuisance abated by
the owner and/or occupant within five (5) days. If the owner and/or occupant
fails to cut down and remove such rank or noxious plants as ordered and fails
to notify the director of such cutting, the building and zoning administrator
may proceed to have the same cut down and/or prosecute the owner or
occupant in municipal court.
SECTION 18.10 - ENTRY TO ABATE
The code enforcement officer may enter the premises upon which such
nuisance is situated for the purpose of abating the same, with or without the
consent of the owner of the property, without being deemed to have
committed a trespass. This limited right of entry shall extend to any person
hired by the code enforcement officer to abate such nuisance.
SECTION 18.11 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
Upon causing abatement of any nuisance as set out above, the code
enforcement officer shall determine the cost of such abatement, including as a
portion thereof an administrative fee of abatement with respect to the
property affected and shall determine whether proper service was made on
the owner(s). Upon determining that proper service was made on the
owner(s), the code enforcement officer shall certify a statement of such
service and of such costs, with a description of the real property upon which
such abatement was accomplished, to the city clerk as a special assessment
upon such real property. The city clerk shall enter such costs as a special
assessment against the real property and shall cause a copy of such statement
to be sent to the owner(s) of such property by regular United States mail, the
original thereof to be retained in the office of the city clerk. Each special
assessment shall constitute a lien upon the real property described thereon,
and shall be payable within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance without
interest and thereafter with interest from the date of its issue until paid at a
rate not to exceed eight (8) percent per annum. The lien may be enforced by
any method appropriate for the enforcement of special assessments generally.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
7
SECTION 18.12 - SCOPE OF ARTICLE
A. This Article shall pertain only to the "Truck Route" within the city
and the Central Business District. The Truck Route is defined as:
1. Main Street (U.S. route 7)
2. East Allen Street (VT Route 15)
3. West Allen Street (from Main Street to Malletts Bay Avenue)
4. Malletts Bay Avenue
5. Tigan Avenue
B. For the purposes of this Article the Downtown Business District is
defined as:
1. Those streets between Mayo Street to the west and East Street to
the east; the Railroad Bridge on Main Street to the north and
Winooski River Bridge on Main Street to the south.
ARTICLE IV - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION 18.13 - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and
welfare of
residents of and visitors to the city by prohibiting smoking in places of public
access. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the
Winooski City Charter and 24 V.S.A. § 2291.
SECTION 18.13.01 - SMOKING PROHIBITED
All persons shall be prohibited from possessing any lighted tobacco products,
in any form, in the common areas of all enclosed indoor places of public
access as defined in 18 V.S.A. §1741, and publicly owned buildings and offices.
No person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls any premises
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
8
described above shall knowingly allow any person to possess any lighted
tobacco products at any time in a place of public access. A proprietor, or the
agent or employee of a proprietor, who observes a person in possession of
lighted tobacco products in apparent violation of this ordinance, shall ask the
person to extinguish all lighted tobacco products. If the person persists in the
possession of lighted tobacco products, the proprietor, agent or employee
shall ask the person to leave the premises.
Statutory Cross-References: 18 V.S.A. § 1741 and 18 V.S.A. § 1742.
SECTION 18.13.02 - EXCEPTIONS
A. The restrictions above on possession of lighted tobacco products
shall not apply to:
1. Designated exterior smoking areas adjacent to licensed cabarets
which may include decks, patios, tents or other similar areas;
2. Buildings owned and operated by social, fraternal, or religious
organizations when used by the membership of the organization,
their guests or families, or any facility that is rented or leased for
private functions from which the public is excluded and for which
arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the
function; or
3. Areas not commonly open to the public of owner-operated
businesses with no employees.
SECTION 18.13.03 - “NO SMOKING” SIGNS
Any person or employer who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls
the use of any premises subject to the restrictions contained in this article,
shall have the responsibility of properly posting and maintaining “No Smoking”
signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (a picture of a burning
cigarette inside a red circle with a red bar across it) clearly and conspicuously
throughout the premises. The color of such signs, when not of the
international type, shall have lettering that is distinct, contrasting to the
background and easily read.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 18 – Public Health
9
ARTICLE VI - PENALTIES
SECTION 18.14 - CRIMINAL PENALTIES
SECTION 18.14.01 - PENALTY FOR FAILING TO OBEY ORDER OF HEALTH
OFFICER
A person who, after receiving notice, fails to comply with the terms of an
order of the health officer shall be subject to criminal penalties and enforced
as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. §1974
SECTION 18.15 - CIVIL PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this Chapter shall be a civil violation
and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section 1.11 of Winooski City Code.
Charter Reference: 19-406(a)
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. § 1974a
6697579_4:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 19 – Reserved
1
Chapter 19 – Reserved
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 20 – Regulating Truck Traffic
1
Chapter 20 - Regulating Truck Traffic
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the flow of truck traffic within the City of
Winooski and limit the damage to public roadways from overweight vehicles.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General Provisions
Section 20.01 Definitions
Section 20.02 Gross Weight Limits on City Streets and Highways
Section 20.03 Truck routes Designated
Section 20.04 Permit to Operate in Excess of Weight Limits
Section 20.05 Exceptions
Section 20.06 Truck Traffic in the City
Article IV Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Statutory Cross-Reference - 23 V.S.A Chapter 13
SECTION 20.01 - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 20 – Regulating Truck Traffic
2
CITY – shall mean the City of Winooski.
DEVIATING TRUCK – shall mean a truck which leaves and departs from a truck
route while traveling inside the city.
PERSON – shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
TRUCK – shall mean any traction engine, tractor, trailer, semi- trailer, motor
truck or other motor vehicles, as defined in 23 V.S.A. § 4(20).
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 VSA § 4.
SECTION 20.02 - GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS ON CITY STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
A. Except as provided in Section 20.04 of this ordinance, no person shall
operate or cause to be operated a truck in excess of twenty-four
thousand (24,000) pounds, inclusive of all loads, upon any street,
highway or bridge, within the city.
B. Said streets and highways shall be posted with signs not less than
twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be not
more than forty-eight (48) inches by forty-eight (48) inches, and shall
contain the works "Legal Load limit 24,000 Pounds," in letters not less
than three inches high.
SECTION 20.03 - TRUCK ROUTES DESIGNATED
A. The legal load limit shall be as prescribed for the state highway system,
as defined in 23 V.S.A. §§ 1392(3) and 1400, for the following:
1. Main Street (U.S. Route 7)
2. East Allen Street (Vermont State Route 15)
3. West Allen Street (Malletts Bay Avenue to Main Street)
4. Malletts Bay Avenue
5. Tigan Street
6. West Center Street (Main Street to Malletts Bay Avenue)
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 20 – Regulating Truck Traffic
3
B. Tractor trailer trucks are strictly prohibited from traveling on Elm Street
between Malletts Bay Avenue and West Street.
C. Said streets or highways shall be posted for said legal load limit. The
notices shall be of a standard size, twenty-four (24) inches by twentyfour
(24) inches, and shall contain the words "Legal Load as for State
Highways" in letters not less than three (3) inches high.
SECTION 20.04 - PERMIT TO OPERATE IN EXCESS OF POSTED WEIGHT LIMIT
A. Any person who desires to operate a truck or trucks in excess of the
weight limits provided by this ordinance, shall make application for a
permit for each truck to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles and the
mayor of the city, or city manager, as prescribed in 23 V.S.A. §§ 1400
(a)(b)(c), 1402 (a)(b)(c)(d).
B. Said permit issued to operate in excess of weight limits shall contain the
following restrictions:
1. Operation of any truck shall be restricted between the hours of
7:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. on all city streets and highways, except
on designated truck routes.
2. No thru truck traffic shall be permitted on East and West Spring
Streets.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 23 VSA § 1400a.
SECTION 20.05 - EXCEPTIONS
A. Said weight limitations shall not apply to:
1. School buses, public agency transportation vehicles, emergency
vehicles and vehicles owned by or performing work for the city;
or
2. Emergency situations recognized by the city manager, the
director of public works, or a designated representative of either
official, or a police officer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 20 – Regulating Truck Traffic
4
SECTION 20.06 - TRUCK TRAFFIC IN THE CITY
A. Outside Origin.
1. One Inside Destination Point. All trucks entering the city for a
destination point in the city shall proceed only over an
established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection
with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to
the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a
deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest
permissible route.
2. Multiple Inside Destination Points. All trucks entering the city for
multiple destination points shall proceed only over established
truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the
street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first
destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a
deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the
shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is
permitted. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating
truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible
route.
B. Inside Origin.
1. Outside Destination Point. All trucks, on a trip originating in the
city, and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the
city shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which
such traffic is permitted to a truck route as herein established.
2. Inside Destination Points. All trucks on a trip originating in the
city, and traveling in the city for destination points in the city
shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is
permitted.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 20 – Regulating Truck Traffic
5
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 24 V.S.A. §1974a
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
1
Chapter 21 - Sewers and Sewage Disposal
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to preserve public health, prevent pollution and
secure the sanitary protection of waters. This ordinance is intended to ensure that
sewerage is discharged into an approved sewerage treatment system and to
accomplish the following:
A. Prevent the creation of health hazards which include, but are not limited
to surfacing sewerage; contaminated drinking water, ground water and
surface water;
B. Ensure adequate drainage related to the proper function of sewerage
disposal; and
C. Ensure that facilities are designed, constructed, operated and maintained
in a manner which will promote sanitary healthful conditions.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the act incorporating the City of
Winooski, Vermont, and such other State laws as are applicable (including
Title 24 V.S.A. Chapters 97 and 101), the undersigned, as the City Council
of the City of Winooski of the Incorporated City of Winooski do ordain that
the rules and regulations herein set forth are established as necessary and
desirable for regulating the use of public sewers and drains, the installation
and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes
into the Sewer System and providing penalties, etc. for violations thereof in
the City of Winooski, County of Chittenden, State of Vermont, and do
hereby make and enact this Ordinance:
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Content
Section 21.01 Definitions and Abbreviations
Article III Building Sewers and Connections
Section 21.02 General Provisions
Section 21.03 Inspection and Right of Entry
Section 21.04 Mandatory Sewer Connections; Septic Tanks
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
2
Section 21.05 Discharge to Natural Outlets Generally
Article IV Permits, Allocations and Billing
Section 21.06 Permit Required
Section 21.07 Class of Permits; Form and Contents of Application
Section 21.08 Ownership of Capacity
Section 21.09 Reserve Capacity Allocation Requests
Section 21.10 Preliminary Allocation Determination
Section 21.11 Final Capacity Allocation
Section 21.12 Expiration of Allocation
Section 21.13 Billing and Payment
Section 21.14 Responsibility for Payment
Section 21.15 Water/Wastewater Disconnection for Delinquent
Payment of Fees
Section 21.16 Owner to Bear Costs of Installation of Building
Sewer
Section 21.17 Roof Downspouts, Exterior Drains, Etc., Not to be
Connected to Building Sewers
Section 21.18 Inspection of Sewer Required Prior to Connection to
Public Sewer
Article V Use of Public Sewers
Section 21.19 Discharge of Storm water, Surface Water, Etc.,
Section 21.20 Prohibited Discharges to Public Sewers
Section 21.21 Prohibited Discharges to Public Sewers Without
Approval
Section 21.22 Pretreatment
Section 21.23 Control of Fats, Oils and Greases
Section 21.24 Monitoring of Industrial Waste Discharge
Section 21.25 Alternatives when Prohibited Substances are to be
Discharged
Section 21.26 Procedures and Policies for Managing Sewer Backups
Section 21.27 Protection from Damage
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
3
Article VI Violation of Chapter; Penalties
Section 21.28 Violation of Chapter
Section 21.29 Civil Action
Section 21.30 Duty to Notify
Section 21.31 Enforcement
Section 21.32 Revocation
Section 21.33 Penalties
Section 21.34 Appeals
Statutory Cross References: 24 V.S.A. s 3501 et seq; 24 V.S.A. s 3601 et seq.
SECTION 21.01 - DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER shall mean the sewer extension from the building drain to
the public sewer or other place of disposal, from five (5) feet outside the inner
face of the building wall.
CITY shall mean the City of Winooski acting by and through its City Council; or
in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representative
(whether the City Manager, Director of Public Works, Utility Manager or other
employees, or agents, deputies, Operators, or other).
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
4
COMBINED SEWER shall mean a conduit receiving both surface runoff and
sewage. Combined sewers shall not be permitted in this system.
DILUTION shall mean the addition of clean water to a water bearing waste
matter for the purpose of reducing the waste concentration, for the purposes
of this Ordinance.
DIRECTOR shall mean the Director of Public Works.
EASEMENT shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.
ELIGIBLE NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES shall mean those specifically listed
as such in National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits issued by
the State of Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation for
discharges from municipal separate storm sewer systems.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU) shall mean a unit of measure used to
equate commercial, non- residential or multi-family residential water usage to
a single-family residence. For the purposes of this Ordinance, one ERU shall be
equivalent to the domestic wastewater flow from one single- family residence,
having one kitchen. For commercial establishments, ERU’s shall be assigned by
the Utility Manager based upon historical water use.
FLOATABLE OIL is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate
by gravity from sewage or wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Sewage or wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pre-treated and the sewage or wastewater bearing said oil
does not interfere with the sewage works.
GARBAGE shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
GREASE shall mean a material either liquid or solid, composed primarily of fat,
oil, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "fats, oils, and
grease (FOG), "oil and grease", or "oil and grease substances" shall all be
included within this definition.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
5
GREASE HAULER shall mean a licensed septage hauler who collects the contents
of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or
disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services to a facility
related to grease trap or interceptor maintenance.
GREASE TRAP shall mean a device used to serve individual fixtures located
adjacent to or in close proximity to a kitchen fixture designed to collect, contain,
or remove wastes and grease from sewage while allowing the balance of the
liquid waste to discharge to the sanitary sewer by gravity. Traps shall have a
removable lid on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning, and
maintenance.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE shall mean any building, house, residence, or other
structure or facility, use for human occupancy, habitation, business, recreation,
or other purposes resulting in the production or emanation or discharge of
sewage as defined herein.
INDUSTRY shall mean any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure
used or intended for use in the operation of a business enterprise or
manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering, or assembling any produce,
commodity or article or from which any process waste, as distinct from sanitary
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL USER A discharger to the City wastewater treatment plant who
discharges non-domestic sewage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage. Industrial wastes shall include any liquid waste
produced from an industry that is not sanitary sewage as heretofore defined.
INFILTRATION shall mean water other than wastewater that enters any sanitary
sewer (including building sewers) from the ground through means which
include, but are not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, service connections,
or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW shall mean water other than wastewater that enters a sewer (including
building sewers) from sources which include, but are not limited to, roof leaders,
cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, sump pumps, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and
sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished
from, infiltration.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
6
INFILTRATION AND INFLOW (I/I) shall mean the quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow.
MUNICIPAL SYSTEM shall mean a sewerage disposal collection system
operated by the municipality.
NATURAL OUTLET shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NON-DISPERSIBLES shall mean anything other than human waste and toilet
paper that is flushed down the toilet; or materials that do not break apart to
become indistinguishable in sewage when the toilet is flushed. Examples
include fats, oils, grease, rags, sanitary products, ear swabs, dental floss, and
other materials that will not disperse within five (5) minutes of discharge to
the public sewer.
OWNER shall be any person vested with Ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial of any property.
OPERATOR shall be the person responsible for the proper function and
maintenance of a facility.
PERSON shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or other legal entity.
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties
in sewage to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the public sewage works. Pretreatment shall
include the reduction or alteration of pollutants by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by
40 CFR Part 403. Dilution is not pretreatment.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
7
PRIVATE SEWER shall mean the building drain and the building sewer, which
shall be owned, operated, and maintained by the Owner of the property on
which the private sewer is located.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER shall mean wastewater collection and pumping infrastructure
owned, maintained, and operated by the City of Winooski that is located: (A)
upon property owned by the City, (B) within the limits of the so-called rightof-
way of a public highway, and/or (C) within the limits of a permanent
easement therefore held by the City for such use for a sewer.
SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean normal water-carried toilet and household type
wastes (such as shower and wash water) or waste from sanitary conveniences
such as properly shredded garbage, and whether produced from residences or
from commercial places of business such as stores, restaurants, or offices or
from other institutions or establishments but shall exclude: (A) any industrial
wastes, (B) any wastewater from a commercial laundromat or dry cleaning
business, and (C) any ground, surface or stormwater.
SANITARY SEWER shall mean a sewer that carries only sanitary sewage.
SEWAGE shall mean wastes carried by water, excluding ground, surface, and
stormwater from all habitable structures, including, but not limited to
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT shall mean arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sanitary sewage such as treatment facilities or
other similar facilities; necessary to bring the City’s wastewater into
compliance with their NPDES Permit and the Vermont Environmental
Protection Rules.
SEWER shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
8
SEWERAGE WORKS shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping,
transporting, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage that are owned,
maintained, and operated by the City of Winooski.
SHALL is mandatory; May is permissive.
SLUG shall mean any discharge of water, wastewater or sewage which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation and shall adversely affect the sewage works including the collection
system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works..
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying
surface waters, ground water, stormwater or unpolluted water from any
source; but excludes sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and sewage works provided.
USER is each connection to the public sewer (each such connection shall
constitute one user)
WATERCOURSE shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
9
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall have the meaning
ascribed to them under this Article. References to standards of the following
organizations shall refer to the latest edition of same.
“ANSI” shall mean American National Standards Institute
“ASME” shall mean American Society of Mechanical Engineers
“ASTM” shall mean American Society of Testing and Materials
“AWWA” shall mean American Water Works Association
“cm” shall mean centimeter
“CS” shall mean Commercial Standards
“degrees C” shall mean degrees Celsius
“degrees F” shall mean degrees Fahrenheit
“EPA” shall mean Environmental Protection Agency
“GPD” shall mean Gallons per Day
“kg” shall mean kilograms
“l” shall mean liters
“m” shall mean meter
“mg/l” shall mean milligrams per liter
“NPC” shall mean National Plumbing Code
“PDI” shall mean Plumbing and Drainage Institute
“ppm” shall mean parts per million
“sq. m.” shall mean square meters
“VT ANR” shall mean Vermont Agency of Natural Resources
“WEF” shall mean Water Environment Federation
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
10
ARTICLE III - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 21.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. All costs and expenses incident to the design, installation, connection,
maintenance, and repair of the building sewer shall be borne by the Owner
of the property served or to be served with the following exception;
1. All or a portion of the costs to design, install, connect and maintain new
building sewers and/or building drains constructed as part of a City
capital reconstruction project may be borne by the City. Building sewers
and/or building drains replaced or installed as part of a City capital
reconstruction project may be owned and maintained by the City per
City Council approval.
B. For building sewers owned and maintained by the User, the Owner shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City, including but not limited to its officers
and agents, from any and all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by any installation, connection, maintenance, repair of the
building sewer or its connection by the Owner to the sewage works
(whether or not any such work was done by the City or in accordance with
its requirements). However, as a part of the initial construction of its
sewage works for the City, the City may, at its expense, initially construct a
portion or the whole of any building sewer to the extent and manner
determined by the City Council.
C. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each
building. Grouping of more than one building on one building sewer shall not
be permitted, except where one building stands behind another and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building. This requirement may
be waived by the City Council, based on specials needs or considerations.
Under no circumstances will one building sewer be allowed to connect and
serve more than one house or dwelling unit under separate Ownership
except in the case of condominiums.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
11
D. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new building only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Owner and approved by the
Utility Manager, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
E. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the City and State of Vermont. In the absence of code provision or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
F. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, maintenance, and repair of the lift system shall be
borne by the Owner of the property served or to be served.
G. No person(s) shall make connections of, or otherwise cause or allow to be
discharged, any roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, cellar
drains, basement sumps, Eligible Non-Stormwater Discharges, or other
sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building
drain which, in tum, is connected directly or indirectly to the sewage works.
These waters shall be discharged to such sewers that are specifically
designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Utility
Manager and/or Federal or State regulatory agency.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
12
H. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the City and State of Vermont, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight
and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the Utility Manager before
installation.
I. No underground piping, connection to the municipal sewer system, septic
tank, or leaching facilities shall be covered until they have been inspected
and approved for covering by the Utility Manager.
J. Prior to any connection of a building sewer to the public sewer, the Utility
Manager shall be given a minimum of two working days’ written notice in
order that such work may be supervised or inspected. All connections will be
made during normal work day hours and no connections may be allowed
Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays. If the Utility Manager has not been
properly notified, he/she may require the completed work to be uncovered
for examination, at the Owner's expense.
K. Exterior clean-outs shall be installed where the distance from the building to
the public sewer is greater than one hundred (100) feet or where bends
greater than forty-five (45) degrees are used in the building sewer. Cleanouts
shall be made by installing a wye and one eighth (1/8) bends of the
same diameter as the building sewer. The clean-outs shall ordinarily be
installed at the point of connection between the building sewer and the
building drain, at curves on the building sewer and on the straight part of
the building sewer. The clean-out shall be brought up from the building
sewer to four (4) inches (10.2 cm) below ground level and be properly
capped. Locations of all clean-outs shall be recorded and turned over to the
Utility Manager.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
13
L. For any new construction, and substantial renovations;
1. Separate and independent building sewers and building storm drains
shall be provided.
2. New plumbing in any existing or new building shall be so constructed
as to keep all stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof and
surface runoff, subsurface drainage, and Eligible Non-Stormwater
Discharges separate from sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, and
from the building sewer.
3. The building drain conveying sewage from plumbing fixtures within
the building shall discharge to a building sewer, while the building
drain conveying stormwater and other drainage shall discharge to a
building storm drain.
4. Where separate storm drains and sanitary sewers are provided, and
an Owner has demonstrated that on-site retainage of stormwater is
not possible, building storm drains shall be connected to a public
storm drain. Connection of a building storm drain to any public or
private sanitary sewer is prohibited.
5. Where separate storm drains and sanitary sewers are provided,
building sewers shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Connection of
a building sewer to any public or private storm drain is prohibited.
6. Prior to activating water service, every new building sewer and storm
drain shall be dye tested by the Owner or their designee in the
presence of the Utility Manager or their designee, to establish that
the building sewer and drain are properly connected to the City sewer
and drain, respectively.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
14
7. The City reserves the right to inspect or conduct testing of an existing
building sewer or drain to establish that it is properly connected to
the public sewer or drain. Any connection from a building sewer to a
storm drain (also referred to as an “illegal” or “illicit” connection) shall
be disconnected immediately at the Owner’s expense. The City may
require an existing connection from a building storm drain to a sewer
to be disconnected at the Owner’s expense if it is determined to be
discharging infiltration or inflow directly or indirectly to the sanitary
sewer system.
M. Before any portion of the existing plumbing system outside of the building is
connected to the building sewer, the Owner shall prove, to the satisfaction
of the Utility Manager, that it is clean and conforms in every respect to this
Ordinance and that all joints are watertight. Outside (buried) building sewer
lines shall be constructed in conformance with the Vermont Environmental
Protection Rules, in effect at the time of sewer line construction.
N. The Utility Manager shall apply appropriate tests to the pipes and the
plumber and Contractor, at their own expense, shall furnish all necessary
tools, labor, materials, and assistance for such tests and shall remove or
repair any defective materials when so ordered by the Utility Manager.
O. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
P. Neither the Owner nor the Contractor shall block any driveway, street, road,
or railroad at any time without permission of the Utility Manager and other
controlling agencies. Every effort shall be made to permit the movement of
vehicular traffic at all times. Whenever it becomes necessary to cross or
interfere with roads, walks, or drives, whether public or private, the Owner
and Contractor shall maintain, at their own expense, and subject to the
approval of the Utility Manager, safe bridges or other means of egress.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
15
Q. Maintaining the building sewer – including inspection, cleaning, structural
repair, and other actions as may be required to ensure the full function and
purpose of the building sewer in accordance with this Ordinance – shall be
the sole responsibility of the Owner of the property, with the following
exceptions;
1. Responsibility is otherwise transferred by legal document such as lease
or trust.
2. City Council authorizes the City to construct, own and/or maintain
constructed building sewer(s) as part of a City Capital reconstruction
project.
SECTION 21.03 - INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY
A. The Utility Manager and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
upon any premises during a scheduled appointment agreed to by the Owner
and/or User to inspect for compliance with this Ordinance. This includes all
public and private properties, and may consist of inspection, sampling,
metering, and testing of internal plumbing, building drains, building sewers,
pumps and grinder pumps, grease traps and interceptors, and all other
structures and conduits designed or used for the purpose of collecting,
treating or disposing of sewage and stormwater. The Utility Manager, or
duly authorized representative, shall have the right to set up on the Owner’s
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct study of the user’s operations. The Owner shall allow said Agent
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
addition duties.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
16
B. The Utility Manager and other duly authorized representatives of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
C. No Owner, occupant, or other person shall refuse, impede, inhibit, interfere
with, restrict or obstruct entry and access to properties, including within
buildings, by the Utility Manager or duly authorized representative, bearing
proper credentials and identification, where inspection is sought at
reasonable times, with prior notice and a scheduled appointment time by
both parties, in order to assure compliance with applicable Ordinances,
statutes, codes and/or regulations.
D. Where an Owner/Operator has security measures in force that require
proper identification and clearance prior to entry upon its premises, the
Owner/Operator shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Utility
Manager or duly authorized representative, shall be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibility.
E. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
establishment shall be promptly removed by the Owner/Operator upon
written or verbal request and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be borne by the Owner/Operator.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
17
F. While performing the necessary work of this Article, the Utility Manager or
their representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source
of discharge to the sewers, waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
G. While performing the necessary work on private properties the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions as required.
H. The City shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
SECTION 21.04 - MANDATORY SEWER CONNECTIONS
A. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon
public or private property within the City of Winooski any sanitary sewage
without approval from the City of Winooski and/or the Vermont Agency of
Natural Resources.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
18
B. Within the City, no privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, sinkhole, or similar
receptacle shall be used and maintained for disposal of sanitary sewage at any
time for or upon any improved property which has been connected to a public
sewer or which has been required to be connected to a public sewer.
C. Within the City, no privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool sinkhole, or similar
receptacle shall be connected with a sewer at any time without approval of
the City of Winooski in so far as disposal of sanitary sewage is concerned.
D. A sewer shall be considered “available” to a habitable structure, for the
purposes of this Ordinance, if a portion of said sewer is within one hundred
(100) feet of the nearest point of the property line of the property upon which
said habitable structure is situated.
E. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby
required at the owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and
to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter,
F. Maintenance of all private sewerage facilities including but not limited to:
1. building plumbing systems,
2. building sewers to the main,
3. sewer connection to the main,
4. sewer appurtenances, shall be the responsibility of the property
owner, at his/her expense.
G. The property owner shall be solely responsible for continually maintaining
such facilities in satisfactory operating condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to:
1. maintaining flow,
2. clearing obstructions in the building sewer to the main,
3. maintaining all joints gas and water tight,
4. repair or replace collapsed, deteriorated or defective materials,
and
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
19
5. all other work which is necessary and essential to maintaining
proper operation and preserving the structural integrity and
water tightness of the system. Building sewers that discharge
into a City owned sewer manhole are responsible for the sewer
connection up to discharge side of the sewer main within said
manhole.
SECTION 21.05 - DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS GENERALLY
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet
within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or
other polluted waters
ARTICLE IV - PERMITS, ALLOCATIONS AND BILLING
SECTION 21.06 - PERMIT REQUIRED
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection(s)with or make
any opening into, use, alter or disturb in any manner any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit in writing from the
department of public works and paying to the City any fee required and
imposed by the City against the Owner.
SECTION 21.07 - CLASSES OF PERMITS; FORM AND CONTENTS OF
APPLICATION
A. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
1. Permits for residential, commercial and other uses conveying
sanitary sewage
2. Industrial user permits for conveyance of industrial wastes
In either case, the Owner shall make application on forms furnished by
the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Utility Manager or authorized representative. A permit and
inspection fee, as set by the City Council shall be paid to the City at the
time the application is filed.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
20
B. The Utility Manager may require an evaluation of a proposed sewer
connection, performed by a Vermont Registered Professional Engineer,
to assess the impact the additional flow would have on the public sewer.
The cost of said evaluation shall be borne by the applicant. A permit
application may be denied if the additional flow is determined to have an
adverse effect on the public sewer.
SECTION 21.08 - OWNERSHIP OF CAPACITY
A. The City of Winooski owns the wastewater collection system and
wastewater treatment facility. The City is obligated to comply with
conditions put forth by the Department of Environmental Conservation
Water Supply Division as it relates to wastewater collection and
capacity requirements.
SECTION 21.09 - RESERVE CAPACITY ALLOCATION REQUESTS
A. All allocations to projects shall be based on the project’s wastewater
demands. Any differential between actual demands and requested
demands is not available for reallocation by the allocatee for another
project or for project expansion.
B. Persons seeking an allocation of uncommitted wastewater reserve
capacity of less than 1,000 gpd shall apply to the City for an allocation
on an authorized form. Persons seeking an allocation of uncommitted
wastewater reserve capacity of more than 1,000 gpd shall apply to the
City for a preliminary allocation on an authorized form prepared and
certified by a Vermont registered engineer. Such applications shall:
1. Be accompanied by a calculation of the project’s water demand to
be generated by the project/development following VT Water
Supply Rule requirements;
2. Any other information requested by staff or the City;
3. The City reserves the right to require a Vermont registered
engineer prepare the authorized form for any allocation request,
at the applicant’s expense.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
21
C. All such applications may be denied when they are deemed to be
incomplete. All staff decisions may be appealed by the applicant to the
City Council. The City Council reserves the right to deny any application
in its sole discretion, and consistent with law.
SECTION 21.10 - PRELIMINARY ALLOCATION DETERMINATION
A. Upon receipt of the application for wastewater allocation with
supportive documents, the City shall make a preliminary determination
regarding allocation of uncommitted reserve capacity. The City shall
issue a preliminary allocation upon making affirmative findings that
there is sufficient wastewater reserve capacity, as of the date of the
application to accommodate the development wastewater supply
demand for the proposed development. Supporting documents for this
section shall include a description of the land development for which
allocation is sought, together with written confirmation from the
Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designee indicating that 1)
the applicant has submitted to the Department of Planning and Zoning
a land development project proposal in sufficient detail for the
Department of Planning and Zoning to determine whether the proposal
is viable under the current zoning regulations and 2) the land
development project as proposed generally appears to be viable under
said regulations, subject to certain approvals.
B. A preliminary determination by the City for wastewater allocation
capacity shall not constitute a binding commitment of capacity to the
applicant and may be revoked by the City Council at its sole discretion.
A preliminary determination may be used by the applicant that a
proposed development has sufficient wastewater capacity available to
proceed through the development review process.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
22
SECTION 21.11 - FINAL CAPACITY ALLOCATION
A. An applicant who holds a preliminary wastewater allocation of
capacity may apply for a final application upon occurrence of the
following:
1. Obtained site plan, conditional use and/or variance
approval(s), if such approvals are the only approvals except
a zoning permit, required for the proposed development
under City zoning and subdivisions regulations then in effect;
or
2. Obtained final approval for a subdivision, Planned Unit
Development or planned Residential Development if such
approvals are the only approvals, except a zoning permit,
required for the proposed development under City zoning and
subdivision regulations then in effect; or
3. Obtained all approvals required under subsection 1 and 2
above, if such approvals are required for the proposed
development under City zoning and subdivision regulations
then in effect; or
4. Does not require any approvals under City zoning and
subdivision regulations then in effect.
5. The request shall be accompanied with payment for the full
amount of the allocation requested.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a final wastewater allocation, the
City shall grant a final allocation upon determination that the
applicant has a preliminary allocation, which has not been revoked,
and that sufficient uncommitted reserve capacity is available for the
development and that all fees have been received.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
23
C. A grant of final allocation shall constitute a binding commitment of
wastewater capacity to the applicant subject to the applicant’s
compliance imposed on such allocation. The final allocation shall
specify the allowed volume and any other characteristics determined
appropriate by the City. Upon the issuance of final allocation, the
allocation shall continue for a period of three years from the date of
issuance of allocation or complete build out of the project, whichever
comes first. The City may allow a period longer than three years if a
developer so requests in writing and the City determines that the
three-year initial time period is not a realistic time within which to
expect connection to the municipal wastewater system. At any point
during the initial three-year time period an applicant may also
request an extension of up to three additional years. Unused
allocations are not eligible for refunds. Any pre-existing wastewater
allocation granted prior to the date of this Ordinance shall have three
years from the date of this Ordinance to utilize said allocations or the
allocations shall expire.
D. A wastewater capacity allocation is not transferable to any other person
or development, except a successor in interest of the development for
which the allocation has been granted.
SECTION 21.12 - EXPIRATION OF ALLOCATION
A. A final wastewater capacity allocation shall expire: 1) on the date that
any approval required for grant of the final allocation expires unless the
applicant has obtained an extension for the development and
demonstrated significant progress toward the completion of the project
for which the zoning permit has been granted; or 2) when the meter
serving the project has been installed, whether or not the project is fully
occupied, and any metered usage is obtained.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
24
B. The section above notwithstanding, for developments which an applicant
has obtained a portion of the water allocation, the remaining portion of
the final allocation shall expire three (3) years from the date of issuance
of the final allocation, unless extended as provided below.
1. The applicant may, depending on the volume of the approved
allocation, apply to the City to extend the capacity allocation for
one period of three (3) years from the date of expiration of the
original final allocation provided that the application extension is
filed prior to the expiration date of the original final allocation, and
the applicant requesting the extension has been working diligently
to complete the project.
2. Upon expiration of the final allocation, approved extension, or any
portion thereof, the remaining capacity shall revert to the City.
There shall be no refund on fees paid for the unused or reverted
allocation.
3. In all cases, design allocations shall be considered expired when
the project is complete and a history of metered usage can be
utilized to establish usual demands of the project.
4. In the event the project is not built within the approved time
period, and all allocation fees have been paid, the customer may
be refunded the paid allocation fees less a 1.27% administrative
fee.
C. The City shall strive to review and approve projects on a first come,
first served basis. The City retains the right to review applications on
other than a first come, first served basis if the City deems such action
is in the City’s best interest. The City may attach conditions related to
the wastewater infrastructure (e.g. line improvements, future tie-in
provisions, etc.) to allocation approvals to achieve the goals and policies
of the City, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant. The City
also reserves the right to deny applications for any reason at their sole
discretion.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
25
D. All customers shall request a change in use whenever there will be a
permanent “substantial change increase” in water volume use from an
existing connection. A substantial change increase is defined as:
1. Equivalent to one (1) gallon less than the flow quantities
established in the current edition of the Vermont Water Supply
Rule, Standard Flow Quantities, required for a single dwelling, or
2. Greater than fifty percent (50%) of the historical use registered
on the meter for normal billing over a three-year period or a.
above, whichever is less, or
3. The conversion of an existing single-family home to multiple
occupancy residential, mixed use, commercial, retail, or industrial
structure, or the conversion of a commercial or industrial unit to
one that differs from the original approval.
D. A user fee shall be paid by all users of the City’s water/wastewater
system based upon the multiplied product of their metered usage, and
a water rate/1000 cubic foot as set by the City, except as set forth in
subsection below:
1. All wastewater charges are based on actual usage for each
individual account per billing cycle.
2. Charges are payable whether or not water is physically turned on or
off to the facility at the meter during part or all of the billing period,
provided the service connection is physically connected to the
mainline. Water service termination at the curb stop needs to be
arranged with the City or a quarterly bill will be assessed. No
abatement of water/wastewater bills or minimum fees will be
allowed by reason of disuse, diminished use, or vacancy of premises
without proper notice to the Department, and water service
termination at the curb stop.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
26
3. Any account that has been finalized between regular billing cycle
readings shall be billed for the larger of: the actual metered usage,
the estimated usage, or the minimum charge for the billing period,
when 45 days or more have occurred since the last reading. For
readings less than 45 days apart, no sewer usage charge shall be
applied unless actual usage is 100 cubic feet or more. The City may
adjust final water bills on a case-by-case basis.
SECTION 21.13 - BILLING AND PAYMENTS
A. Wastewater charges will be invoiced quarterly to all residential,
commercial, and other accounts that convey sanitary sewage.
Wastewater charges shall be payable on or before the 30th day
following the date of the invoice or a later date as shown on the
invoice. In the event that such charge is not paid when due, a one-time
penalty of eight percent (8%) shall be applied and interest of One (1.0%)
percent monthly shall be imposed by the City per month after the first
thirty (30) days of delinquency and monthly thereafter until the invoice
is paid. If any account shall remain delinquent, the City may also take
action that is consistent with the provisions of Title 24, V.S.A. Chapter
129, Uniform Water and Sewer Disconnect, as presently constituted and
as amended from time to time, to obtain payment of delinquent
charges or to discontinue water service. Such charges shall be a lien
upon the real estate as provided in 24 V.S.A. 3306 and 32 V.S.A. 5061.
B. New residential and commercial water connections made during a
billing period shall be billed on the following basis:
1. The billing shall be the larger of the actual metered billing, the
estimated usage, or the minimum charge for the billing period.
2. Notwithstanding above, the City may adjust new water connection
water bills on a case-by-case basis.
Should any meter become inoperative between readings, upon
investigation and discretion of the City the customer shall be billed at
the average amount of the preceding two quarters that the meter
recorded correctly, or the previous year’s same quarter, or an average
as determined by the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
27
D. Industrial User wastewater charges will be invoiced in accordance with
their approved permit.
E. Refer to Chapter 28 for sewer rate charges for sewage and Industrial
waste.
SECTION 21.14 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT
A. In consideration of sewer service supplied by the City all property
owners are responsible for payment of bills rendered for water used by
the owner, their tenants, successors in tenancy or in ownership, and all
other operations at the specified location, unless and until proper notice
is given to the City of termination of service on a specific date. The
property owner shall abide by all rules and regulations established by
the City consistent with enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
B. All sewer charges will be billed to the owner of record of the facility(s)
served, unless waived by the City. Although another person may pay
the service rate, the owner of the premises shall ultimately be held
responsible for such fees. In the event that all charges are not paid on a
timely basis, the owner of record will be solely responsible for all
penalties, fees, interest and delinquent charges. Each time a bad check
is received for payment of a water bill the account shall be charged a
returned check fee as established by and as may be modified from time
to time by the Council in addition to any other penalties. Failure to
receive a bill does not relieve the owner of the obligation for payment
or for the payment of penalties.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
28
SECTION 21.15 - WATER/WASTEWATER DISCONNECTION FOR DELINQUENT
PAYMENT OF FEES
The City of Winooski may disconnect water/sewer services to ratepayers as a
collection procedure for delinquent water and/or sewer bills or charges (24
VSA § 5151) in accordance with the conditions and provisions as set out in Title
24, Chapter 129, “Uniform Water and Sewer Disconnect”, of the Vermont
Statutes Annotated (VSA), as the same may be amended from time to time.
This statute delineates the operative definitions, conditions and procedures
the City shall observe for both disconnections and reconnections based on the
then-current edition of 24 VSA.
SECTION 21.16 - OWNER TO BEAR COSTS OF INSTALLATION OF BUILDING
SEWER
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner, with the exception that;
the City Council may authorize the City to bear a portion or all costs for the
installation and connection of the building sewer associated with a City Capital
reconstruction project.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of a privately owned building
sewer.
SECTION 21.17 - ROOF DOWNSPOUTS, EXTERIOR DRAINS, ETC., NOT TO BE
CONNECTED TO BUILDING SEWERS
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
29
SECTION 21.18 - INSPECTION OF SEWER REQUIRED PRIOR TO
CONNECTIONTO PUBLIC SEWER
The applicant for the building sewer permit required by this article shall notify
the Utility Manager when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Utility Manager or designated representative.
ARTICLE V - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
SECTION 21.19 - DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER, SURFACE WATER, ETC.,
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling waters or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
B. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
natural outlet approved by the City.
SECTION 21.20 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged in amounts
that will interfere with the sewage treatment works, nondispersables
such as fats, oils, grease, rags, sanitary products,
ear swabs, dental floss, and other materials that will not break
apart to become indistinguishable in sewage within five (5)
minutes of discharge to the building sewer. Any gasoline,
benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
30
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher that
9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewerage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either single or by interaction with other pollutants by the same
user, to injure, pass through, or cause interference with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
6. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create
a public nuisance or hazard to life or sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair. For the purpose of this
paragraph, an odor shall be considered as creating a public
nuisance when it exists at a sufficient intensity or duration to cause
a neighboring resident to register a complaint with the City.
7. Any substance which will cause the sewage treatment plant to
violate its NPDES Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
31
8. Water sufficiently hot to cause the influent at the sewage
treatment facilities to exceed 104°F (40°C) or cause inhibition of
biological activity in the sewage treatment plant.
9. Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a
''slug'' as defined.
10. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Utility Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
11. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life as defined
by the Environmental Protection Agency or creates a public
nuisance.
SECTION 21.21 - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS WITHOUT
APPROVAL
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely in
the opinion of the City that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the City will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of twenty-five (25) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit and
one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
32
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a
motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Utility Manager.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting
an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City for
such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the superintendent as necessary,
after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the
requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies having
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Utility
Manager in compliance with applicable State and/or Federal
regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues or
of dissolved solids, such as but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
b. Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
33
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works or which may cause the
effluent limitation of the discharge permit to be exceeded.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
e. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment processes employed, or are amenable
to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
B. The Utility Manager may set limitations lower than the limitation established in
these regulations if in their opinion such more severe limitations are necessary
to meet the above objectives.
C. No user shall achieve, or attempt to achieve, compliance with this Ordinance by
diluting a discharge instead of using proper pretreatment. The increased use of
process water in place of proper treatment shall be considered dilution and is
prohibited by this Ordinance.
D. When required by the Utility Manager, the Owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial or other process wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located
and shall be constructed in compliance with applicable construction standards
and in accordance with plans approved by the Utility Manager. The structure
and appurtenances shall be properly maintained by the Owner, including
calibration of all meters and measuring devices so as to ensure accurate
measurement. All records from meters, measuring devices and samplers shall
be kept for at least five years and furnished to the Utility Manager or their
designee upon request. During construction and after installation, the Utility
Manager or their designee shall have the right to inspect the facilities.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
34
E. Oil traps shall be required on sewers directly or indirectly tributary to the public
sewage works from existing or new garages, service stations, enclosed parking
areas, and other establishments capable of discharging petroleum-based oil or
grease, flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful substances. Such devices
shall not normally be required for garages associated with private dwelling units.
The determination as to whether an oil trap is required rests with the Utility
Manager. Where required, oil traps shall be in accordance with the following
provisions, as well as State plumbing statute, and all other applicable Federal,
State, and local rules and regulations:
1. Discharges from oil traps shall be directed to a sanitary sewer and not to a
storm drain.
2. Oil traps shall be of a type, capacity, location, and construction approved by
the Utility Manager and located so as to be readily accessible for
maintenance and inspection. The Utility Manager, or duly authorized
representative, shall have the right to inspect such facilities in accordance
with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Oil traps shall be installed and maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by and at the expense of the Owner or user. Both the
Owner of the premises where an oil trap is required and the Owner or
Operator of the establishment or business conducted on the premises shall
be jointly and severally responsible for installing an oil trap acceptable to the
Utility Manager and for properly servicing and maintaining the oil trap. The
schedule for service and maintenance of an oil trap shall be subject to
approval by the Utility Manager.
4. The Owner or Operator of the establishment or business conducted on the
premises where the oil trap is located shall maintain a log describing the date
and type of all service and maintenance performed in connection with the
oil trap, the identity of the person who performed the service or
maintenance, the amount of residue removed from the oil trap on each date,
and the method of disposal of the residue. The log entries shall be
maintained for six years and shall be made available for inspection and
copying by the Utility Manager.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
35
SECTION 21.22 – PRETREATMENT
A. When required by the Utility Manager, a user shall design, construct, install,
operate and maintain special pre-treatment facilities which will provide for the
regulation and control of the rate, volume and characteristics of sewage
discharged City’s sanitary sewer. Pre-treatment facilities shall be designed,
constructed, installed, operated and maintained in compliance with Vermont
Agency of Natural Resources requirements.
B. The design and installation of the pre-treatment facilities shall be subject to
the review and approval of the City, and the requirements of all applicable
Federal, State, and local codes, Ordinances and laws. Pre-treatment facilities
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for inspection,
maintenance, and/or cleaning and shall be provided and maintained by the
Owner, at the expense of the Owner, in a continuous, efficient operating
condition at all times.
C. In the maintaining of pre-treatment systems, the Owner shall be responsible
for monitoring the proper removal and disposal, by appropriate means, of the
captured material. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials must be
performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. Materials collected shall
not be reintroduced into the public sewage works. The Owner(s) shall annually
file reports with the City reporting on such maintenance, removal and
disposal; including dates performed and who did the removal and disposal.
D. The Utility Manager shall have the right to inspect such special facilities in
accordance with provisions of this Ordinance to ascertain compliance with
such.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
36
SECTION 21.23 CONTROL OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE
A. A grease trap/interceptor shall be installed in the waste line leading from sinks,
drains or other fixtures in all new establishments where significant amounts of
animal or vegetable fat, oil, or grease can be introduced into the sewer system
in concentrations that can cause line stoppage or hinder the sewage works, or
when, in the opinion of the Utility Manager, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil in excessive amounts. This
includes, but is not limited to any restaurant; cafeteria; hotel; hospital;
institutional, factory, club, or other commercial kitchen; food and meat packing
and processing facilities; supermarkets; and bakeries. Private residences shall
be exempt from this rule, except for housing developments with more than
three (3) units discharging to a public sewer. Grease traps/interceptors shall be
installed and permitted prior to operation. The Utility Manager shall require
existing facilities to install, operate, and maintain a new grease trap/interceptor
that complies with the requirements of this section or to modify or repair any
noncompliant plumbing or existing trap/interceptor within ninety (90) days of
written notification from the City when any one or more of the following
conditions exist:
1. The facility is found to be contributing oils and grease in quantities
sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance of
the wastewater collection system.
2. The facility does not have a grease trap/interceptor.
3. The facility has an undersized, irreparable or defective grease
trap/interceptor.
4. Remodeling of food preparation, kitchen waste, or other waste plumbing
system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the
City.
5. The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of Ownership.
6. The existing facility does not have plumbing connections to a trap/grease
interceptor in compliance with the requirements of this section.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
37
7. The facility has not operated as a food service facility for 12 consecutive
months.
B. The discharge of the following to grease traps/interceptors is strictly prohibited:
1. Sink water temperatures in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit.
2. Wastewater from sanitary facilities and other similar fixtures.
3. Waste from food and waste grinders, except where a pre-filter is provided.
C. Grease traps (internal) shall be based on Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI)
sizing and installation data, in accordance with PDI Standard G101, and shall
utilize only those units approved by PDI. Installation of a dedicated building drain
and an in-line grease trap shall be required to serve all fixtures from which fat,
oil or grease may be discharged whenever there is sufficient space and
adequate plumbing to incorporate the appropriate facilities as determined by
the Owner and approved by the Utility Manager. Point of use grease traps may
be required instead of or in addition to, an in-line grease trap for discharges
from dish washer rinse sinks, pot sinks, floor sinks and drains, automatic hood
washes, soup and tilt kettles, wok drains, and any other fixture which may
introduce fat, oil or grease to the sewer as determined by the Utility Manager.
These units shall also include a sample port on the effluent Tee. Grease traps
shall meet the following criteria:
1. Trap design and location: Grease traps shall conform to the standards in the
PDI Standards G101. Grease traps shall be installed in strict accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions. Grease traps shall be equipped with a cover
that can be opened for inspection and sampling and a mechanism for a
secure closing.
2. Trap capacity: The capacity of the grease trap shall be related to the flow
rate as indicated in Table 1 of the PDI Standard G101 document.
3. Flow-through rate: Flow-through rates shall be calculated in accordance
with the procedures in the PDI Standard G101.
4. Flow control device: Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to control
the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed the
manufacturer’s rated capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the
unit.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
38
5. Particle Separator: Grease traps shall be equipped with a device, prior to the
grease trap, to control the amount of solids through the unit.
6. Venting: The flow-control device and the grease trap shall be vented in
accordance with the State plumbing code.
D. Grease interceptors (external) shall be designed and installed in accordance with
PDI Standard G-101 and the accepted State Plumbing Code, unless otherwise
stated herein. All new and existing grease interceptors shall meet the following
criteria:
1. Interceptor design and location: Grease interceptors shall have a minimum
of two compartments and shall be capable of separation and retention of
grease and storage of settled solids. Interceptor design shall conform to the
requirements of the Vermont Environmental Protection Rules, and the
interceptors shall be PDI certified. The use of water-cooled grease
interceptors is prohibited. A control manhole over each compartment for
monitoring purposes shall be required and installed at the Owner/Operator’s
sole expense. Covers shall have a gas tight fit. The grease interceptor shall
be designed, constructed and installed for adequate load-bearing capacity.
Flow control devices shall be required where the water flow through the
interceptor may exceed its rated flow. Interceptors shall be installed in a
location outside of the building, which provides easy access at all times for
inspections, cleaning, and proper maintenance, including pumping. A
manhole or other access point shall be installed on the discharge line of the
grease interceptor for sampling of the grease trap effluent. Effluent
sampling shall be performed to ensure compliance with the regulations.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
39
2. Interceptor capacity: Grease interceptor capacity calculations shall be
performed by each facility based on size and type of operation in
accordance with State environmental statues. Grease interceptors shall have
a minimum depth of four feet and a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons per
unit, have a grease retention capacity of not less than two (2) pounds for
each gallon per minute of flow, and shall have sufficient capacity to provide
at least a 24-hour detention period for all flow to be discharged to the
interceptor. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single unit,
installation of grease interceptors in series is required. Interceptor capacity
calculations shall be approved by the Utility Manager prior to the installation
of the interceptor(s). Grease interceptors shall not be installed unless tested,
rated and bear the seal of acceptance of State Plumbers Examination Board
or approved by the Utility Manager.
E. Other alternative and innovative approved methods of grease removal and
disposal may be used if approved by the Utility Manager. If the Owner
determines there is insufficient space available to install a grease
trap/interceptor, or the facility’s plumbing cannot accommodate a grease trap,
or if it is determined that an existing or proposed grease installation, despite
being designed according with industry standards, cannot meet the discharge
limits, the City may require the Owner to implement other measures to ensure
compliance with the discharge limitation. Required measures may include but
are not limited to, modifying the type, capacity, location and construction of the
grease trap/interceptor, adding chemical or biological agent approved by the
Utility Manager to convert the fats, wax, oil, and grease to a substance not
prohibited by this Ordinance, more frequent cleaning of the grease
trap/interceptor, and physical containment and removal of fats, wax, oil and
grease for disposal offsite.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
40
F. Waivers:
1. An establishment which generates very little or no fat, oil or grease, may
request a waiver of the requirements of this Ordinance. The request must
be clear and specific, and include the quantity generated, how it is
generated, method of disposal, and any other pertinent information
supporting the request. All such requests will be reviewed and a
determination made within 30 days of receiving the request. Written and
signed documentation of all proposed prevention measures shall be
maintained on-site and available for inspection.
2. An establishment may apply for a waiver from this regulation if the
establishment can demonstrate that it is impossible or impracticable to
operate or maintain an interceptor at that location. Any request must
include alternative pre-treatment for managing fat, oil, and grease from the
establishment. Consideration will be given but not limited to the following
scenarios: (1) inadequate space for the installation or maintenance of a unit,
and (2) inadequate slope for gravity flow between fixtures and unit or unit
and public sewer. A waiver may contain additional requirements specific to
the location including but not limited to alternative equipment, sampling
and analytical requirements, reimbursement of costs associated with sewer
monitoring and maintenance, and implementation of additional Best
Management Practices.
3. Every waiver request shall be made in writing and it shall reference the
specific provision of this Ordinance for which the waiver is sought. The
applicant shall provide technical documentation that demonstrates that an
equal amount of environmental protection can be attained without full
compliance with this Ordinance. A copy of said request shall be sent to the
Utility Manager. Any waiver allowed by the City shall be issued in writing. Any
denial of a waiver request shall also be issued in writing and shall contain a
Statement of the reasons for a denial. Written notification to the applicant
shall be completed by the City within 30 days of receipt of a complete
application. All documents relating to the request, approval or denial of a
variance shall be kept on file with the Water & Sewer Department and shall
be available to the public during the regular hours of operation.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
41
G. Maintenance:
1. Where grease traps/interceptors are required, they shall be installed and
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation and in
accordance with this Ordinance and the requirements of the accepted State
Plumbing Code, all by and at the expense of the Owner and user. Unless
otherwise required by the equipment manufacture or Utility Manager, Owners
or Operators shall have traps/interceptors inspected a minimum of once per
month and pumped at least every three (3) months. In addition to required
quarterly pumping, each establishment is required to pump its grease
trap/interceptor whenever one of the following conditions occurs:
a. When the total volume of captured grease and solid material displaces
more than 25% of the capacity of the interceptor as calculated using an
approved dipping method.
b. When the interceptor is not retaining/capturing oils and greases, or the
removal efficiency of the device, as determined through sampling and
analysis, is less than eighty percent (80%).
c. Chemical, biological, or physical means (including flushing with water)
shall not be used to release fats, wax, oil or grease into the sewer, bypass
the trap, or otherwise make the trap operate less effectively. Subject to
the Utility Manager’s prior written approval, a chemical or biological
agent may be added to convert the fats, wax, oil, and grease in a trap to
a substance not prohibited by this Ordinance, if the resulting discharge
from the trap will not cause or contribute to an obstruction or blockage
in the sewer or otherwise violate this Ordinance. Unless so converted, the
fats, wax, oil, and grease contents of a grease trap shall not be
discharged to public sewers.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
42
H. All waste fats, oil and grease must be collected in an appropriate container
provided by an approved vendor, and stored in an approved location on the
premises. The container must be stored on an impervious surface such as
concrete or pavement. Containers must be capable of being sealed to prevent
entry of precipitation or stored in a sheltered area. During storage, all grease
containers and surrounding areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times. For containers and a grease interceptor, the waste
material shall be removed by a professional hauler and shall include the
complete removal of all contents. Wastes removed shall be disposed of at a
facility permitted to receive such wastes or at a location designated by the City
for such purposes. The name and location of the disposal facility shall be verified
by the establishment, which shall be responsible for obtaining such information
from the grease hauler.
I. The Owner or Operator of the establishment or business conducted on the
premises where the grease trap/interceptor is located shall maintain a record
which describes the date and type of all inspections and cleaning of the grease
trap, service and maintenance performed in connection with the grease trap,
the identity of the person who performed the service or maintenance, the
amount of residue removed from the grease trap on each date, the method of
disposal of the residue, and any other data pertaining to operation, inspection,
or maintenance. The log shall be submitted to the Utility Manager annually. Each
facility shall also maintain a file on site, available at all times for inspection and
review by the Utility Manager, which contains at least the following information:
a. As-built drawings of the plumbing system for new or renovated
buildings and (if available) for existing buildings
b. Records of inspections
c. Copies of annual reports (submitted with Food Service Permit)
d. Receipts (pumping, maintenance, repairs, etc.)
e. Log of pumping activities
f. Log of maintenance activities vii Grease hauler information
g. Disposal information (including site name and location of disposal
facility obtained from grease hauler)
h. Monitoring data (including amount of grease present during inspection)
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
43
J. Failure to maintain an adequately sized grease trap/interceptor in proper
working order where required by this Ordinance, will result in a fine. Reinspection
of any establishment due to non-compliance or a violation shall result
in a charge to the Owner of the establishment. Establishment Owners will have
30 days to rectify any violations or non-compliance issues.
K. Enforcement Specific to Food Service Facilities:
After completing inspection of grease traps/interceptors at all food service
facilities, the Utility Manager or duly authorized representative of the City shall
initiate the following action:
1. No Further Action Required: If all information is verified and the grease
trap/interceptor is of proper type/size and in proper working condition in
accordance with the provisions of this section, no further action will be
required.
2. Written Notice: If the grease trap/interceptor requires any maintenance,
repairs, replacement, or corrections, the Utility Manager shall provide a
written notice of violation within five (5) days of inspection. The
Owner/occupant shall have ninety (90) calendar days to correct all
deficiencies identified by the City. Failure to do so may result in the
suspension of the establishment’s Permit to Operate a Food Establishment.
3. Notice of Violation: A Notice of Violation (NOV) shall be issued to an
establishment for any one or more of the following reasons:
a. Failure to properly maintain the grease trap/interceptor in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
b. Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
c. Failure to maintain a file of records on site at all times.
d. Failure to provide logs, files, records, or access for inspection or
monitoring activities.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
44
e. Any other failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
4. Notice of Violation Response: Any establishment issued a notice of violation
shall respond to the Utility Manager in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days
of receipt of the notice of violation and submit information describing how the
noncompliance occurred and what steps shall be taken to correct the
deficiencies and/or prevent the re-occurrence of the noncompliance.
Requirements for submittal shall include maintenance records, plans for
installation or upgrade of grease interceptors, including time frames for
preparation of plans, acquisition of necessary equipment, initiation of
construction (including time for permit approval, where required), completion
of construction, and a date for achievement of final compliance with this
section. The establishment shall have ninety (90) days from the Notice of
Violation to perform corrective work. Once corrective actions have been made,
the food service establishment shall contact (within 90 days of notice of
violation) the Utility Manager in writing, who shall perform a re-inspection
within five (5) business days to confirm that all deficiencies have been
corrected.
5. Time-Extension: If the establishment cannot complete the required repairs or
maintenance within ninety (90) days from the Notice of Violation to perform
corrective work, the establishment may apply for a one-time extension. The
establishment shall submit a written request to the Utility Manager for a time
extension, including proof that a “good faith effort” was made to
contact/schedule a Contractor to perform work and a definitive schedule for
when the establishment intends to have the corrective work completed.
6. Re-inspections: The Utility Manager, or duly authorized representative, shall
re-inspect facilities that received deficiency notices after the original
inspection. Any repairs or other deficiencies shall be inspected and written
notice provided of compliance or non-compliance as the case may be. In the
event that the establishment has returned to compliance with all of the
deficiencies, there shall be no further action required. If the establishment is
not in compliance at the second inspection, the City may issue civil penalties
and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section1.11 of Winooski City
Code.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
45
SECTION 21.24 MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGES
A. The Utility Manager shall be permitted to enter into, upon, or through the
premises of any property discharging into the sewage works to have access to
and copy any record; to inspect any discharge, monitoring equipment or
method; and to sample any discharge into the sewage works, including but not
limited to access to water meters.
B. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined per this Article or on an individual basis subject to the approval by
the Utility Manager.
C. All measurements and tests shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected.
D. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
46
SECTION 21.21 - ALTERNATIVES WHEN PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES ARE TO
BE DISCHARGED
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 21.20, and which
in the judgment of the City may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewerage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
City may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
B. If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
the review and approval of the City, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
SECTION 21.22 - PROCEDURES AND POLICIES FOR MANAGING SEWER BACKUPS
A. It is the policy of the City of Winooski that the City, will respond to
requests for assistance by municipal sewer customers, in the event of a
sewer backup, in the following manner:
1. An investigation shall be made to determine if the sewer blockage is
in the City sewer main (i.e. between municipal manholes or at
municipal manholes).
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
47
2. If the sewerage flow in the municipal manholes is flowing freely, the
indication is that the blockage is occurring in the service connection
at or between the building and the sewer main. The affected sewer
customer(s) shall be notified and informed that the problem appears
to be in the service lateral. It is the responsibility of the sewer
customer to correct the problem and the City will take no further
action to repair. The City, however, reserves the right granted
under this ordinance to inspect and approve all repairs that are
made.
3. If the blockage is determined to be in the municipal system, the City
shall be responsible for removing the blockage and reestablishing
flow. If the sewer backup appears to have been caused by a
blockage in the sewer main, the City shall assist the sewer customer
in making arrangements and paying for a one-time cleaning of the
affected area to include walls, floors, carpets and affected
upholstered furniture, to a ceiling amount of one-thousand dollars
($1,000) per dwelling or business.
4. The purpose of providing the initial cleanup services identified in this
section is to provide for a minimum level of public health protection
to the affected sewer customer. The risk of exposure to pathogenic
bacteria and other health related contaminants is assumed to be
greater with a sewer main blockage, potentially involving many
sewerage customers, than blockages involving a single service.
5. The City shall not be responsible for replacement or repairs to the
structure or its contents, including but not limited to walls, floors and
floor coverings, heating and other mechanical systems, and
furniture and furnishings.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
48
6. If, upon inspection of the facility by a City representative, it is found
that the service connection or interior house plumbing does not
meet the requirements of the public works standards, the City Sewer
Ordinance, the state plumbing code or other similar accepted
standards, the City can, as a condition of continued service, require
that the appropriate plumbing changes be made. The City may also
seek any penalties allowable under law for violation of the
referenced standards.
7. The City accepts no legal responsibility for sewer backups or
restitution as a result of such backup in that such backup is
considered to be an act of God. Actions taken by the City are solely
for the purpose of protecting the public health.
SECTION 21.27 – PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
A. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the sewage works.
B. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under
the charge of unlawful mischief as set forth in Title 13, Section 3701 of the
Vermont Statutes Annotated. Any person violating this article on conviction
thereof shall be fined and/or shall owe a penalty in an amount not less than
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence.
ARTICLE VI - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER; PENALTIES
SECTION 21.28 - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
A. Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Failure to do
so will result in criminal or civil penalties as provided for in this
chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
49
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation.
SECTION 21.29 - CIVIL ACTION
In additional to the enforcement authority set forth in this chapter, the City
shall have the right to institute civil action which it deems appropriate to
obtain injunctive or monetary relief.
SECTION 21.30 - DUTY TO NOTIFY
A. Users shall notify the Department of Public Works by telephone
immediately upon discharge or receiving knowledge of a discharge of
water or wastes in violation of this Ordinance and of any spill or other nonpermitted
pollutant release that may reasonably be expected to discharge
whether directly or indirectly to any public or private sewer, combined
sewer, or storm drain, or to a natural outlet. When directed by the
Department of Public Works, or if the user fails to reach the Department of
Public Works by telephone, the user shall also notify the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and the Vermont Department of
Environmental Conservation immediately by telephone.
B. Each notification shall be followed within fifteen (15) days of the date of
occurrence by a detailed written Statement addressed to the Utility
Manager and, as appropriate, State and Federal agencies, describing the
causes of the discharge and the measures being taken to prevent a
recurrence. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any
expense, loss or damage to the public sewer or for any fines imposed on
the City, or the Owner as a result of such discharge.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
50
SECTION 21.31 - ENFORCEMENT
A. Administrative Enforcement:
1. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily
abated or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to
abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance
maybe taken.
2. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance shall
be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. Such notice may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
The elimination of illicit discharges.
b. The cessation of improper practices and operations and
implementation of proper practices and operations.
c. The abatement or remediation of any contamination of the public
sewage works or and waters of the State of Vermont or the
United States and restoration of any property impacted by such
contamination.
d. Establishment of time limits for the completion of all required
work.
f. Payment of a fine
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
51
g. The Utility Manager may, without prior notice, suspend discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
and actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
the health or welfare of persons, or to the sewage works or
waters of the State of Vermont or United States. If the violator
fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the Utility Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the sewage works or waters of
the State of Vermont or the United States.
h. Any person discharging to the sewage works in violation of this
Ordinance may have their sewage works access terminated if
such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
Utility Manager will notify a violator of the proposed termination
of its sewage works access.
i. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates sewage
works access to premises terminated pursuant to aforesaid
without the prior approval of the Utility Manager.
B. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance, shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
C. On the basis of information available to it, the City may take any or all of
the following actions upon determination that any person is violating any
provision of this Ordinance:
1. Issue an order to cease and desist any such violation.
2. Assess fines.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
52
3. Issue an implementation schedule ordering specific actions to be taken
together with time and schedule requirements.
4. Terminate public water service until such time as the violation has
been eliminated.
5. Bring a civil or criminal action as provided by law.
6. Take any action available to it under Federal, State, or local laws or
regulations.
D. Any person violating the provisions of these regulations shall become liable
to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the City by
reason of such violation, including but not limited to legal costs or fees;
administrative fees; disposal, cleanup or maintenance fees; and any fines,
charges, or assessments made or imposed on the City by any Federal,
State, or local agency.
E. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the City may institute any
appropriate action including, but not limited to, injunction or other
proceeding to prevent, restrain, or abate violations of any provision of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 21.32 - REVOCATION
A. wastewater permit may be revoked by the Director for any of the following
reasons:
1. False, fraudulent, or misleading information contained in the permit
application. Installation of an onsite system or connection to the municipal
sewer system which does not comply with the conditions of the permit.
2. Alteration of the onsite system or connection to the municipal sewer system
so that it does not comply with this article.
3. Information which shows that the proposed onsite system or connection to the
municipal sewer system will not comply with this article.
4. Failure to comply with this article or any terms or conditions of permits issued
under this article.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 21 – Sewers and Sewage Disposal
53
B. The Director shall give the permit holder written notice of revocation of the
permit within seventy-two (72) hours of revocation. All sewage disposal
system work must ease immediately upon notification of revocation of permit.
The revocation will be held as a contested case per 3 V.S.A. Chapter 25.
SECTION 21.33 - PENALTIES
A. Any first (1st) or second (2nd) violation of this Chapter shall be a civil violation
and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1,
Section1.11 of Winooski City Code.
B. All third (3rd) and subsequent violations of this Chapter will be a criminal
violation and subject to criminal penalties and enforcement as provided for in
Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
SECTION 21.34 - APPEALS
A. The City Council shall receive appeals for arbitration of differences between
the Director and sewer users, or other parties, on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this Ordinance by the Utility
Manager and Director. The City Council shall review such appeal at a
subsequent meeting. Following the meeting, the City Council shall issue its
decision on the appeal in writing. The decision of the City Council on said
matter shall be considered final.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 22 – Streets and Sidewalks
1
Chapter 22 - Streets and Sidewalks
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Winooski by promoting safe and effective pedestrian
and vehicular travel throughout the City.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 22.01 Survey Books
Section 22.02 Barbed Wire Fences
Section 22.03 Snow and Ice Removal
Section 22.04 Paving Private Driveways and Roads
Section 22.05 Street Names and Building Numbering
Article IV Permits Required
Section 22.06 Permit Required to Dig or Obstruct Public Way
Section 22.07 Permit Required for Making Curb Cuts
Section 22.08 Cuts and Excavations to Have Protective Barriers;
Repairs and Restoration of Streets
Article V Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 22.01 - SURVEY BOOKS
The books in which are recorded the surveys of the streets, and the books
containing the maps or profiles of street grades, are hereby adopted and
accepted as the public books of record for the purpose of establishing the
street grades.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 22 – Streets and Sidewalks
2
SECTION 22.02 - BARBED WIRE FENCES
No person shall erect or maintain a barbed wire fence or railing upon the line
of a sidewalk or street, or so near thereto, or so located, as to be within reach
of and dangerous to a passerby upon such street or sidewalk.
SECTION 22.03 - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, by his/her own act, or through
his/her agents, contractors or employees, to plow, throw, place, push
or otherwise deposit snow or ice within the public right of way to
include all city streets, sidewalks, driveway aprons or within 8-feet of
any fire hydrant. This shall also include the intentional or unintentional
depositing of snow from roofs, awnings or similar structures within the
public right of way. The city shall be exempt from this ordinance as it
applies to snow removal operations from city roads and sidewalks. The
city shall not hold individual property owners responsible for remedying
snow or ice issues within the public rights of way that are created by
the city.
B. The owner, agent or person having the care of land or buildings
bordering on a street, square or other public place in the downtown
area (the area contained within the perimeter of the railroad tracks
(north boundary), Abenaki Way (east boundary), the Winooski River
(south boundary) and Mayo Street (west boundary)), where there is a
sidewalk, footway, awning or shade, shall, after the ceasing to fall of
snow, if in the daytime within four (4) hours, and if in the nighttime
before 12:00 noon the next succeeding day, cause the snow to be
removed from such sidewalk, footway, awning or shade. If such person
shall fail to remove the snow from such sidewalk, footway, awning or
shade, the Director of Public Works, or designee, shall do so at the
expense and charge of such owner or occupant, which expense and
charge may be recovered with full costs in an action in the name and
behalf of the city, and such owner or occupant shall also, upon
conviction, be fined for the violation of this section. This provision shall
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 22 – Streets and Sidewalks
3
not apply to lands or buildings outside of the downtown area, as
defined above.
Statutory Cross-Reference - 24 V.S.A. § 2391(2).
SECTION 22.04 - PAVING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS AND ROADS
Any person, firm or contractor that installs paving beyond the curb cut causing
a diversion of the natural water flow from the gutter and which causes
damage, creates an unsafe condition, or poses a problem to the city in the
operation and maintenance of its city streets shall be required to fix, remove,
or abate said obstruction or shall be liable for the costs of said abatement in
the event that the city undertakes it.
SECTION 22.05 - STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Statutory Cross-Reference - 24 V.S.A. § 2391(16); 24 V.S.A. § 4463.
A. The city council may, after a public hearing, change the names of
streets, roads, both public and private, and building numbers, within the
city when necessary to promote the welfare and safety of the
community. This provision shall be applicable to all existing streets and
roads as well as new streets and roads developed after the effective
date of this ordinance.
B. All street naming and building numbering will be in accordance with the
rules governing same promulgated by the State of Vermont related to
its program for Enhanced 911.
ARTICLE IV - PERMITS REQUIRED
SECTION 22.06 - PERMIT REQUIRED TO DIG OR OBSTRUCT PUBLIC WAY
No person shall break or dig up the ground or pavement in any street, lane or
alley, or on any sidewalk or common in the city, or erect thereon or in
dangerous or inconvenient proximity thereto a staging for building, or place or
deposit thereon stone, earth, brick, lumber or other building materials, without
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 22 – Streets and Sidewalks
4
first obtaining a written permit from the city and complying in all respects with
the conditions of such permit. Such permit shall state the nature of the
obstruction and the time allowed for it to remain, and shall be revocable by
the city.
SECTION 22.07 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR MAKING CURB CUTS
No person shall break or dig up any curbing, sidewalk or gutter in any street,
lane, alley or common in the city without first obtaining a written permit from
the city and complying in all respects with the conditions of such permit.
SECTION 22.08 - CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS TO HAVE PROTECTIVE BARRIERS;
REPAIRS AND RESTORATION OF STREETS
Whenever any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city
shall under any license or permit be dug up, obstructed, encumbered or
rendered unsafe or inconvenient for travel, the person so licensed or
permitted shall erect and maintain a suitable guard or fence around the place
or places so obstructed so long as the same shall be necessary, and he shall
keep two (2) or more lighted lanterns or lights in close proximity to such fence
or obstruction from twilight in the evening until daylight in the morning. No
person shall, without authority, remove any such fence, guard or railing or
disturb or extinguish such lighted lanterns or lights. Whenever any such work
is ready for the refilling of the excavated place or upon the expiration of the
time specified in said permit, whichever comes first, the permittee shall notify
the Director of Public Works or designee in writing and the refilling of all
excavations within the street limits shall be done under his supervision. The
resurfacing of any such portion disturbed in the street limits shall be done by
the street department and the cost thereof shall be charged to the person to
whom the permit is granted. An itemized statement of the cost shall be sent to
the permittee, who within ten (10) days shall pay the amount thereof to the
city. Upon failure of such person to pay the amount of such costs within the
said ten (10) days, the city shall have the right to bring proper action to
recover same.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 22 – Streets and Sidewalks
5
ARTICLE V - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
Statutory Cross-Reference – 24 V.S.A. § 1974a.
6697584_2:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
1
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Winooski, through the regulation of
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable
as required by federal and state law.
B. Nearly all of Winooski’s land areas are already developed, so the City must
carefully plan and monitor any new construction and redevelopment to reduce
negative impacts to local waterways and wetlands. Polluted storm water
runoff often flows into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and
then into local streams and can cause physical, chemical, and biological harm
to the waterways. Buffers adjacent to stream systems provide numerous
environmental protections including removing pollutants delivered in urban
storm water, reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation, stabilizing
stream banks, and restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of the water resources. It is the desire of the City of
Winooski to protect and maintain the native vegetation along all stream areas
by implementing specifications for the establishment, protection and
maintenance of vegetation along all streams within our jurisdictional authority.
C. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The
objectives of this ordinance are:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user.
2. To prohibit Illicit Connections and Discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system.
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
2
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose and Applicability
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 23.01 Definitions
Article IV Regulation
Section 23.04 Discharge Prohibitions
Section 23.04.01 Illegal Discharges
Section 23.04.02 Waste Disposal
Section 23.04.03 Illicit Connections
Section 23.05 Construction Stormwater
Section 23.05.01 Erosion/Sediment Control
Section 23.05.02 Pre-Post Construction Operation & Maintenance
Section 23.05.03 Redevelopment
Section 23.05.04 Buffers
Section 23.05.04.01 Forest Buffers
Section 23.05.04.02 Buffer Restrictions
Article V Special Provisions
Section 23.06 Illegal Discharge Exceptions
Article VI Appeals and Severability
Section 23.07 Variance, Waivers, and Appeals
Section 23.07.01 Variances
Section 23.07.02 Waivers
Section 23.07.03 Appeals
Section 23.08 Severability
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
3
Article VII Violation of Chapter; Penalties
Section 23.09 Violation of Chapter
Section 23.10 Civil Action
Section 23.11 Penalties
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 23.01 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY- Employees or designees of the director of
the municipal agency designated to enforce this ordinance.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs)- Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm
water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage.
BUFFERS- A narrow, permanent strip of dense perennial vegetation established
parallel to the contours of the waterway or wetlands for the purposes of slowing
water runoff, enhancing water infiltration, and minimizing the risk of any
potential nutrients or pollutants from reaching surface waters.
CLEAN WATER ACT- The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY- Activities subject to NPDES or State Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance that
would trigger a State or Federal Storm Water permit as outlined in the Vermont
Storm Water Management Manual. Such activities include but are not limited to
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
4
FOREST BUFFER- A forested strip of land extending along both sides of a stream
and its adjacent flood plains or slopes. The forest buffer shall be adjusted to
include contiguous sensitive areas, such as steep slopes or erodible soils, where
development or disturbance may adversely affect water quality, streams or other
water bodies. The forest buffer shall begin at the edge of the stream bank of the
active channel. The required width for all forest buffers shall be a minimum of 10
feet with the requirement to expand the buffer depending on stream order,
percent slope, and critical areas.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS- Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE- Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS- Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to (i) any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed permitted, or approved by an authorized agency; or (ii), any
drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY- Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in
40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b) (14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEMS (NPDES) STORM
WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT- A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
5
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE- Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON- Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation
or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s
agent.
POLLUTANT- Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid such as laundry wastewater, gray water
and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from construction a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
PREMISES- Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved
or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM- Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORM WATER- Any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN- A document which describes the
Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person
WASTEWATER- Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
6
ARTICLE IV - REGULATION.
SECTION 23.04 - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS
SECTION 23.04.01 - ILLEGAL DISCHARGE
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
Erosion from private property that enters the MS4 causing water quality
violations is prohibited. Examples include: Dirt or gravel on to public roads
from unpaved driveways, erosion from home improvements or construction
activities, wash down from concrete trucks, sweeping of dirt or debris on to
public roads etc.
SECTION 23.04.02 - WASTE DISPOSAL
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown,
deposited, left or maintained in or upon any public or private property,
driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain
system, or water of Winooski, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, animal waste,
litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so
that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in
streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
SECTION 23.04.03 - ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation
of this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4,
or allows such a connection to continue.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
7
SECTION 23.05 - CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER
SECTION 23.05.01 - EROSION/SEDIMENT CONTROL
The City of Winooski, under coverage of the MS4 Permit, is responsible to
report to the State of Vermont any Construction activities that result in a land
disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre as well as the five-acre
threshold. Reduction of storm water discharges from construction activities
disturbing less than one acre, will be subject to local review processes and
inspections. At a minimum, the City requires that an erosion control checklist
and plan be completed when obtaining a permit that involves land disturbance
(list possibilities. excavation, landscaping, paving, house additions etc.) Any
project that disturbs more than one acre will require coverage of a State or
Federal NPDES storm water permit as stated earlier.
SECTION 23.05.02 - PRE-POST CONSTRUCTION OPERATION &
MAINTENANCE
Any construction project that disturbs more than one acre of land will need to
design, operate and maintain a storm water erosion and control system, built
in accordance with BMPs, at the site to control construction site runoff. All
such systems shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance and
reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the most
recent version of The Vermont Storm Water Management Manual. Final design
shall be reviewed by the City of Winooski, and approved by the State of VT
Storm Water division. All such systems shall be maintained according to the
measures outlined in the most recent version of The Vermont Storm Water
Management Manual, and as approved in the permit. The person(s) or
organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan.
The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall inspect
storm water control systems on a regular basis as outlined in the plan.
Authorized representatives of the City of Winooski may enter at reasonable
times to conduct on-site inspections or routine maintenance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
8
SECTION 23.05.03 - REDEVELOPMENT
A. The design of a redeveloped site is expected to comply with the
requirements of the VT Storm Water Management Manual. All
redevelopment projects shall reduce existing site impervious areas by at
least 20%. Where site conditions prevent the reduction of impervious
area, then storm water management practices shall be implemented to
provide qualitative control for at least 20% of the site’s impervious
area. When a combination of impervious area reduction and storm
water practice implementation is used, the combined area shall equal or
exceed 20% of the site.
B. Where conditions prevent strict compliance with the standards,
practical alternatives may be considered, including but not limited to:
1. contribution to a city-managed Watershed/Stream Restoration
Fund program or the state offset fund for impaired waters
2. off-site BMP implementation for a drainage area of comparable
characteristics to that of the project within the same watershed
3. other City determined options including, but not limited to,
donation of open space to a stream buffer zone, donation of
land to the city for public use, etc. Special exemption, variance,
and waiver considerations may be granted in the review as
deemed appropriate by the City
SECTION 23.05.04 - BUFFERS
The purpose of this section is to establish minimal acceptable requirements for
the design of buffers to protect the streams and rivers of the City of Winooski
and to provide for environmentally sound use of the City of Winooski’s land
resources.
SECTION 23.05.04.01 - FOREST BUFFERS
The forest buffer shall be managed to enhance and maximize the unique value
of these resources. Management includes specific limitations on alteration of
the natural conditions of these resources. The following practices and
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
9
activities are permitted in the forest buffer with specific design or
maintenance features subject to the review and approval of the City of
Winooski.
1) Roads bridges, paths, and utilities
a) An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no
economically feasible alternative is available.
b) The right of way should be the minimum width needed to allow
for maintenance access and installation.
c) The angle of the crossing shall be perpendicular to the stream or
buffer in order to minimize clearing requirements
d) The minimum number of road crossing should be used within
each subdivision and no more than one fairway crossing is
allowed for every 1000 feet of buffer.
2) Storm water management
a) An analysis needs to be conducted to ensure that no
economically feasible alternative is available and that the project is
either necessary or significantly improves the water quality or
habitat in the stream.
b) In new developments, on-site and non-structural alternatives will
be preferred over larger facilities within the stream buffer.
c) During construction, the area cleared will be limited to the area
required for construction and adequate maintenance access, as
outlined in the most recent edition of The Vermont Storm Water
Management Manual.
d) Material dredged or otherwise removed hall be stored outside the
buffer or in accordance with BMP.
3) Stream restoration projects, facilities and activities approved by the
City of Winooski are permitted within the forest buffer.
4) Water quality monitoring and stream gauging are permitted within
the forest buffer as approved by the City of Winooski.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
10
5) Individual trees within the forest buffer may be removed which are
in danger of falling, causing damage to dwellings or other structures, or
causing blockage of the stream.
6) Other timber cutting techniques approved by the City of Winooski
may be undertaken within the forest buffer under the advice and
guidance of the State of Vermont, if necessary to preserve the forest
from extensive pest infestation, disease infestation, or threat from fire.
7) Forest buffer area may be allowed to grow into their vegetative
target state naturally, but methods to enhance the successional process
such as active reforestation may be used when deemed necessary by
the State of Vermont to ensure the preservation and propagation of the
buffer area.
SECTION 23.05.04.02 - BUFFER RESTRICTIONS
1) The following practices and activities are restricted within a
buffer, except with approval by the City of Winooski.
a) Clearing of existing vegetation
b) Soil disturbance by grading, stripping, or other practices
c) Filling or dumping
d) Drainage by ditching, underdrains, or other systems
e) Use, storage, or application of pesticides
f) Housing, grazing, or other maintenance of livestock
g) Storage or operation of motorized vehicles
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
11
ARTICLE V - SPECIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 23.06 - UNPERMITTED DISCHARGE EXCEPTIONS
A. The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any unpermitted
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as follows:
1. water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground
water, ground water infiltration to storm water drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing
drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial
washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land
flows, de-chlorinated swimming pools ( typically less than one PPM
chlorine level, firefighting activities, and any other water source not
containing pollutants.
2. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
3. Dye testing, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
ARTICLE VI - APPEALS AND SEVERABLITIY
SECTION 23.07 - VARIANCE, WAIVERS AND APPEALS
This ordinance shall apply to all proposed development.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
12
SECTION 23.07.01 - VARIANCES
A. The City may grant a variance for the following:
1. Those projects or activities where it can be demonstrated that
strict compliance with the ordinance would result in practical
difficulty or financial hardship.
2. Those projects or activities serving a public need where no
feasible alternative is available.
SECTION 23.07.02 - WAIVERS
A. Waivers for development may also be granted in two forms if
deemed appropriate by the City:
1. The buffer width may be relaxed and the buffer permitted to
become narrower at some points as long as the average width of
the buffer meets the minimum requirement.
2. The City of Winooski may offer credit for additional density
elsewhere on the site in compensation for the loss of developable
land due to the requirement of this ordinance.
SECTION 23.07.03 - APPEALS
Appeals of any provision provided herein will be made to the City Council.
SECTION 23.08 - SEVERABILITY
Where the standards and management requirement of this ordinance are in
conflict with other laws, regulations, and policies regarding streams, steep
slopes, erodible soils, wetlands, floodplains, timber harvesting, land
disturbance activities or other environmental protective measures, the more
restrictive shall apply.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 23 - Storm Water Management
13
ARTICLE VII - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER; PENALTIES
SECTION 23.09 - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
A. Any person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be served
by the City with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations. Failure to do so will result in criminal
or civil penalties as provided for in this chapter.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.
SECTION 23.10 - CIVIL ACTION
In additional to the enforcement authority set forth in this chapter, the City
shall have the right to institute civil action which it deems appropriate to
obtain injunctive or monetary relief.
SECTION 23.11 - PENALTIES
A. Any first (1st) or second (2nd) violation of this Chapter shall be a civil
violation and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for
in Chapter 1, Section1.11 of Winooski City Code.
B. All third (3rd) and subsequent violations of this Chapter will be a
criminal violation and subject to criminal penalties and enforcement as
provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of the Winooski City Code.
6711134_2:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
1
Chapter 24 - Water Use
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
An ordinance to establish authority necessary for the City of Winooski, County of
Chittenden, and State of Vermont to efficiently manage and operate the Water
System and to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, permits, rules,
regulations and requirements. This ordinance shall regulate the installation and use
of public and private water lines, service connections, water meters, fire hydrants,
valves and other existing or proposed water system components of the public water
system owned and/or managed by the City of Winooski, and provides penalties for
violations thereof.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Definitions and Abbreviations
Article IV Connections and Extensions of the Public Water System
24.2.1 Mandatory Connections
24.2.2 Water Mains and Extensions
24.2.3 Water Main Responsibility
24.2.4 Fire Hydrant Maintenance and Responsibility
24.2.5 Private Water Mains and Hydrants
Article V Building Water Service Connections
24.3.1 Permit Requirements
24.3.2 Allocations and Applications
24.3.3 Service Requirements
24.3.4 Costs for Connections
24.3.5 Meter Requirements
24.3.7 Additional Testing
24.3.8 Service Line Ownership
24.3.9 Water Allocation
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
2
Article VI General Provisions
24.4.1 Primary Use
24.4.2 Auxiliary Use
24.4.3 Hydrant Use
24.4.4 Emergency Rights
24.4.5 Protection from Losses
24.4.6 Protection from Damages
24.4.7 Water Quality Emergency
24.4.8 Private Fire Protection Charges
24.4.9 Water Conservation
24.4.10 Backflow Prevention and Inspection
24.4.11 Preexisting Private Water Supply Main Connections
to the Public Water Supply System
Article VII Protection from Damage
24.5.1 General
24.5.2 Motor Vehicle Damage to Fire Hydrants and Other
Water Appurtenances
24.5.3 Obstructions
24.5.4 Contamination
24.5.5 Unauthorized Hydrant Use
24.5.6 Water to Waste
24.5.7 Conservation Notices
24.5.8 Use of Water without Authority
24.5.9 Furnishing Water to Others
24.5.10 Surreptitious Use of Water
Article VIII Powers and Authorities of Inspectors
24.6.1 Authority to Enter
24.6.2 Liability
24.6.3 Water Use
24.6.4 Receipt of Water Responsibilities
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
3
Article IX Rates
24.7.1 Authority
24.7.2 New User Connection Fees
24.7.3 Fire Hydrant User Fee
24.7.4 Usage Fees
24.7.5 Connection and Disconnection Fees:
24.7.6 Excess Revenues
24.7.7 Billings and Payments:
24.7.8 Responsibility for Payment
24.7.9 Fire Sprinkler Systems
24.7.10 Modifications to Rates and Fees
24.7.11 CWD Connection Fees
24.7.12 New User Water Allocation Fee
24.7.13 New Construction Bills
24.7.14 Liens
Article X Water Disconnection for Delinquent Payment of Fees
Article XI Violation of Chapter; Penalties
24.8 General
24.9 Notice of Violation
24.10 Legal Action
24.11 Water Disconnection or Refusal of Service
24.12 Penalties
24.13 Civil Action
ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
Ordinance and any rules, regulations, standards or requirements promulgated
pursuant hereto shall be as follows:
BACKFLOW – shall mean the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of
water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of a
potable supply of water from any source or sources.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
4
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY- shall mean any effective assembly used to
prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly shall be based
on the existing or potential degree of hazard, and backflow condition.
CHAPTER 21- shall mean the current version of the State of Vermont Water Supply
Rule.
CONNECTION – shall mean that pipe connecting the water main with the premises
served.
CONNECTION FEE – shall mean the fee imposed on applicants which is based on the
City’s cost to fund upgrades, capital improvements and extensions to the water
system in order to maintain capacity for all connections. This shall include the cost
of performing work or services, supplying materials, supervising, inspecting and
administering a connection to the water system, including any water service
extension, upgrade of a water service, or for any portion of these activities as
deemed appropriate by the City.
CONTAMINANT – shall mean any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter in water.
CONTAMINATION – shall mean an impairment of the quality of water, which creates
an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of
disease by sewerage, industrial fluids, waste, etc.
CROSS CONNECTION – shall mean any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system and
any other source through which it is possible to introduce into any other part of the
potable water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than
the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements,
jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other
temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can
occur are considered to be cross connections.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
5
CURB STOP – shall mean the valve that typically terminates the City’s portion of the
service line normally located at the highway right-of-way or public water main rightof-
way and to which a building’s service line is connected to provide water service to
the user.
CUSTOMER CLASSIFICATIONS - shall mean:
Residential: includes private homes, duplexes, and apartment buildings.
Commercial: All businesses, non-profits, and larger users not further defined herein.
Industrial: manufacturing facilities.
Public: City properties, schools, and government
DEPARTMENT – shall mean the City of Winooski Public Works/Water Department or
its designee. In this ordinance Department and City of Winooski Public Works/Water
Department or its designee are interchangeable.
DEVELOPMENT WATER FLOW – shall mean the estimated flow calculated for any
given project using flow quantities adopted in Vermont Environmental Protection
Rules; “Chapter 21, Water Supply Rule”.
DIRECTOR - shall mean the City of Winooski Public Works Director or his designee.
The Director or his designee shall have the responsibility for the operation, control,
maintenance, improvement, and repair of the City water distribution system, its
appurtenances and all City property pertaining thereto, subject to the orders and
Ordinances of the City Council.
DISCONNECTION – shall mean the deliberate interruption of water service to the
user.
DISTRIBUTION MAIN (water main or main) – shall mean the primary supply pipe or
conduit from which service connections are made to supply the user, installed or
caused to be installed by the City for the delivery of water.
DISINFECTANT – shall mean any substance, including but not limited to chlorine,
chlorine dioxide, monochloramines, and ozone, which are intentionally added to
water in any part of the treatment or distribution process that is intended to kill or
inactivate pathogenic microorganisms.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
6
FIRE FLOW – shall mean the rate of flow, usually expressed in gallons per minute,
that can be delivered from a water distribution system at a specified residual
pressure for firefighting.
FIRE HYDRANT, PUBLIC – shall mean a fire hydrant installed by the City within public
rights-of-way, on City property or within an easement owned by the City, or installed
by a person other than the City which has been offered and accepted by the City,
which acceptance is documented by action of the City Council.
FIRE HYDRANT, PRIVATE – shall mean a fire hydrant not constructed by the City or
within the City public right-of-way, nor on City property or within an easement
owned by the City, or a hydrant that has not been accepted by the City.
FIRE SERVICE - shall mean the water service provided to a user for fire protection
systems or equipment installed on the property of the user, such as a fire sprinkler
system.
MANAGER – shall mean the City Manager of the City of Winooski, Vermont or his/her
authorized representative.
METER – shall mean an instrument installed to measure the volume and/or rate of
flow of water delivered through it.
METER FEE – shall mean that fee applied to owners or applicants to cover those
meter materials and labor provided with a water meter installation, including but not
limited to: water meter, remote reader, meter connections as appropriate, and
installation.
PATHOGENIC – shall mean a substance causing or capable of causing disease.
PEAK DEMAND – shall mean the maximum momentary load placed on a water
system.
POTABLE WATER – shall mean water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to
cause disease or harmful physiological effects with the bacteriological, chemical,
physical and radiological quality conforming to applicable regulations and standards
of the Safe Drinking Water Act administered by the State of Vermont, Water Supply
Division of the Department of Environmental Conservation.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
7
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM – shall mean a water system to which only the owner(s) of
the served properties have rights, other than supply from the City, and which are not
owned by the City.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM – shall mean a water system in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
REPLACEMENT – shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances, which are necessary during the useful life of the water
system to maintain capacity and performance.
RESIDENTIAL - shall mean water consumption consistent with common household
activities.
SAMPLING – shall mean the act or technique of selecting a representative part of the
water supply for testing.
SERVICE CONNECTION – shall mean each single water pipeline which provides water
to an individual residential living unit, a commercial unit or an industrial unit from the
public water system. The typical service connection shall start at the corporation stop
at the main water line and extend inside the building to the water meter. The service
connection on new construction shall be constructed by the applicant to approved
City standards. Once installed, the responsibility for maintenance and repairs on the
service connection is split at the curb stop between the owner/applicant and the City.
The City has responsibility for maintenance from the City owned water main to and
including the curb stop, which is normally located at the edge of the City right-ofway.
The owner/applicant has responsibility for maintenance and repairs from and
including the downstream side (outlet) of the curb stop to and inside the building
along with the shutoff valves on either side of the meter but not the meter. Service
connections on those water lines not owned by the City shall be the responsibility of
the premise owner or his designee unless otherwise agreed with the City.
STANDARD METHODS – shall mean methods for examination of water and
wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association or the Water Pollution Control Federation or
successor organizations.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
8
WATER ALLOCATION – shall mean that quantity of water available from the City
owned reserve capacity designated for a specific project or projects as requested by
a developer.
WATER DISTRICT - shall mean the Champlain Water District (CWD) or its appointed
representatives.
WATER MAIN – shall mean a pipeline used for the transmission of water to hydrants
and service connections, together with such appurtenant facilities as are necessary
for the proper operation of the main.
CITY WATER MAIN - shall mean a water main constructed by the City within public
rights-of-way, on City property or within an easement owned by the City, or a water
main constructed by a person other than the City which has been offered and
accepted by the City, which acceptance is documented by action of the City Council.
Any other water main in the City, which is not a CWD water main, shall be deemed a
private main for the purpose of this ordinance.
CWD WATER MAIN – shall mean a water main owned and controlled by CWD.
WATER SYSTEM – shall mean all water mains, and all equipment and appurtenances
which the City has or shall have possession and or operating responsibility for
(whether owned by the City or not) located within the City of Winooski service area
either now in existence or hereafter acquired or constructed, including extensions,
enlargements, and improvements thereto.
WET TAP – shall mean a connection made to a main that is full (live) or under
pressure.
ARTICLE IV - CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS OF THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
SECTION 24.2 - MANDATORY CONNECTIONS
The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy,
employment, education, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the
City, or outside the City in specific locations where City water is provided, or
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now or may in
the future be located a water line owned or operated by the City, is required
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
9
at his or her own expense to connect such property directly with the proper
City water line in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 24.2.2 - WATER MAINS AND EXTENSIONS
A. Extension of water service beyond the limit of the municipal system in
place at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall be done as part
of and to approved City standards and the standards of the Vermont
Environmental Protection Rules, "Chapter 21 - Water Supply Rule", and
subsequent amendments thereto.
B. No person shall construct a water line that is to be connected to a City
water main, without the prior, written approval of the Director. Direct
connections to a CWD water main require separate written approval by
CWD.
SECTION 24.2 - WATER MAIN RESPONSIBILTY
A. The Department shall be responsible for the maintenance of all City
water mains. The Department shall oversee the maintenance and
repair of private water mains at current rates for labor and material
that may be billed to the private water main owner.
B. The City may shut off the water for the purpose of extending,
replacing, repairing, or cleaning mains and appurtenances, and the City
or its representatives is not liable for any damages arising therefrom.
No claim shall be made against the City by reason of the breaking of
any service pipe or connection.
SECTION 24.2.4 - FIRE HYDRANT MAINTENANCE AND RESPONSIBILITY
The Department shall be responsible for the routine maintenance of all fire
hydrants in the City. Routine service shall include: flushing, lubricating, flow
testing, painting, winterization, and leak detection. If in the view of the City, a
private fire hydrant requires replacement or work beyond routine service
provided by the Department, the hydrant owner shall be responsible to
conduct such work at his own expense, and only after approval of the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
10
SECTION 24.2.5 - PRIVATE WATER MAINS AND HYDRANTS
A. All water lines and appurtenances not located in the City right-of-way
or public grounds shall be considered private pursuant to this ordinance
and others of the City.
B. All water mains and appurtenances located within an area so
designated as restricted or private by the developer shall be considered
private.
C. Water lines, hydrants, and appurtenances installed at the request of a
property owner in a location that none was originally planned or
intended shall be considered private, unless waived by the City Council.
D. The City may accept private water mains and/or hydrants, thereby
incorporating them into the City’s public water system. Such
acceptance(s) shall be duly recorded in writing and shall meet at least
the following requirements:
1. The transfer shall be perpetual in duration and shall be warranted
by the person making the transfer to be free from all
encumbrances or attendant liabilities, unless these are specified
in the City’s written document of acceptance.
2. Adequate easement(s) shall be given to the City.
3. The water mains and/or hydrants have been, or by the date of
the transfer will be, constructed to City standards, or the City
Council has granted a specific derogation from this requirement.
4. Be sufficiently restrictive to prevent the installation or
construction of improvements within the limits of the easement,
including landscaping improvements that would place an
unreasonable burden on the City when exercising its rights under
the easement.
5. The Department, having reviewed the mains and/or hydrants to
be transferred and the terms of acceptance, has recommended
acceptance to the City Council.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
11
ARTICLE V – BUILDING WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
SECTION 24.3.1 - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
A. Any party desiring water service connection with the City water system
shall make application or cause application to be made therefor on a form
provided by the City and file same accordingly with such fee as may be
established by the City.
B. All service connections shall be made in accordance with any conditions
stipulated with the permit issued for the connection, and in compliance
with all City and Department procedures, specifications, requirements and
fees.
C. New service connections will not be made between November 15 and April
1 of each year.
D. A new water service hookup fee shall be paid to the City at the time the
application is filed.
SECTION 24.3.2 - ALLOCATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
A. Any person proposing a new water allocation from the distribution system
or a substantial change in the volume from the system shall notify the
Department and CWD as early as possible, but not less than 90 days prior
to the proposed change or connection. No such change or connection shall
be made without written approval from the City as required in this
ordinance.
B. The allocation request shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information requested by the Department.
SECTION 24.3.3 - SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
Any building whose ownership is condominium-ized shall have either separate
meters for each unit, or a single meter for the entire building, as determined by
the City. Separate curb stops shall be provided for each unit with an individual
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
12
meter unless waived by the City. If separate curb stops for each unit are waived
for each unit, then separate shut-off valves for each unit in the building shall be
provided, and provisions shall be made in a condominium declaration allowing
access for the City to enter upon the premises for the purpose of shutting off
some or all of the water supply. Individual exemptions to this provision may be
granted by the City in writing. The Department may impose additional
requirements for the installation of building service connections.
SECTION 24.3.4 - COSTS FOR CONNECTIONS
All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building
water service connection shall be borne by the owner. Such installation shall be
in accordance with City specifications and shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the City. The property owner/agent is responsible and must provide
all necessary excavation from the main to the building or structure. The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the water service connection.
SECTION 24.3.5 - METER REQUIREMENTS
A. All service connections to the City water distribution system shall be
required to have water meter(s).
B. The cost of the meter and installation shall be borne by the owner
requesting service. The City shall not furnish water through any meter that
it neither owns nor has exclusive control, and to which it does not have full
access for meter reading, testing and maintenance. No person except as
authorized by the Department shall break or injure the seal or change the
location of, or alter or interfere with, any water meter.
C. In cases where the City determines that it is not feasible or in its best
interest to install individual meters for multiple units, the City may allow a
single meter to serve multiple units. The number of meters required shall
be determined solely by the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
13
D. Each meter installed shall be controlled by a curb stop directly associated
with the meter unless waived by the City. Water shall not be turned on or
off for a customer except by the City.
E. Additional meters for the purpose of identifying specific
commercial/industrial flows due to the subdivision of an existing building
may be installed if approved by City. Where such additional meters are to
be used by the City as a basis for billing, the City shall install the meters at
the owner’s expense and at current fees as approved by the City. Water
used through two or more meters upon the same premises, for the same
business, and to supply the same pipes used for a common supply, shall be
rated as passing through one meter; if used for separate pipes or for
different kinds of business, each meter shall be rated separately. In no
case, however, shall water be furnished to any meter for less than the
established minimum charge.
F. All persons or customers connected to the City’s public water distribution
system taking water shall keep all private fixtures and service pipe within
their own premises in good repair and fully protected from frost, and shall
prevent all unnecessary waste of water.
G. Water users must connect all fixtures supplied with water on their premises
through the meter.
H. Failure of a building owner to provide access to a water meter for repairs,
maintenance or upgrade, upon request by the City, shall be in violation of
this ordinance, and subject to water service disconnection.
I. Installed meters shall be tested upon a customer’s request at an additional
fee to the user. The customer shall be informed of this fee prior to the
removal of the meter for testing. The customer shall not be charged for a
meter test if the meter is found to be registering fast, outside of American
Water Works Association standards.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
14
SECTION 24.3.6 - ADDITIONAL TESTING
The City may require appropriate tests be conducted with respect to the pipes and
appurtenances, and the owner or owner’s agent shall furnish all necessary tools,
labor, materials, and assistance for such tests, and shall remove or repair any
defective materials when so ordered by the City. Such tests and actions required
based on the tests shall be at the owner’s expense. The Department reserves the
right to demand any unmetered use, whether intentional or unintentional, to be
corrected within a reasonable period of time. The Department may issue an
estimated bill for unmetered water to the owner.
SECTION 24.3.7 - SERVICE LINE OWNERSHIP
A. The City owns and has responsibility for maintenance from the City owned
main line to and including the curb stop, which is normally located at the edge
of or within the City right-of-way. Only a City employee may operate, repair,
replace, remove, or modify these items. The owner/applicant has
responsibility for maintenance and repairs from and including the downstream
side (outlet) of the curb stop to and inside the building, along with the shutoff
valves on either side of the meter but not the meter, and for all internal
plumbing.
B. Water service lines that have only a tapping valve connected to a City owned
water main, controlling the flow of water through the line to the premises,
shall only be owned and maintained by the Department up to and including
the tapping valve. All costs associated with the repair and maintenance
beyond the tapping valve, including the downstream connection at the tapping
valve, even if the line is located within the City right-of-way, shall be borne by
the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person other than those authorized by the City to
turn water on or off at the curb stop or gate valve.
D. The City shall have the right to enter and inspect the water system within any
facility connected to the City’s public water distribution system in the event of
an emergency, inoperable meter, or when there is reasonable cause to
suspect that there has been unauthorized tampering with water system
appurtenances or components owned or controlled by the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
15
E. A person, other than an authorized agent or employee of the City, who
maliciously opens, closes, breaks into or in any manner adjusts or interferes
with a meter, or other regulating or measuring device or appliance attached to
or connected with wires, pipe lines, mains, service pipes or house pipes owned
by the City shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to those
conditions stated in 13 V.S.A. § 3784.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 13 V.S.A. § 3784
SECTION 24.3.8 - WATER ALLOCATION
A. Ownership of Capacity
1. The City of Winooski owns the water distribution system and utilizes the
CWD water storage system within the City as defined in this ordinance and
CWD policies. The City is obligated to comply with conditions put forth by
the Department of Environmental Conservation Water Supply Division as it
relates to water distribution and water storage requirements.
2. The capacity of the City of Winooski’s water distribution and storage
system is the property of the City of Winooski.
B. Reserve Capacity Allocation Requests
1. All allocations to projects shall be based on the water demands of the
proposed development. Any differential between actual demands and
requested demands is not available for reallocation for another project
or for project expansion.
2. Persons seeking an allocation of uncommitted water reserve capacity
of less than 1,000 gpd shall apply to the City for an allocation on an
authorized form. Persons seeking an allocation of uncommitted water
reserve capacity of more than 1,000 gpd shall apply to the City for a
preliminary allocation on an authorized form prepared and certified by a
Vermont registered engineer.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
16
Such applications shall:
a) Be accompanied by a calculation of the development water
demand to be generated by the project/development
following VT Water Supply Rule requirements; and
b) Include any other information requested by staff or the City.
The City reserves the right to require a Vermont registered engineer
prepare the authorized form for any allocation request, at the customer’s
expense.
3. An application may be denied if it is deemed to be incomplete. All
staff decisions may be appealed by the applicant to the City Council.
The City Council reserves the right to deny any application for any
reason whatsoever in its sole discretion, in accordance with applicable
law.
C. Preliminary Allocation Determination
1. Upon receipt of an application for water allocation with supportive
documents, the City shall make a preliminary determination regarding
allocation of uncommitted reserve capacity. The City shall issue a
preliminary allocation upon making affirmative findings that there is
sufficient water reserve capacity, as of the date of the application, to
accommodate the water supply demand for the proposed development.
Supporting documents for this section shall include a description of the
land development for which allocation is sought, together with written
confirmation from the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designee
indicating that 1) the applicant has submitted to the Department of
Planning and Zoning a land development project proposal in sufficient
detail for the Department of Planning and Zoning to determine whether the
proposal is viable under the current zoning regulations and 2) the land
development project as proposed generally appears to be viable under said
regulations, subject to certain approvals.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
17
2. A preliminary determination by the City for water allocation capacity shall
not constitute a binding commitment of capacity to the applicant and may
be revoked by the City Council at its sole discretion. A preliminary
determination that a proposed development has sufficient water capacity
available may be used by the applicant to proceed through the
development review process.
D. Final Capacity Allocation
1. An applicant who holds a preliminary water allocation of capacity may
apply for a final application upon occurrence of the following:
a. Obtained site plan, conditional use and/or variance approval(s), if
such approvals are the only approvals, except a zoning permit,
required for the proposed development under City zoning and
subdivision regulations then in effect; or
b. Obtained final approval for a subdivision, Planned Unit Development
or Planned Residential Development if such approvals are the only
approvals, except a zoning permit, required for the proposed
development under City zoning and subdivision regulations then in
effect; or
c. Obtained all approvals required under subsection a and b above, if
such approvals are required for the proposed development under
City zoning and subdivision regulations then in effect; or
d. No approvals are required under City zoning and subdivision
regulations then in effect.
The request shall be accompanied with payment for the full amount of the
allocation requested.
2. Upon receipt of an application for a final water allocation, the City shall
grant a final allocation upon determination that: the applicant has a
preliminary allocation, which has not been revoked; one of the
requirements in subsection (1) above has been met; sufficient uncommitted
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
18
reserve capacity is available for the development; and that all required
fees have been received.
3. A grant of final allocation shall constitute a binding commitment of water
capacity to the applicant subject to the applicant’s compliance with any
requirements imposed on such allocation. The final allocation shall specify
the allowed volume and any other characteristics determined appropriate
by the City. Upon the issuance of final allocation, the allocation shall
continue for a period of three years from the date of issuance of allocation
or complete build out of the project, whichever comes first. The City may
allow a period longer than three years if a developer so requests in writing
and the City determines that the three year initial time period is not a
realistic time within which to expect connection to the municipal water
system. At any point during the initial three year time period an applicant
may also request an extension of up to three additional years. Unused
allocations are not eligible for refunds. Any pre-existing water allocation
granted prior to the date of this Ordinance shall have three years from the
date of this Ordinance to utilize said allocations or the allocations shall
expire.
4. A water capacity allocation is not transferable to any other person or
development, except a successor in interest of the development for which
the allocation has been granted.
E. Expiration of Allocation
1. A final water capacity allocation shall expire: 1) on the date that any
approval required for grant of the final allocation expires unless the
applicant has obtained an extension for the development and
demonstrated significant progress toward the completion of the project for
which the zoning permit has been granted; or 2) when the meter serving
the project has been installed, whether or not the project is fully occupied,
and any metered usage is obtained.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, for developments
which an applicant has obtained a portion of the water allocation, the
remaining portion of the final allocation shall expire three (3) years from
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
19
the date of issuance of the final allocation, unless extended as provided
below.
a. The applicant may, depending on the volume of the approved
allocation, apply to the City to extend the capacity allocation for one
period of three (3) years from the date of expiration of the original
final allocation provided that the application extension is filed prior
to the expiration date of the original final allocation, and the
applicant requesting the extension has been working diligently to
complete the project.
b. Upon expiration of the final allocation, approved extension, or any
portion thereof, the remaining capacity shall revert to the City.
There shall be no refund on fees paid for the unused or reverted
allocation.
c. In all cases, design allocations shall be considered expired when the
project is complete and a history of metered usage can be utilized to
establish usual demands of the project.
d. In the event the project is not built within the approved time period,
and all allocation fees have been paid, the customer may be
refunded the paid allocation fees less a 1.27% administrative fee.
3. The City shall strive to review and approve projects on a first come, first
served basis. The City retains the right to review applications on other
than a first come, first served basis if the City deems such action is in the
City’s best interest. The City may attach conditions related to the water
infrastructure (e.g. line improvements, future tie-in provisions, etc.) to
allocation approvals to achieve the goals and policies of the City, the cost
of which shall be borne by the applicant. The City also reserves the right to
deny applications for any reason at their sole discretion, consistent with
applicable law.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
20
4. All customers shall request a change in use whenever there will be a
permanent “substantial change increase” in water volume use from an
existing connection. A substantial change increase is defined as:
a. Equivalent to one (1) gallon less than the flow quantities established
in the current edition of the Vermont Water Supply Rule, Standard
Flow Quantities, required for a single dwelling, or
b. Greater than fifty percent (50%) of the historical use registered on
the meter for normal billing over a three year period or a. above,
whichever is less, or
c. The conversion of an existing single family home to multiple
occupancy residential, mixed use, commercial, retail, or industrial
structure, or
d. The conversion of a commercial or industrial unit to one that differs
from the original approval.
ARTICLE VI - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 24.4.1 - PRIMARY USE
The primary uses of the public water supply system shall be for the supply of
potable water to all connected users for domestic consumption and fire
protection for structures within the area served by the public water supply
system.
SECTION 24.4.2 - AUXILIARY USE
Auxiliary use of the public water system, such as using hydrants to fill private
swimming pools, and the like, shall only be permitted when such uses are
approved by the City and not in conflict with the primary uses. Flooding
private ice rinks from hydrants is not permitted as an auxiliary use.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
21
SECTION 24.4.3 - HYDRANT USE
A. Except for hydrant use by Fire Departments in fighting fires or
practicing for firefighting, or Department use, use of hydrants in the
City shall require prior written approval and issuance of a fire hydrant
use permit by the City. The fee for hydrant use is as set forth by the
Board. Water drawn from any fire hydrant shall be considered nonpotable
and therefore not normally used for human consumption
without further testing and/or treatment.
B. Hydrant permit holders shall be financially responsible for the damage
to any hydrant, meter, gate valve, or backflow device, caused by the
permit holder or their agent’s failure to protect said equipment during
use. The hydrant permit holder shall also be financially responsible for
the loss of said equipment.
SECTION 24.4.4 - EMERGENCY RIGHTS
A. In the event of an emergency the City shall have the right to:
1. Temporarily cut off water supply in order to make necessary repairs,
connections, etc. Except in the cases of emergency repairs the City
shall provide notification of the interruption, by flyers, web postings
or other ways, whenever practical and feasible. Notice is to be
considered a courtesy only, and not a requirement on the part of the
City. In the case of a break in a pipeline, water may be shut off
without notice, to perform emergency repairs. No refund will be
allowed to customers for the temporary suspension of supply under
any circumstance.
2. Reserve sufficient supply of water at all times in storage tanks to
provide for fires or other emergencies, and restrict and regulate the
quantity of water used by customers in case of scarcity or whenever
the public welfare may require such restriction or regulation.
3. Prescribe any temporary regulations as necessitated by emergency
conditions.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
22
SECTION 24.4.5 - PROTECTION FROM LOSSES
The City shall not be liable for any injury, loss or damage of whatever nature
occasioned by the failure to maintain a constant uniform pressure within the
water mains, leakage of hydrants, pipes, or other appurtenances or for
damages occasioned by or growing out of a stoppage of said water by frost or
other causes, or for damage occasioned by or growing out of an insufficient
supply of the same, or for accident or damage of any kind caused by or
growing out of the use or failure of said water. The City shall not be liable for
leakage of pipes or fixtures upon the premises of the user, nor for any
obstructions therein by frost or otherwise, nor for any damages resulting from
any of the foregoing causes.
SECTION 24.4.6 - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES
The City shall not be responsible for damage caused by dirty water, which
may be occasioned by the cleaning of pipes or the opening and closing of gate
valves or hydrants, when said work is done with reasonable care on the part
of the City.
SECTION 24.4.7 - WATER QUALITY EMERGENCY
In case of a water quality emergency, the City in accordance with the Water
Supply Rules shall notify the consumer immediately. While the City is
ultimately responsible for water quality to the “last tap” on the municipal
system, the “last tap” shall be considered the last point on the system where
water enters into a building and is registered at a water meter. Credit shall
not be issued for the minimal use of water that is not fit for consumption by
human or animal. Water quality notices shall be lifted only after the
requirements of the Water Supply Rule have been achieved.
SECTION 24.4.8 - PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION CHARGES
The City shall maintain a listing on file of private fire hydrants and fire
services. Private water mains and businesses within the City water system
with fire hydrants, or fire sprinkler services may be billed annually as
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
23
determined by the City. A Private Fire Hydrant charge may be imposed in
order to defer costs associated with the routine maintenance and testing costs
incurred by the Department; similar to a service contract. Costs associated
with damages and charges outside of routine maintenance are billed to the
private hydrant owner. The fire service charge relates to potential unmetered
water use through a fire sprinkler system. The fire service and private hydrant
charges shall be established or revised from time to time by resolution of the
City.
SECTION 24.4.9 - WATER CONSERVATION
A. Upon finding by the City, Champlain Water District, or the Vermont
Department of Environmental Conservation, Water Supply Division, that
there exists an actual, potential or anticipated threat to potability,
sufficiency, quality, quantity or integrity of the City’s water distribution or
supply system, the City may direct one or more of the following water
conservation measures for all consumers on the water distribution system:
1. A voluntary conservation request seeking the restriction, curtailment or
cessation of non-essential water use, including but not limited to motor
vehicle washing, lawn, garden and landscaping watering, street and
exterior building cleaning, filling swimming pools, agricultural irrigation,
and industrial processing.
2. A prohibition against certain activities, including motor vehicle washing,
lawn, garden and landscaping watering, street and exterior building
cleaning, filling swimming pools, agricultural irrigation, and industrial
processing. This prohibition does not apply to commercial enterprises
or watering of food crops or trees.
3. An emergency water conservation notice prohibiting the use of water
for certain activities, including motor vehicle washing, lawn, garden and
landscaping watering, street and exterior building cleaning, filling
swimming pools, agricultural irrigation, and industrial processing, and/or
limiting the quantity of water to be used on any premises directly or
indirectly connected to the City’s water distribution system.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
24
4. A mandatory water conservation order prohibiting the use of water for
any purpose other than to prevent an immediate and serious health
hazard.
B. Notice of any water conservation method adopted under this Section shall
be disseminated immediately through the local media and other reliable
sources, and shall be posted conspicuously in all areas served by the City’s
public water supply system. In addition, such notice may be served upon
the occupants of all commercial and industrial premises connected directly
or indirectly to the City’s water distribution system.
C. Any person who shall violate any water conservation measure set forth in
this Section shall be deemed to have committed a civil offense, and shall
be subject to penalties established in this Ordinance.
SECTION 24.4.10 - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND INSPECTION
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be approved or allowed
to remain in service if in the opinion of the City the water supply is not
protected as required by the most recent version of this Ordinance, the
“City of Winooski Cross Connection Control Policy,” and applicable State
Laws. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued if an
approved backflow prevention device cannot be installed, tested and
maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been
removed, by-passed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected.
B. The most current version of the “City of Winooski Cross Connection Control
Policy” shall define further requirements for the protection of the City’s
water distribution system from cross connections.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
25
SECTION 24.4.11 - PREEXISTING WATER SUPPLY MAIN CONNECTIONS TO THE
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
The City’s responsibility for private water mains terminates at the main line or
shut off valve to the private water system. The City assumes no responsibility for
water line maintenance, operational checks, line breaks or other similar items of
work in connection with these mains.
ARTICLE VII - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
SECTION 24.5.1 - GENERAL
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment,
which is part of the Pub1ic Water System. No fire hydrant, gate valve, curb
stop, stand pipe or other water appurtenance shall be tampered with or
opened or closed by any person except City authorized persons.
SECTION 24.5.2 - MOTOR VEHICLE DAMAGE TO FIRE HYDRANTS AND OTHER
WATER APPURTENANCES
Owners or operators of motor vehicles will be held responsible for the actual
repair or replacement costs of any hydrant, blow off, or water appurtenance
damaged by a motor vehicle. The City will not be responsible for any damage
to a motor vehicle or injury by reason of such accident.
SECTION 24.5.3 – OBSTRUCTIONS
No person shall in any way interfere or obstruct access to any valves, curb
stops, fire hydrants, or other appurtenances within the City water distribution
system. No person shall adjust, open, close, alter or perform any operations
of valves, hydrants, or any other parts of the water system without
permission of the City. No person shall remove, carry off, or in any way injure
or interfere or meddle with any fire hydrant, gate valve, valve box, tool,
apparatus, fixture, building, machinery, or fence, belonging to the City or
connected to the City water distribution system.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
26
SECTION 24.5.4 - CONTAMINATION
It shall be unlawful to cause or have caused the deliberate or unintentional
contamination of publicly owned water mains or water supply.
SECTION 24.5.5 - UNAUTHORIZED HYDRANT USE
A. No unauthorized use of any fire hydrant within the City of Winooski
shall be permitted. Any person or firm found to be in violation of this
Section may, at the City’s discretion, be charged for a minimum water
use fee and the hydrant hook on fee.
B. Any person who without lawful authority tampers or interferes with a
main, hydrant, gate or other fire protection apparatus of the municipal
water system or with the fire protection apparatus of a private water
system used for municipal purposes shall be fined or imprisoned in
accordance with 13 V.S.A. § 3729.
Statutory Cross-Reference: 13 V.S.A. § 3729.
SECTION 24.5.6 - WATER TO WASTE
No person or entity shall knowingly permit water to run through any fixture
that results in wasteful consumption. When instances are noted or found by
the City, such persons or entity shall be notified in writing and provided up to
30 days to complete any necessary repairs. If the person or entity refuses to
cooperate in conducting repairs, the City, at its discretion, may turn off water
or take such other action as in its judgment appears proper. Water losses that
occur on the premises, which are registered by the water meter, shall be the
responsibility of the customer. Any leaks or other losses of water registered
by the meter will be billed at water and wastewater rates in place at the time
of billing.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
27
SECTION 24.5.7 - CONSERVATION NOTICES
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any customer to violate a City of
Winooski conservation notice or order.
SECTION 24.5.8 - USE OF WATER WITHOUT AUTHORITY
It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any premise without the
consent of the owner, or to use water from the City system, except to be
drawn through a meter installed as stated within this Ordinance, without the
consent of the City.
SECTION 24.5.9 - FURNISHING WATER TO OTHERS
No consumer, except with the prior written consent of the City, will be allowed
to furnish water to other persons or premises by means of permanent or
temporary service lines, hoses, and the like. Violations of this requirement
may result in the water service supply to the customer be shut off, in the
discretion of the City.
SECTION 24.5.10 - SUREPTITIOUS USE OF WATER
A. When the City has reasonable evidence that a customer is obtaining his
water supply, in whole or in part, by means of devices or methods used
to stop or interfere with the proper metering of the water being
delivered to his equipment, the City reserves the right to estimate and
present immediately a bill for service unmetered as a result of such
interference and such bill shall be payable subject to a 24-hour
disconnection of service. When the City has disconnected for any such
reason, the City will reconnect the customer upon the following
conditions:
1. The customer will be required to deposit with the City an amount
sufficient to guarantee the payment of the customer’s bill for
water service from the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
28
2. The customer will be required to pay the City for any and all
damages to its equipment on the customer’s premises due to
such stoppage or interferences with its metering.
3. The customer must further agree to comply with reasonable
requirements to protect the City against further or future losses.
ARTICLE VIII - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
SECTION 24.6.1 - AUTHORITY TO ENTER
The Director, Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall have access to all premises
served by the City water distribution system at all reasonable hours during any
day of the week, except State and Federal holidays and Sundays (unless and
emergency is believed to exist by the City) with reasonable notice to the
building owner, resident or occupant for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing and maintenance in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. All entry and subsequent
work on those properties through which the City holds an easement shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the
private property involved. If a property owner, resident or occupant denies
the City or its agents access after reasonable notice has been provided to the
property owner, resident or occupant, the City may direct disconnection on
forty-eight (48) hours written notice of such disconnection to the owner,
resident or occupant. Once water service has been disconnected it will not be
restored until access has been provided and the City has been paid all
applicable water charges.
SECTION 24.6.2 - LIABILITY
While performing any necessary work on private property, the duly authorized
employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the owner or tenant, and the owner or tenant shall be held
harmless for accidental injury or death to the City employees. City employees
or authorized agents of the City shall indemnify the owner or tenant against
liability claims and demands for injury of property damage except as may be
caused by negligence or failure of the owner or tenant to maintain safe
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
29
premises or conditions, including conduct of agents or employees of the owner
or agent, as applicable.
SECTION 24.6.3 - WATER USE
The City shall have the authority to inquire into any private, commercial or
industrial processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
paper or other uses beyond the water meter or backflow prevention device
that may, in the City’s sole opinion, have a direct bearing on providing safe,
potable water supply to its users.
SECTION 24.6.4 - RECEIPT OF WATER RESPONSIBILITIES
Any person who applies for and/or receives water from the City under this
Ordinance shall be deemed to have consented to inspection pursuant to this
Ordinance, including entrance upon the person’s premises as defined herein.
ARTICLE IX - RATES
SECTION 24.7.1 - AUTHORITY
The City Council shall have the authority to establish rates, including hookup
fees, hydrant use fees, user fees, turn-on/shut-off fees, and other similar fees
to defray the costs of planning, design, construction, operations and
maintenance of the system. The rates shall be established by resolution at an
open meeting of the City Council. The rates and fees may be revised by the
City on an as-needed basis, and the rates in force shall be those most recently
adopted by the City.
Cross-Reference: Winooski City Charter, 24A V.S.A. § 19-304.
SECTION 24.7.2 - NEW USER CONNECTION FEES
All new users shall pay a service connection fee at the time of submittal of the
application for water service. The water service application fee is a two-part
fee comprised of a service connection fee and a water meter installation fee.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
30
The service connection fee defrays the City’s past, current and future costs,
both direct and indirect, of providing potable water and water for fire
protection to the customer. The water meter installation fee covers the costs
of installing a water meter based on time and material.
SECTION 24.7.3 - FIRE HYDRANT USER FEE
A. A fire hydrant user fee shall be paid by all users, (excluding fire
departments while fighting or practicing the fighting of fires) for use of
any fire hydrant within the City’s distribution system at the time of
submittal of the application for fire hydrant use. In addition to payment
of the fire hydrant user fee, the applicant shall be responsible for
payment of normal user fees for all water taken from the fire hydrant.
All fire hydrant use must be completed during normal Department
working hours so as to allow adequate time for shut down and retrieval
of the meter as stated herein. Fire hydrant use in excess of the
standard one-day period may be approved by the City if such use is
determined not to be in conflict with any Article of this Ordinance.
B. Any outstanding balance due for water charges from a requesting
individual or firm shall be paid in full prior to connecting a hydrant
meter to any fire hydrant within the City.
SECTION 24.7.4 - USAGE FEES
A. A user fee shall be paid by all users of the City’s water system based
upon the multiplied product of their metered usage, and a water
rate/1000 cubic feet as set by the City, except as set forth below:
1. There shall be a minimum water usage fee for each individual
account equivalent to 500 cubic feet per billing cycle.
2. The minimum use fee reflects the fact that all users of the system
receive some level of fire protection in addition to the benefit of
potable water. This charge is also based in part of the significant
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
31
portion of water system expenses that are independent of actual
customer usage.
B. This fee is payable whether or not water is physically turned on or off to
the facility at the meter during part or all of the billing period, provided
the service connection is physically connected to the mainline. Water
service termination at the curb stop needs to be arranged with the City
or a minimum quarterly bill will be assessed. No abatement of water
bills or minimum fees will be allowed by reason of disuse, diminished
use, or vacancy of premises without proper notice to the Department,
and water service termination at the curb stop.
C. Any account that has been finalized between regular billing cycle
readings shall be billed for the larger of: the actual metered usage, the
estimated usage, or the minimum charge for the billing period, when 45
days or more have occurred since the last reading. For readings less
than 45 days apart, no water usage charge shall be applied unless
actual usage is 100 cubic feet or more. The City Clerk may adjust final
water bills on a case-by-case basis.
SECTION 24.7.5 - CONNECTION AND DISCONNECTION FEES
There shall be connections and disconnection fees as determined by the City
Council for turning on and shutting off water at the curb stop. These fees
shall be charged in all cases except when it is determined that there is a
problem with the service connection between the curb stop and the main line,
a leak between the curb stop and meter, or a problem with the meter or meter
connection fittings. Customers who require emergency service after regular
working hours (7AM-3PM regular work days), including turn-off and turn-on of
curb stops, shall be responsible for overtime charges rather than the standard
service charge. Fees for services associated with delinquency disconnects
shall not exceed the maximum allowed under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 129, Uniform
Water and Sewer Disconnect. The property owner shall own and be
responsible for all problems between the curb stop (split at the middle of the
curb stop) and the building with exception of the meter itself, which is the
City’s responsibility. When multiple service calls are required for a single
repair, each call shall be billed individually.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
32
SECTION 24.7.6 - EXCESS REVENUES
Excess revenues shall be placed into a reserve fund, accessible specifically for
costs for water system improvements, repairs and management, capital
equipment purchases, debt retirement, or other water department expenses
as approved by the City Council, pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Chapter 89.
SECTION 24.7.7 - BILLINGS AND PAYMENTS
A. Water charges will be invoiced quarterly to all residential and
commercial accounts. Water charges shall be payable on or before the
30th day following the date of the invoice or a later date as shown on
the invoice. In the event that such charge is not paid when due, a onetime
penalty of eight percent (8%) shall be applied and interest of one
percent (1%) shall be imposed by the City per month after the first thirty
(30) days of delinquency and monthly thereafter until the invoice is
paid. If any account shall remain delinquent, the City may also take
action that is consistent with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. Chapter 129,
Uniform Water and Sewer Disconnect, as presently constituted and as
amended from time to time, to obtain payment of delinquent charges
or to discontinue water service. Such charges shall be a lien upon the
real estate as provided in 24 V.S.A. § 3306 and 32 V.S.A. § 5061.
B. New water connections made during a billing period shall be billed on
the following basis:
1. The billing shall be the larger of the actual metered billing, the
estimated usage, or the minimum charge for the billing period.
2. Notwithstanding the above, the City may adjust new water
connection water bills on a case-by-case basis.
C. Should any meter become inoperative between readings, upon
investigation and discretion of the City, the customer shall be billed at
the average amount of the preceding two quarters that the meter
recorded correctly, or the previous year’s same quarter or an average
as determined by the City.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
33
SECTION 24.7.8 - RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT
A. In consideration of water service supplied by the City, all property
owners are responsible for payment of bills rendered for water used by
the owner, their tenants, successors in tenancy or in ownership, and all
other operations at the specified location, unless and until proper notice
is given to the City of termination of service on a specific date. The
property owner shall abide by all rules and regulations established by
the City consistent with enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
B. All water charges will be billed to the owner of record of the facility(s)
served, unless waived by the City. Although another person may pay
the service rate, the owner of the premises shall ultimately be held
responsible for such fees. In the event that all charges are not paid on
a timely basis, the owner of record will be solely responsible for all
penalties, fees, interest and delinquent charges. Each time a bad check
is received for payment of a water bill the account shall be charged a
returned check fee as established by and as may be modified from time
to time by the City Council in addition to any other penalties. Failure to
receive a bill does not relieve the owner of the obligation for payment
or for the payment of penalties.
SECTION 24.7.9 - FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Each structure served by a fire suppression system (sprinklers) may be subject
to an annual fee for each sprinkler line served by the public water system, as
determined by the City.
SECTION 24.7.10 - MODIFICATIONS TO RATES AND FEES
Rates and fees may be modified by the City Council and established by
resolution on an as needed basis, and the rates in force shall be those most
recently adopted by the City Council.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
34
SECTION 24.7.11 - CWD CONNECTION FEES
The City’s residential and commercial service application fee shall be assessed
to each building that has applied for a tap to a CWD owned transmission main,
in addition to any connection charges levied by CWD. In addition, all other
rates and fees shall apply as outlined in this Ordinance.
SECTION 24.7.12 - NEW USER WATER ALLOCATION FEE
For all new growth and those requesting an increase in water allocation, there
will be a one-time charge to be assessed at time of approval. The fee will be
as prescribed by Ordinance.
SECTION 24.7.13 - NEW CONSTRUCTION BILLS
In the case of new construction, the Department shall read the water meter at
the time of closing. This reading shall be used as the “final reading” for real
estate transfers involving the new premises, when the information is
requested in advance by either party for their real estate closing.
SECTION 24.7.14 - LIENS
By accepting water service from the City, the customer, his transferees,
successors, and assignees, together with any record lien holders of customer,
agree that a lien applied by the Department shall have priority over all liens
allowed by law.
ARTICLE X - WATER DISCONNECTIONS FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENT OF FEES
The City of Winooski is permitted by State law to disconnect water services to
ratepayers as a collection procedure for delinquent water and/or sewer bills or
charges (24 V.S.A. § 5151) but may only do so in accordance with the
conditions and provisions as set out in 24 V.S.A. Chapter 129.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
35
ARTICLE XI - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER; PENALTIES
SECTION 24.8 - GENERAL
Any person violating any provision if this Chapter, any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant hereto or who is liable to the City for any costs it incurs
as a result of such violation, including without limitation, the costs incurred by
the City for any corrective actions or measures and the fines or penalties
incurred by the City, shall be liable for any legal costs, including attorney fees,
incurred by the City by reason of such violation or liability, including without
limitation, the costs by the City to collect from such person any amounts due
under this ordinance, this section, or the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to this Chapter.
SECTION 24.9 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION
The City shall provide any person found to be in violation any provision of this
ordinance with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time period for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, correct the violation or
be subject to criminal or civil penalties as provided for by law.
SECTION 24.10 - LEGAL ACTION
The City may commence and/or maintain any action at law or equity to
enforce any provision of this ordinance, or a rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to this ordinance. Such actions may include, without limitation, the
seeking of preliminary, temporary or permanent injunctive relief and/or the
seeking of damages.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 24 – Water Use
36
SECTION 24.11 - WATER DISCONNECTION OR REFUSAL OF SERVICE
A. Service may be disconnected or refused for any of the following
reasons:
1. Failure to pay a delinquent account or comply with the terms of a
Payment Agreement as defined in Article IX.
2. Violation of the City’s rules, regulations and policies pertaining to
the use of service in such a manner which interferes with the
service of others or to the operation of nonstandard equipment,
if the customer has first been notified and provided reasonable
opportunity to remedy the situation as stated herein.
3. Diversion of service around the meter, or removal of the meter
and the installation of a non-measurable device.
SECTION 24.12 - PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, or allowed by law, a violation of this Chapter shall be
a civil violation and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for
in Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of Winooski City Code.
SECTION 24.13 - CIVIL ACTION
In additional to the enforcement authority set forth above, the City shall have
the right to institute civil action which it deems appropriate to obtain
injunctive or monetary relief.
6710477_2:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 25 – Reserved
1
Chapter 25 - Reserved
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
1
Chapter 26 - Event Permits and Regulations
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
To maintain order, protect property, and support the safety and welfare of the
public, the City of Winooski requires certain events conducted on City property to be
regulated. This Chapter includes provisions for obtaining approval of certain events
held within the City of Winooski and contains special regulation and enforcement
standards for these events.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III General
Section 26.01 Definitions
Section 26.02 Fees
Article IV Regulations
Section 26.03 General Provisions
Section 26.04 License for Alcohol
Article V Permits
Section 26.05 Permits Required
Section 26.06 Application
Section 26.07 Standards for Issuance.
Section 26.08 Applicant to be Notified of Permit Application
Refusal; Appeal
Section 26.09 Liability of Permittee
Section 26.10 Permits to be Produced Upon Request
Section 26.11 Revocation of Permit
Article IV Penalties
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
2
ARTICLE III - GENERAL
SECTION 26.01 - DEFINITIONS
CITY RIGHT OF WAY – Shall mean any and all City property including streets,
sidewalks, and parks.
EVENT – is defined to include any public gathering using or affecting any city
street, sidewalk, park, publically owned building or office, places of public
access, or public place to which the public is invited, including, without
limitation, parades, festivals, concerts, trade shows, walks, runs, bicycle rides,
sporting events, and similar activities.
LICENSE - The word “license” or “licensed” as used in this Chapter shall mean a
license granted by the City Council.
PARK - is defined to include all recreation facilities and lands regarding which
the City of Winooski holds a legal interest for open space and recreation use,
whether such lands are developed or undeveloped. “Park” includes, but is not
limited to, playgrounds, open spaces, conservation areas, recreation and
bicycle paths, trails, beaches, pathways, as well as public parks. “Park” shall
also include property regarding which another person holds a legal interest
and at such time provides the City Council with written authority to regulate
conduct on such property and the Council by resolution accepts said authority.
Recreation and bicycle paths shall not include roadways identified by the City
as “bicycle routes” where a bicycle path or lane is not specifically defined on
such roadway.
PERSON - as used in this Ordinance shall mean and include any person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCESS - means any place of business, commerce, banking,
financial service, or other service-related activity, whether publicly or
privately owned and whether operated for profit or not, to which the general
public has access or which the general public uses, including buildings, offices,
means of transportation, common carrier waiting rooms, arcades, restaurants,
bars and cabarets, retail stores, grocery stores, salons, laundromats, shopping
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
3
malls, museums, art galleries, nursing homes, hospitals, resorts, hotels and
motels, including the lobbies, hallways, elevators, restaurants, restrooms and
cafeterias.
PUBLIC PLACE - public place shall mean any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place
shall also include but not be limited to any store, shop, bowling alley, cafe,
theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other place devoted
to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the
front or immediate areas of the above. For the purposes of this chapter, no
licensed establishment that sells malt, spirituous or alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises shall be considered as public.
PUBLICLY OWNED BUILDINGS AND OFFICES - publicly owned buildings and
offices means enclosed indoor places or portions of such places owned,
leased, or rented by state, county, or municipal governments, or by agencies
supported by appropriation of, or by contracts or grants from, funds derived
from the collection of federal, state, county, or municipal taxes.
SIDEWALK - shall mean that improved portion of a street between the curb
lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended
for the use, or routinely used, by pedestrians.
SECTION 26.02 - FEES
Permit fees for all events regulated in this chapter are described below and
summarized in Chapter 28 of Winooski Municipal Code. All fees must be paid
to the City at the time of permit issuance.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
4
ARTICLE IV - REGULATIONS
SECTION 26.03 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. All applicants requesting an event permit shall submit the event permit
application to the City no less than thirty (30) days prior to the event if
the anticipated attendance will exceed two hundred (200) people or if
the event will require closure of City streets for any period of time. For
all other events the event permit application may be submitted no less
than five (5) business days prior to the event.
B. Any event with anticipated attendance of more than two hundred (200)
people or that will require closure of City streets for any period of time
shall require approval by the City Council.
C. No musical instrument, phonograph, sound-making device or sound
producing system or vocal activity shall exceed 100 decibels as
recorded from the curb line outside of the permitted space, or a
reasonable distance from the sound-producing activity, as applicable.
D. The City reserves the right to establish any additional restrictions that
may be necessary, in its sole opinion, to protect the health, safety or
welfare of the public.
E. All permits required will be subject to all conditions imposed at the time
of issuance, to include the requirement that the applicant be
responsible for any and all costs associated with the approved event
unless otherwise specified.
SECTION 26.03.01 - PERMITS RESTRICTED
The City Council may, if it finds it to be in the best interest of the City,
restrict the number of permits issued under the provisions of this chapter.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
5
SECTION 26.04 - LICENSE FOR ALCOHOL
A. Licensing for any event requesting to sell alcohol shall be as set forth in
Statute as described in Chapter 5 of the Winooski City Code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of
alcoholic beverages or consume any alcoholic beverages on City
property, except for where the City has approved a permit and the
distribution and consumption of alcohol are managed by a person
licensed by the State of Vermont as set forth in Statute.
ARTICLE IV - PERMITS
SECTION 26.05 - PERMITS REQUIRED
A permit is required for the use of City streets, sidewalks, buildings, and parks,
and places of public access for any event. It shall be a standard condition of
each permit that the applicant shall comply with all City ordinances and
regulations, and all applicable State and Federal laws.
SECTION 26.06 - APPLICATION
A person seeking issuance of a permit required by this chapter shall file an
application with the City on forms provided by the City.
SECTION 26.07 - STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE
The City shall issue a permit required by this article when it finds:
1. That the proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the general public’s use of the space;
2. That the proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, and safety;
3. That the proposed event is not unreasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
6
4. That the proposed event will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense by the City;
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application;
6. That all City obligations for which the applicant is responsible have
been satisfied, including, but not limited to, all taxes, utility bills or
fines levied by the City for violations of City Ordinances; and
7. That the event permit application is complete and does not contain
any material misrepresentation.
No change to layout or conditions approved in the permit will be made without
prior written approval from the City.
SECTION 26.08 - APPLICANT TO BE NOTIFIED OF PERMIT APPLICATION
REFUSAL; APPEAL
For events not requiring City Council approval, the City shall apprise an
applicant in writing of its reasons for refusing a permit within five (5) business
days after the receipt of an application. Any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal in writing within two (2) business days to the City Manager
which shall consider the application under the standards set forth in this
chapter and sustain or overrule the decision. The decision of the City Manager
shall be final. For events requiring City Council approval as set forth in this
chapter, the decision of City Council shall be final.
SECTION 26.09 - LIABILITY OF PERMITTEE
The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or
injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the
person to whom such permit shall have been issued.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 26 – Event Permits and Regulations
7
SECTION 26.10 - PERMITS TO BE PRODUCED UPON REQUEST
No person shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the City they claim
to have upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the
same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
SECTION 26.11 - REVOCATION OF PERMIT
The City shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of a
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown, including, but
not limited to, the following:
1. The owner of the permit is in violation of any ordinance or law, or any
other condition of the permit;
2. The owner of the permit has misrepresented or failed to disclose any
material information on the application; and/or
3. The activities governed by the permit have resulted in any increase in
disturbances on the premises or in the immediate vicinity of the
premises, in the sole opinion of the City.
ARTICLE V – PENALTIES
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this Chapter shall be a civil violation and
subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1.11
of Winooski City Code.
6711186_2:10780-00007
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 27 – Reserved
1
Chapter 27 - Reserved
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
Chapter 28 - Fees
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
Pursuant to Section§ 19-401 of the Charter of the City of Winooski, this Chapter of Ordinance shall be
adopted to (1) provide for a fine or other penalty for violation of City ordinance; (2) regulate the rate
charged for municipal water, sewer, and utility services; and (3) establish other fees.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Fees
Section 28.01 Building Permits
Section 28.02 City Clerk’s Office
Section 28.03 Code Enforcement
Section 28.04 Community Services and Recreation Programs
Section 28.05 Event and Facility Fees
Section 28.06 Police Department
Section 28.07 Rental Rates for Equipment
Section 28.08 Street Department
Section 28.09 Water Rate and Fee Schedule
Section 28.10 Zoning Fees
ARTICLE II. FEES
SECTION 28.01. BUILDING PERMITS
Building Permits Maintenance of existing fence/porch/roof (residential only): $35.00
Up to $15,000.00 (cost of construction): $75.00
$15,001 to $30,000: Residential = $100 plus $.10/sq. ft.; Commercial = $100
plus $.12/sq. ft. (square foot charge based on area under construction)
$30,001 to $80,000: Residential = $150 plus $.10/sq. ft.; Commercial = $150
plus $.12/sq. ft.
$80,001 to $175,000: Residential = $250 plus $.10/sq. ft.; Commercial = $250
plus $.12/sq. ft.
$175,001 to $325,000: Residential = $500 plus $.10/sq. ft.; Commercial = $500
plus $.12/sq. ft.
Greater than $325,001: Residential = $750 plus $.10/sq. ft.; Commercial = $750
plus $.12/sq. ft.
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
SECTION 28.02. CITY CLERK’S OFFICE
Trash Hauler License $60 + $35 per truck
Peddler's Fee $600 per year.
Itinerant Vendor Fee $1,200 within designated downtown
$ 800 on gateway corridors outside downtown
Entertainment Permit $25/night with max of $175 annually
Entertainment permits are blanket permits issued for a year.
Restaurant License $25/year
Sidewalk Usage Fee $2.00/sq ft
Chicken Permit $10/year
8 Chickens
*Section 3.09B of Ordinance
Beehive Permit $10/year
*Section 3.09B of Ordinance
Domestic Quadraped $10/year/animal
*Section 3.09B of Ordinance
Dog Licenses Before Apr 1
$9.00 (s/n) - $13.00 (non s/n) + State fees per Statute
After Apr 1 late fee added per State Statute
Marriage License $60 ($50 + $10 for certified copy) State fee per Statute
Certified Copies of Vital Records $10
Fax Fee In-state: $4.00 for the first page, .75 for each additional
page
Out-state: $5.00 for the first page, $1.00 for each additional
page
Recording Fees/Property Transfer
Return
Follow State Statute Title 32 V.S.A. §1671
Title Search/Copy Fees $4.00/hour and $1.00/page
SECTION 28.03. CODE ENFORCEMENT
Four Year Certificate of Fitness and Registry Application Fee - Pursuant to Section 17.01-
17.08, the Registration and Inspection of all rental dwelling units including attached units subject
to Minimum Housing Standards will be required in order to issue a (4) Four Year Certificate of
Fitness. To comply with the Minimum Housing Standards Inspection Program the property owner
shall file the Registry Application each year and pay an annual fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per unit. The fees are due by April 1st, of the programmed year.
Re-inspection Fee for Noncompliance After 90 days - Re-inspections for noncompliance to
Minimum Housing Standards, and re-inspections for Certificates issued for less than the four (4)
year cycle shall be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling units each time
they are inspected until they obtain a (4) year Certificate of Fitness except when an extension
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
or variance has been granted in writing from the City.
Time of Sale or out of Cycle Inspections - Inspection of properties for "Real estate"
transactions or inspections requested for properties with current COF shall be one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) per unit.
Commercial Properties
A. Certificate of Fitness:
Category I: under 2000 square feet $100.00/per year
Category II: 2,001-10,000 square feet $250.00/per year
Category III: 10,001-100,000 square feet $500.00/per year
Category IV high hazard/service station $1,000.00/per year
Category V industrial, manufacturing $1,250.00/per year
B. Multi-unit buildings: buildings having a common roof, common corridors, storage
areas, exits, fire doors, fire alarms, and sprinkler systems, and which may include
separate businesses, recreational areas, parking lots, and related premises, will
undergo an annual inspection for the common area. All common areas inspected
yearly with a random percentage of units inspected on a 4-year cycle. Other
residential uses such as Inn, Boarding Housing Student Housing and Hotels with
common areas shall apply based on number of units and mix uses.
Less than or equal to 10 units $50.00 per unit
More than 10 units $25.00 per unit
Annual inspection of common areas, fire protection systems,
and garages/parking areas
$300.00
SECTION 28.04. COMMUNITY SERVICES AND RECREATION
Garden Plots
Landry 15 x 7 ($35)
15 x 15 ($50)
OCC 4 x 10 ($10)
West Street 15 x 7 ($35)
15 x 15 ($50)
Senior Center 4 x 10 ($10)
15 x 7 ($35)
15 x 15 ($50)
Thrive Afterschool Established annually by City Council Resolution.
Thrive Summer Established annually by City Council Resolution.
Thrive Vacation camps Established annually by City Council Resolution.
Myers Memorial Pool Fees
Family Season Pass (Resident) $120.00
Family Season Pass (Non-Resident) $150.00
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
Adult Season Pass (Resident) $60.00
Adult Season Pass (Non-Resident) $75.00
Youth Season Pass (Resident) $45.00
Youth Season Pass (Non-Resident) $56.00
Senior (55+) Season Pass (Resident) $45.00
Senior (55+) Season Pass (Non-
Resident) $56.00
Adult Day Pass (Resident) $6.00
Adult Day Pass (Non-Resident) $7.00
Youth Day Pass (Resident) $4.00
Youth Day Pass (Non-Resident) $5.00
Senior Day Pass (Resident) $4.00
Senior Day Pass (Non-Resident) $5.00
Hourly Rate for Pool Rental (Camp
Group)
$90.00/hour for up to 20 participants
$25.00/hour for 1 to 20 additional participants
Hourly Rate for Pool Rental (Resident)
$100.00/hour for up to 20 participants
$25.00/hour for 1 to 20 additional participants
Hourly Rate for Pool Rental (Non-
Resident)
$125.00/hour for up to 20 participants
$25.00/hour for 1 to 20 additional participants
Myers Pool Community Room Rental
(Resident) $25.00/hour
Myers Pool Community Room Rental
(Non-Resident) $50.00/hour
Myers Pool Community Room Rental
(Agency/Other) $50.00/hour
Partner Programs Fees set by Partner Agency
Library Overdue fees
N/A (replacement fee for lost/damaged material based on
cost of material)
Library copy fees $0.10/page
Fees for Community Services and Recreation Programs not otherwise codified in this Chapter shall be
determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 28.05. EVENT AND FACILITY FEES
Street Closure
Winooski Falls Way Street Closure $500/day
Block Party – Residential Street Closure $50/day
Facility Rentals
Casavant – Meadow $200/day
River Walk $150/day
Rotary Park $200/day
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
Richards Park $25/day
Gilbrook Natural Area $150/day
Landry Park $150/day
Landry Park Baseball Field
2 hours $25 (resident)
$50 (non-resident/agency)
4 hours $50 (resident)
$100 (non-resident/agency)
All Day
$100 (resident) + $25/team for
tournament
$200 (non-resident/agency) + $25/team
for tournament
Light Usage $25/use
Senior center member $5/hr
Winooski Resident $25/hr
Non-Resident $50/hr
501(c)3 Non Profit $50/hr
College/University $50/hr
Other $50/hr
Senior Center - additional Kitchen Use Fee
Senior center member $5/hr
Winooski Resident $10/hr
Non-Resident $15/hr
501(c)3 Non Profit $15/hr
College/University $15/hr
Other $15/hr
SECTION 28.06. POLICE DEPARTMENT
Crash Report $15.00
FOIA/Public Records Request $1 per page/ Free under 10 pages
DUI/DVD $40.00
Alarms N/A
Fingerprinting $25 per session
Animal Control
Impoundment Fee
1st $25.00
2nd $50.00
3rd $75.00
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
Kennel $10 per day
Running at Large
1st $150.00
2nd $250.00
3rd Court max and min set by statute
Nuisance including noise, dog waste
and property damage
1st $150.00
2nd $250.00
3rd Court max and min set by statute
Animal Ordinance Waiver Fees
1st offense waiver - $50.00
2nd offense waiver- $75.00
3rd offense waiver - $100.00
4th or more waiver - $200.00
SECTION 28.07. RENTAL RATES FOR EQUIPMENT
The City uses the most recent FEMA “Schedule of Equipment Rates.”
SECTION 28.08. STREET DEPARTMENT
Paving $25.00 (requires staff inspection)
Tap into City Sewer Main $300
Tap into City Storm Sewer $300
Street excavation
$15.05/sf (not to exceed $2,500 for sewer
related excavation)
Greenbelt Excavation $2.38/sf
Excess Weight Permit $5/single $10/fleet
SECTION 28.09. WATER RATE AND FEE SCHEDULE
Wastewater charge
Set annually by the City Council as part of
the budget process
Metered water usage charge
Set annually by the City Council as part of
the budget process
Industrial Wastewater charge
Set from time to time by City Council
Resolution
Fire hydrant user fee $200.00
Damaged water meter replacement charge
(5/8" or 5/8" x3/4" meter)
$210.00
Meter test fee $100.00
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
Interim or final meter reading $35.00
Off/on (non-delinquent) $25 workday /$37.50 after hours
Off/on (delinquent) per statute
Water connection fee-residential
Single family home (3/4" or 1" tap) $1,000.00
Multi-family dwelling (each individual unit) $1,000.00
Water connection fee-commercial
Single commercial unit $3,000.00
Multi-commercial (per unit) $3,00 0.00
Multi-commercial (one meter) $3,000.00
New Water Allocation Fee
$4.16/gallon (Increases annually on July 1,
by Construction Cost Index for previous 12
months)
New Wastewater Allocation Fee
$7.32/gallon (Increases annually on July 1,
by Construction Cost Index for previous 12
months)
SECTION 28.10. ZONING & LAND DEVELOPMENT FEES
Zoning: Administrative Permit
(does not include recording fees – see
Section 28.02)
Residential = $100.00 plus $.10 sqft (single
fam/duplex) $.12 multifamily >duplex
Commercial = $100.00 plus $.15 sqft
Gateways/Mixed Use = $100.00 plus $.25 sqft
multifamily & commercial (no DRB)
Change of Use in an existing structure from one
permitted use to another permitted use = $75.00
DRB: Residential $150
DRB: Non-Residential $175
DRB: Mixed Use $175
DRB: Appeal $100 Residential
$150 Commercial
$150 Mixed Use
DRB: Public Meeting Warning $250
Property File Review and Bianchi Report $100 (plus recording fee)
RUSH Property File Review and Bianchi
Report (less than 5 business days)
$150 (plus recording fee)
Site Plan Review Up to $50k = $200 (plus recording fee(s) plus
Public Warning)
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 28 – Fees
$50k and up = $300 (plus recording fee(s) plus
Public Warning)
Sub Division/Planned Unit Development Each of first 2 lots/units = $300 (plus recording
fee(s) plus Public Warning)
Each Lot/unit #3-9 = $150 (plus recording fee(s)
plus Public Warning)
Each Lot/unit #10 plus $125 (plus recording fee(s)
plus Public Warning)
Demolition Permit $100 (Staff time to assure ANR/testing is
complete, Recycle laws)
Street Space Amenities (as required in the
Unified Land Use and Development
Regulations)
Establish annually by City Council Resolution
Sign Permit Sign (new) = $75 plus recording fee(s)
Swimming Pool Swimming pool = $75 plus recording fee(s)
Deck/Patio or accessory structure (no other
alterations to existing structures)
$75 plus recording fee(s)
Approved: XXXXX
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
1
Chapter 29 - Trees
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance is to promote, protect, and enhance public health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Winooski (hereafter referred
to as “City”) by providing a mechanism for governing the planting, maintenance,
protection, and removal of trees on public streets, parks, and city-owned properties.
ARTICLE II - TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Definitions
Article IV Authority
Article V Applicable Regulations
Article VI Administrative Responsibilities
Section 29.01 Tree Advisory Committee
Section 29.02 Tree Warden
Article VII Provisions for Tree Management
Section 29.03 Public Tree Planting
Section 29.04 Public Tree Maintenance and Protection
Section 29.05 Public Tree Removal
Section 29.06 Control of Hazardous Trees and Trees Infected with a Pest or Pathogen
Article VIII Penalties
ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS
Certified Arborist: A person certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture as having specialized knowledge, experience, and training related
to arboriculture.
Diseased Tree: Any tree with a combination of structural defects and/or a
health condition which make it subject to a high probability of failure
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
2
Hazardous Tree: Any tree with visibly defined structural defects likely to cause
failure of all or part of the tree and be a danger to public safety
Public Tree: All trees on City-owned property including by not limited to: The
Public Right of Way and public parks.
Public Right of Way: The public “Right of Way” (ROW) is an area of land owned
or controlled by the City for the purposes of constructing, operating, and
maintaining transportation routes such as highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
medians, bike paths, etc. The ROW is measured from the centerline of the
aforementioned routes and varies by street. This information is available at the
Department of Public Works.
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) - The diameter of tree trunks measured at a
height 4.5 feet from finished grade at the base of the tree.
Private Tree: Any tree located on private property. If the majority of a tree
trunk at DBH is on private property, it will be deemed a Private Tree.
Street Tree: Any tree located on either side of a transportation route and within
the designated Right of Way. If the majority of a tree trunk at DBH is within the
right-of-way it will be deemed a street tree.
Tree: Any woody plant together with its root system growing upon the earth
with one trunk at least two inches in diameter at a height of four and one-half
feet above the ground, or a multi-stemmed trunk system with a definitelyformed
crown.
ARTICLE IV - AUTHORITY
The City Council shall appoint a Tree Warden, under 24 V.S.A. § 871. The Tree
Warden may appoint a Deputy Tree Warden, under 24 V.S.A. § 2505. With
oversight from the City, the Tree Warden will have control and authority over
all trees and plants and the right to plant, maintain, protect, and remove
vegetation on City-owned lands. When possible, the appointed Tree Warden
should have training and/or experience in forestry, horticulture, or a closelyrelated
field. When necessary, the Director of the Department of Public Works
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
3
will serve as Tree Warden.
ARTICLE V - APPLICABLE REGULATIONS
The Winooski Municipal Code and the Uniform Land Use and Development
Regulations both contain provisions related to the care of Public trees. In
addition, the Department of Public Works maintains a Public Works
Standards and Specifications document that provides details on tree planting,
maintenance, and removal.
ARTICLE VI - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBLITIES
SECTION 29.01 - TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The City Council may appoint a Tree Advisory Committee for specific purposes
related to urban tree management. In general, the Committee shall facilitate
the implementation of the Winooski public tree management plan and revise
the plan as needed to support its mission to 1) protect and enhance the vigor of
Winooski’s urban forest, and 2) educate the public about the importance of this
work and develop opportunities to get involved. In concert with City staff or
partner agencies, the Committee may apply for grants to accomplish goals
established in the Urban Tree Management Plan. A subcommittee of the Public
Works Commission may be formed to facilitate the implementation of the Plan
during such times that a formal Tree Advisory Committee cannot be
established or appointed by the City Council.
SECTION 29.02 - TREE WARDEN
The Tree Warden (see Authority above) shall have complete power and
authority over all Public Trees planted and growing, or hereafter to be planted
and grown, on City-owned or managed land, including Public Right of Ways.
The Tree Warden shall have all powers granted under 24 V.S.A. Chapter 67 or
successor provisions. He or she may refer violations of this ordinance or that
chapter to the City Attorney or State’s Attorney for prosecution. The Tree
Warden will advise the Tree Advisory Committee or acting Public Works
Commission Tree Committee and any other departments or regulatory boards
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
4
of the City in matters of tree health, care and maintenance as needed. All
activities performed and taken by the Tree Warden will be reported to the
Tree Advisory Committee and/or Public Works Commission.
ARTICLE VII PROVISIONS FOR TREE MANAGEMENT
The City retains the right to plant, maintain, protect, and remove Public Trees
as may be
necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve and enhance the symmetry
and beauty of City property, in accordance with the following guidelines:
SECTION 29.03 - PUBLIC TREE PLANTING
i. No tree shall be planted on City-owned property including Public Right of
Ways unless approved by the Tree Warden, who reserves the right to
prescribe planting specifications including but not limited to how trees will
be planted, at what distance apart, and of what variety.
ii. All Public Trees shall be planted in accordance with the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations, or
most current version.
iii. The Tree Warden will be consulted on the selection of any outside firm
contracted to plant Public Trees in the City, and that firm must retain a
Certified Arborist on their staff.
iv. All Public Trees shall be selected from the most up to date version of the
“Vermont Tree Selection Guide” published by the Vermont Urban and
Community Forestry Program. This can be downloaded at
www.vtcommunityforestry.org.
v. Public Trees should be sited based on above and below ground conditions.
Minimum planting offsets for various infrastructure are as follows:
a. Light standard - 18 feet
b. Utility pole: 10-18 feet depending on cross arm size
c. Hydrant: 15 feet
d. Driveway: 10 feet
e. Crosswalk: 5 feet
f. Transformer/connection box: 6 feet
g. Underground utility connection: 15 feet
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
5
h. Street sign: 6 feet
Exceptions may be granted only with approval from the Tree Warden or
Public Works Director. A written request for an exception from the abovelisted
requirements will be responded to within 30-days of receipt. Dig Safe
must inspect the site prior to digging.
vi. All newly-planted Public Trees are required to carry a one-year
maintenance and replacement guarantee
SECTION 29.04 - PUBLIC TREE MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION
i. No Public Tree shall be cut or removed without the written permission of the
Tree Warden. The Tree Warden will be consulted before performing any tree
pruning or maintenance work.
ii. All Public Tree care shall be performed in accordance with ANSI A300
Standards for Tree Care operations.
iii. The Tree Warden will be consulted prior to the selection of any outside firm
contracted to prune or maintain Public Trees in the City, and that firm must
retain a Certified Arborist on their staff.
iv. Any construction on City-owned land within 10 lateral feet of a Public Tree
canopy drip line requires consultation with the Tree Warden, who will be
consulted for specific written requirements for the protection of the tree.
SECTION 29.05 - PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL
i. In accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 2502, the Tree Warden may remove any
Public, Hazardous Tree that is deemed a danger to public safety or threaten
the effectiveness of disease or insect control programs.
ii. If in the opinion of the Tree Warden, a Public Tree constitutes no hazard to
public safety and is determined to be healthy but needs to be removed, then
the Tree Warden will warn a public hearing in accordance with 24 V.S.A. §
2509.
iii. Two weeks before the scheduled removal of the tree the public will be notified
via the Tree Advisory Committee meeting and/or paper of record and a sign
will be posted on the Public Tree of the proposed action to be taken and the
Public Hearing time, date, and place.
iv. Anyone contesting the removal of a Public Tree must do so to the Tree
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
6
Warden between the time of posting the tree removal notice and the
hearing, at the hearing or within 24 hours of the decision having been
made. After informing the Tree Warden, a written appeal must be submitted
within two weeks to the Tree Warden and the City Council. The Tree Warden
will notify the appellant by certified mail of the hearing with the Tree Advisory
Committee; the decision of the Tree Advisory Committee will be final.
v. A no net loss policy of Public Trees will be maintained in the City. When a
Public Tree is removed the Tree Warden will approve a replacement tree with
at least 2” caliper tree planted in accordance with section V1. a. The
replacement tree must be planted to within two years of the Public Tree
removal date.
SECTION 29.06 - CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS TREES AND TREES INFECTED
WITH A PEST OR PATHOGEN
i. It shall be the responsibility of any person owning property bordering Cityowned
land or Public Right of Way to ensure that Private trees that are
dead, diseased, or injured do not pose an unreasonable risk of property
damage or bodily injury.
ii. In consultation with the Tree Warden, the City may remove or cause to be
removed any Public or Private Tree or part thereof which is hazardous or
which by reason of its nature is injurious to public safety, City
infrastructure or other public improvements, or is affected with any
injurious disease, insect, or other pest, in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 2511.
In such cases that the Tree Warden determines with reasonable certainty
upon inspection or examination that any hazardous tree herein defined
exists in or upon any private premises within the City, and may damage or
cause injury in the City ROW, he/she shall notify the owner of such premises,
or their agent, in writing that said hazardous tree must be treated, trimmed,
removed, or otherwise abated. Said written notice shall specify the nature
and exact location of the hazardous tree, the manner in which the hazard
shall be abated, and the time-limited in which the hazard shall be abated
which shall not be less than sixty (60) days after issuance of said notice
unless the Tree Warden shall determine that immediate action is necessary
for public safety. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such
provision, the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge
the owner for the cost of removal.
ARTICLE VIII - PENALTIES
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 29 – Trees
7
Unless otherwise stated, any violation of this chapter shall be a civil
violation and subject to civil penalties and enforcement as provided for in
Chapter 1, Section 1.11 of Winooski City Code
Winooski Municipal Code
Chapter 30 – Emergency Ordinances
1
Chapter 30 – Emergency Ordinances
ARTICLE I – PURPOSE
Pursuant to Section 19-403 of the Charter of the City of Winooski, this Chapter is
adopted to document any emergency ordinances promulgated by the City Council
from time to time.
ARTICLE II – TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I Purpose
Article II Table of Contents
Article III Emergency Ordinances
Section 30.01 COVID-19 Pandemic: Municipal Charges and Property Tax Relief
ARTICLE III – EMERGENCY ORDINANCES
SECTION 30.01. COVID-19 PANDEMIC: MUNICIPAL CHARGES AND PROPERTY TAX
RELIEF
A. A state of emergency exists throughout the State of Vermont, pursuant to
Executive Order 01-20 issued by the Governor of the State of Vermont and
dated March 13, 2020, and supplemented by Addenda issued since that date.
The state of emergency was declared to address the spread of COVID-19
throughout the State, including in the City of Winooski. The measures required
by the Executive Order and its Addenda have disrupted the business and civic
life of the City, and may have significant financial repercussions for some
taxpayers in the City.
B. To assist those residents whose ability to pay municipal charges have been
impaired as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures
imposed to limit or halt it, the following provisions are hereby adopted:
1) All penalty and interest payments on late water and sewer charges from FY20
Quarter 4 due June 15, 2020 will not start accruing until July 15, 2020, 30 days
from the extended due date.
2) Utility disconnections will be suspended this period for late water and sewer
charges due June 15, 2020.
C. This Ordinance shall be effective upon enactment. As required by Charter §19-
403, this Ordinance shall expire as of midnight on the 31st day following the
date of its enactment. The date of enactment is June 15, 2020.
CITY OF WINOOSKI, VERMONT
UNIFIED LAND USE & DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
August 7, 2017
DRAFT APPROVED BY PLANNING COMMISSION – JANUARY 14, 2016
RECEIVED BY CITY COUNCIL: JANUARY 19, 2016
AMENDED: MAY 20, 2016
AMENDED BY PLANNING COMMISSION: APRIL 27, 2017
RECEIVED BY CITY COUNCIL: JUNE 19, 2017
AMENDED: JULY 17, 2017
EFFECTIVE: AUGUST 7, 2017
Prepared for the Winooski City Council and the Residents of Winooski, VT
By the Winooski Planning Commission
Amendment History:
• Section 7.400 Affordable Senior Housing District [1990]
• Section 5.200 Central Business Transitional District, C-3 [1993]
• Interim Land Development Regulation for Downtown Core District [2002, 2004]
• Downtown Core District, DCD [2005]
• Interim Land Development Regulation for the C-2 General Commercial District [2003, 2009]
• Inundation Hazard Area Regulation [2010]
• Interim Land Development Regulation to Change Minimum Off-Street Parking Schedule in the
Downtown Core District [2011]
• Amendments & Revisions pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §4412 and 4413 [2012]
• Section 8.404 b Changes, Non-Conforming Uses and Non-Conforming Structures [2012]
• Re-zoned East Allen, Mallets Bay and Main St as the Gateway Districts using Form Based Code, and re-organized
and updated the entire Zoning Regulations into a Unified Land Use & Development Regulations with the
exception of the Downtown Core District [2016]
• Amendments & Revisions pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §4412 and 4413 [2017]
• “Other” category added to use table (Section 2.4)
• Delete Section 4.4 D. and references to Vermont Division of Historic Preservation from Section 4.4 E.1.
• Add Nonconforming Right of Way or Drive to Section 4.9
• Amend Bonus Story provisions in Form Based Code Section 402.F.
2 Unified Land Use & Development Regulations | City of Winooski
City of Winooski
Unified Land Use & Development Regulation
Unified Land Use & Development Regulations ........................................................................................................................................ 1
Article I – AUTHORITY & PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................................................. 6
SECTION 1.1 ENACTMENT ...................................................................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 1.2 PURPOSE ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 1.3 APPLICATION & INTERPRETATION .................................................................................................................................... 6
SECTION 1.4 BYLAW AMENDMENTS ...................................................................................................................................................... 7
SECTION 1.5 SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................................................................................... 7
ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS .................................................................................................................................................................. 8
SECTION 2.1 ZONING MAP .................................................................................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.2 LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS .......................................................................................................... 8
SECTION 2.3 APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................................................. 8
SECTION 2.4 LAND USE TABLE ......................................................................................................................... 9
SECTION 2.5 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE ......................................................................................... 12
SECTION 2.6 RESIDENTIAL A, ‘ R-A’ ............................................................................................................. 13
SECTION 2.7 RESIDENTIAL B, ‘ R-B’ ...................................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 2.8 RESIDENTIAL C, “ R-C” ................................................................................................................. 13
SECTION 2.9 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT , “C-1” ........................................................................................... 13
SECTION 2.10 GENERAL COMMERCIAL, “ C-2” ...................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 2.11 DOWNTOWN CORE, “ DC” ..................................................................................................... 14
SECTION 2.12 GATEWAY DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................. 14
SECTION 2.13 INDUSTRIAL, “I” ............................................................................................................................ 15
SECTION 2.14 PUBLIC, “P” ................................................................................................................................... 15
SECTION 2.15 FLOOD HAZARD AREA, “FHA” ................................................................................................ 15
ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS ............................................................................................................................................... 16
SECTION 4.1 ABANDONMENT, STABILIZATION & DEMOLITION ....................................................................... 16
SECTION 4.2 ACCESS, DRIVEWAYS, ROADS AND CIRCULATION ....................................................................... 16
SECTION 4.3 CONVERSION OR CHANGE OF USE ............................................................................................ 20
SECTION 4.4 DESIGN REVIEW ..................................................................................................................... 21
SECTION 4.5 EQUAL TREATMENT OF HOUSING ................................................................................................. 22
SECTION 4.6 FENCES & WALLS .................................................................................................................... 22
CONTENTS
3 Unified Land Use & Development Regulations | City of Winooski
SECTION 4.7 LANDSCAPING & SCREENING ........................................................................................................ 23
SECTION 4.8 NATURAL RESOURCE AND OPEN SPACE .................................................................................... 24
SECTION 4.9 NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES......................................................................... 26
SECTION 4.10 OUTDOOR LIGHTING .................................................................................................................. 28
SECTION 4.11 OUTDOOR STORAGE, MECHANICAL AND UTILITY EQUIPMENT ..................................................... 29
SECTION 4.12 PARKING, LOADING AND SERVICE AREAS .................................................................................... 29
SECTION 4.13 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ................................................................................................... 34
SECTION 4.14 SIGNS ........................................................................................................................................ 35
SECTION 4.15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL............................................................... 39
SECTION 4.16 UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE & PUBLIC FACILIITES .......................................................................... 41
ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS.................................................................................................................................................... 43
SECTION 5.1 ACCESSORY DWELLING ................................................................................................................ 43
SECTION 5.2 DAY CARE FACILITY (HOME CHILD CARE, DAY CARE FACILITY) .................................................. 43
SECTION 5.3 FILLING OR REMOVAL WITH EARTH PRODUCTS ....................................................................... 43
SECTION 5.4 GARAGE SALES ....................................................................................................................... 44
SECTION 5.5 GAS STATION AND FUEL SALES ............................................................................................... 44
SECTION 5.6 GROUP, BOARDING AND RESIDENTIAL CARE HOMES ............................................................ 44
SECTION 5.7 HOME OCCUPATION ............................................................................................................... 44
SECTION 5.8 MOBILE HOME PARK .............................................................................................................. 45
SECTION 5.9 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL USES ........................................................................................... 45
SECTION 5.10 PROTECTED USES, PUBLIC FACILITY ............................................................................................ 46
SECTION 5.11 SWIMMING POOLS ................................................................................................................ 46
SECTION 5.12 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .......................................................................................................... 46
SECTION 5.13 VEHICLE SERVICE & SALES .......................................................................................................... 47
ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES ............................................................................................................................... 48
SECTION 6.1 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING ........................................................................................................ 49
SECTION 6.2 SUBDIVISIONS ............................................................................................................................ 49
SECTION 6.3 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ................................................................................. 62
SECTION 6.4 REVISIONS TO EXISTING LOT LINES .............................................................................................. 64
SECTION 6.5 SITE PLANS, CONDITIONAL USE & VARIANCES .............................................................................. 65
SECTION 6.6 SITE PLAN REVIEW ................................................................................................................. 68
SECTION 6.7 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW .......................................................................................................... 71
SECTION 6.8 WAIVERS & VARIANCE REVIEW .................................................................................................... 73
SECTION 6.9 APPEALS ..................................................................................................................................... 74
4 Unified Land Use & Development Regulations | City of Winooski
SECTION 6.10 ZONING PERMITS ...................................................................................................................... 76
SECTION 6.11 EFFECTIVE DATES AND PERMIT RENEWALS ................................................................................. 77
SECTION 6.12 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE ........................................................................... 78
SECTION 6.13 EXEMPTIONS ........................................................................................................................ 80
ARTICLE VII – VIOLATIONS & ENFORCEMENT .......................................................................................................................................... 82
ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION .............................................................................................................................................................. 83
Article IX - DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................................................................... 87
ARTICLE X OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS
Map 1 Zoning Map
Map 2 Regulating Plan (for Gateway District)
Map 3 Regulated Flood Hazard Areas
APPENDIX
Appendix A Inundation Hazard Area Regulations
Appendix B Gateway Districts Form Based Code Regulations
Appendix C Downtown Core Regulations
Figures 1 – 9 were developed by Site Concern Inc., Landscape Architects + Planners for the City of Winooski in
1993. Funded by a Planning Grant from Vermont Department of Housing & Community Affairs.
Appendix B Gateway Districts Form Based Code Regulations were developed by Ferrell Madden with Dreher
Design Associates, Inc. and Urban Advantage in 2015. Funded through a grant from the Federal Highway
Administration (FHA), and administered by the Chittenden County Regional Planning Commission, and City of
Winooski match.
5 Unified Land Use & Development Regulations | City of Winooski
SECTION 1.1 ENACTMENT
A. In accordance with the Vermont Planning and Development Act (24 VSA Chapter 117), hereinafter referred to as “the
Act,” there is hereby established a unified bylaw to govern land use and development in the City of Winooski, VT. This
bylaw shall be known as the “Unified Land Use and Development Regulations”, referred to herein as “the Regulations”.
B. This bylaw replaces and supersedes the following previously enacted municipal bylaws:
• Winooski Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map, enacted December 28, 1981 as amended through
January 30, 2012
• Winooski Subdivision, enacted October 21, 1985
• Site Planning Guidelines, enacted 1993
The above-referenced bylaws are repealed as of the effective date of the Winooski Unified Land Use and Development
Regulations.
SECTION 1.2 PURPOSE
A. The purposes of these regulations are to:
1. Conform to and implement the Winooski Municipal Development Plan as most recently adopted, and to further
state planning goals under the Act [§ 4302][statutory references are to Title 24 of Vermont Statutes Annotated,
unless otherwise indicated].
2. Protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Winooski.
3. Protect the public health and safety by the reduction of noise, air, and water pollution, and other noxious physical
influences; and secure safety from fire, explosions, floods and other hazards.
4. Create an optimum urban environment by encouraging a rational pattern of development and the most
appropriate use of land, minimizing the adverse impact of one land use on another, protect access to adequate light
and air, and by conserving and enhancing important natural areas, urban open space, historic and cultural
resources.
5. Provide adequate access to public ways that will be safe and convenient.
6. Facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation for pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic, water,
sewer, schools and other public facilities and services.
SECTION 1.3 APPLICATION & INTERPRETATION
A. These regulations, and their administration and enforcement, are subject to all provisions of the Act as may be
amended from time to time.
B. No land subdivision or development shall commence in the City of Winooski except in conformance with these
regulations. Land subdivision or development not specifically authorized under these regulations, unless exempted
under the Act, is prohibited.
C. These regulations are not intended to repeal, annul, or in any way impair any previously issued permit or
approval. All land subdivisions, uses, and structures legally in existence as of the effective date of these regulations are
ARTICLE I – AUTHORITY & PURPOSE
6 Article I – AUTHORITY & PURPOSE | City of Winooski
allowed to continue. Changes or alterations to pre-existing subdivisions, structures, or uses must meet all applicable
requirements of these regulations, including requirements for nonconforming lots, uses and structures.
D. Where these regulations impose a greater restriction on the use of land or a structure than is required by any other
statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation, these regulations shall apply.
F. Additional municipal, state or federal permits may be required beyond those identified in these regulations. It is the
applicant’s responsibility to secure all required municipal, state and federal permits prior to commencing land
subdivision and development.
SECTION 1.4 BYLAW AMENDMENTS
A. These regulations, including the official zoning map, may be amended or repealed only in accordance with the Act [§
4441, § 4442 and § 4444].
B. Proposed changes to these regulations or the zoning map shall be submitted in writing to the Winooski Planning
Commission for consideration, as required under the Act [§ 4441].
SECTION 1.5 SEVERABILITY
A. The provisions of these regulations are severable. If any provision of these regulations, or its application by the City, is
held invalid by a court of jurisdiction, this shall not affect the validity or application of other provisions in these
regulations.
7 Article I – AUTHORITY & PURPOSE | City of Winooski
The official zoning map, ‘City of Winooski Zoning Map’ is hereby adopted as part of these Regulations and is on file with
the City Clerk. The Zoning Map shall be amended in accordance with the Act [§ 4441, § 4442 and § 4444]. Any
uncertainty as to the location of a district, overlay, or flood hazard area boundary line on the zoning map shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator (ZA) with rights of appeal to the Development Review Board (DRB).
The ‘City of Winooski Zoning Map, 201x’ and these Regulations divide the City into the following districts:
A. Residential A, ‘R-A’ (formally referred to as R-1-A)
B. Residential B, ‘R-B’ (formally referred to as R-1-B)
C. Residential C, ‘R-C’ (formally referred to as R-2)
D. Central Business District, ‘C-1’
E. General Commercial, ‘C-2’
F. Downtown Core, ‘DC’
G. Gateway, ‘G’
H. Industrial, ‘I’
I. Public, ‘P’
J. Flood Hazard Area, ‘FHA’
A. Development of lots may only be permissible based on the uses and dimensional criteria defined in this Article,
and in accordance with the review procedures defined in this regulation and all applicable local, state and
federal ordinances and regulations.
B. All lots created after the effective date of these regulations that are intended for development must meet
minimum applicable frontage requirements along public road rights-of-way, and area and yard dimensional
requirements for the district(s) in which they are located unless modified or waived by the DRB for planned unit
development under Section 6.3, or under Section 6.8.
C. For the Gateway Districts, no lot intended for development shall be so reduced that development cannot be
established in accordance with the Building Form Standards in Part 4 of Appendix B of these regulations.
D. Any USE not specifically permitted or prohibited in this Ordinance may be considered as a Conditional Use by
the DRB and reviewed in accordance with Section 6.7 of these regulations.
ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 2.1 ZONING MAP
SECTION 2.2 LIST OF ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION 2.3 APPLICABILITY
8 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
SECTION 2.4 LAND USE TABLE
9 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
LAND USE
Residential
A
R-A2
Residential
B
R-B2
Residential
C
R-C3
Central
Business
District
C-1
General
Commercial
C-2
Downtown
Core
DC
Gateway
Urban
General &
Storefront1
Gateway
Townhouse
Small Apt/
Detached
Residential1
Industrial
I
Public
P
Residential Uses
Single Family Dwelling P P P
See Part 4
of the
Form-
Based
Code
Accessory Dwelling Unit
P
P
P
Two Family Dwelling
(attached)
P
P
CU
Detached Cottage CU CU CU
Multi-family (3+ units) P4 CU P
Assisted Living & Residential
Care Homes
P
CU
P
P
P
Bed-and-breakfast (B&B) CU CU P CU P P P
Family Child Care Home P P P P P P P P
Group Home P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
P/CU5
Home Occupation P P P P P P P P
Commercial Uses
Adult establishment CU
Alcohol Manufacturing
Facility
CU
CU
CU
P
P
Animal Care & Boarding P
Bar CU CU P
Brew Pub CU CU CU P CU
Industry CU P P
Laboratory CU P
Lodging establishment P CU P P
Office P P P P CU
Personal Service
establishment
P
P
P
P
Retail sales P P P P CU
Retail sales, Neighborhood
commercial
CU
CU
P
Recreation &
entertainment, commercial
P
CU
P
P
CU
Restaurant P P P P
Restaurant, café CU CU CU CU CU
10 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
Restaurant with drive-thru P
Vehicle Repair & Sales CU P P
Civic & Public Uses
Association, fraternal
organization, social club
P
CU
P
P
P
Crematorium P P
Cultural facility P CU P P P
Daycare facility P CU P P P P
Education facility P CU P P P P P
Funeral home P P P P
Healthcare facility P CU P P
Recreation &
entertainment, noncommercial
P
P
P
P
CU
P
P
P
CU
P
Religious facility P P P P P P P P P
OTHER
Accessory Structure (6)
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
Accessory Use (6)
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
CU
Notes:
1. Some of the FBC permitted uses are subject to specific Development and Performance Standards in Section 804 of the code in
Appendix B.
2. Maximum dwelling units per lot in R-A and R-B shall be 2 total dwelling units no matter how it is configured in the allowable use
types as listed above (i.e. Two Family Dwelling in R-B only, Single Family Dwelling and Accessory Dwelling, or Single Family Dwelling
and Detached Cottage).
3. Maximum dwelling units per lot in R-C shall be 3 total dwelling units no matter how it is configured (i.e. Two Family Dwelling and a
Detached Cottage, or Single Family Dwelling and Accessory Dwelling and Detached Cottage).
4. Maximum density for Multi-family housing in C1 is 60 units/acre.
5. If a group home locates within 1,000’ of another group home it shall be subject to Conditional Use review and approval.
6. Accessory Use shall be limited to “uses” or structures such as administrative offices or services that relate to the “primary” use of the
site/parcel and shall be operated (solely) by the property owner or owner representative for the purpose of providing services to the site.
11 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski

Zone standards
R-A
R-B
R-C
C-1
C-2
DC
I
P
Lot Size
(Minimum Square
Feet)
10,000
7,500
7,500
3,000
7,500
NA
See
Appendix B
20,000
NA
Frontage
(Minimum Feet)
75 75 75 50 75 NA 100 NA
Lot Depth
(Minimum Feet)
100 100 60 60 60 NA 60 NA
Lot Coverage
(Maximum %)
40 50 50 1001
80 NA 70 50
Front Setback
(Minimum Feet)
20 10 10 0 0 NA 10 10
Rear Setback
(Minimum Feet)
15 15 15 0 0 NA 10 15
Side Setback
(Minimum Feet)
15 10 10 0 0 NA 10 10
Building Height
(Maximum Feet)
35 35 35 60 35
See
Appendix C
35 35
Front Setback
(Minimum Feet)
10 10 10 NA NA NA 10
Rear Setback
(Minimum Feet)
5 5 5 NA NA NA 5
Side Setback
(Minimum Feet)
5 5 5 NA NA NA 5
Building Height
(Maximum Feet)
35 35 35 NA NA
See
Appendix C
35
1. Conditional upon attainment of all necessary State and City stormwater management approvals.
SECTION 2.5 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE
12 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Residential A district is to accommodate a safe, livable, and pedestrian friendly
residential neighborhood with low density development and an inviting streetscape.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Residential B district is to accommodate a safe, livable, and pedestrian friendly
residential neighborhood with moderately higher density development than R-A and an inviting streetscape.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Residential C district is to accommodate safe, livable, and pedestrian friendly single
and multi-unit residential housing neighborhoods. Infill development will be balanced with privacy of surrounding
homes, preservation of neighborhood character and safe housing conditions. R-C serves as a transition to higher density
and non-residential districts.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5.
A. Purpose. The regulations associated with this district are intended to encourage, retain, and protect commercial,
business, and high density housing land uses which are compatible with historic sites and pedestrian activity.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5.
A. Purpose. The regulations associated with this district are intended to encourage, retain and protect a variety of
general business and service activities.
SECTION 2.6 RESIDENTIAL A, ‘ R-A’
SECTION 2.7 RESIDENTIAL B, ‘ R-B’
SECTION 2.8 RESIDENTIAL C, “ R-C”
SECTION 2.9 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT , “C-1”
SECTION 2.10 GENERAL COMMERCIAL, “ C-2”
13 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5.
A. Purpose. The Downtown Core District is composed of the core of the City’s downtown and has been the subject of
a Master Plan which has been developed by the City over many years after extensive public input and hearings. The
Master Plan was approved by the DRB, the City Council and by the State of Vermont District Environmental Commission
under “Act 250” in 2001. The regulations associated with this district are intended to protect the public health, safety
and welfare and to provide for orderly physical and economic growth by allowing and encouraging high density, mixed
use land development within the downtown core.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4 and Appendix C.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.5 and Appendix C.
D. Development Review and Standards. The Master Plan permits a range of uses within pre-approved vertical and
horizontal building envelopes as shown on the Building Height and Location Map. Approval of the exterior design details
must be submitted by the applicant, with the City as a co-applicant, and must be approved by the District Environmental
Commission under Act 250 as complying with the approved Master Plan. Therefore, all development proposed in this
District is subject to review and conformance with Appendix C of these Regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose the Gateway Districts is to create a walkable, mixed-use development dependent on three
factors: density, diversity of uses, and design. Development and redevelopment of the Gateway Districts are intended to
follow the vision identified in the Winooski Public Design Workshop Vision Plan and the Municipal Development Plan for
these areas. The development regulations are established in the Winooski Gateways Form Based Code (“the Code”)
found in Appendix B of these Regulations. The Code places greatest emphasis on design, or physical form, because of its
importance in defining neighborhood and corridor character. The Code shall be applied to new, infill development, and
redevelopment within the Gateway Districts both in order to achieve the vision set forth and to provide a mechanism for
implementing the following specific goals, using both public and private sector investment:
1. Capitalize on public investment in existing infrastructure
2. Stabilize and strengthen mixed-use commercial areas and residential neighborhoods
3. Create a pedestrian-friendly and multi-modal district
4. Promote, create, and expand housing options
5. Ensure a complementary relationship between the Corridors and the surrounding neighborhoods
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.4 and Appendix B.
SECTION 2.11 DOWNTOWN CORE, “ DC”
SECTION 2.12 GATEWAY DISTRICTS
14 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
C. Dimensional Standards – See Appendix B.
D. Development Review and Standards. The Gateway Districts are regulated by the Form Based Code in Appendix B.
Therefore, all development proposed in this District is subject to review and conformance with Appendix B of these
Regulations, unless specified otherwise in throughout these Regulations.
A. Purpose. The regulations associated with this district are intended to encourage, retain, protect, and provide for
wholesale and warehousing activities, manufacturing and commercial activities compatible to abutting residential
districts.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.5.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.6.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Public District is to retain these lands for public use, public utility, natural resource
management, and conservation. The Public District encompasses Landry Park, Gilbrook Natural Area, and the Winooski
School District.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Table 2.5.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Table 2.6.
A. Purpose. The Flood Hazard Area District is intended to protect the Special Flood Hazard Area and Floodway as
defined in Appendix A of this Regulation. More detail on the purpose of this district is included in Appendix A.
B. Permitted and Conditional Uses – See Section V. Summary Table: Development Review in Hazard Areas of Appendix
A.
C. Dimensional Standards – See Appendix A.
D. Development Review and Standards. The Flood Hazard Areas are regulated by the Inundation Hazard Area
Regulations in Appendix A. Therefore, all development proposed in this District is subject to review and conformance
with Appendix A of these Regulations.
SECTION 2.13 INDUSTRIAL, “I”
SECTION 2.14 PUBLIC, “P”
SECTION 2.15 FLOOD HAZARD AREA, “FHA”
15 ARTICLE II - ZONING DISTRICTS | City of Winooski
A. No zoning permit shall be required for the stabilization of damaged structures to prevent hazards to public
health or safety, or to adjoining properties, structures or uses; nor for the timely repair or reconstruction of damaged
structures to the extent of their prior condition and use. Rebuilding that results in changes in density, dimension or use
under applicable provisions of these regulations shall require a zoning permit. If rebuilding a nonconforming structure,
see Section 4.9.D of these regulations.
B. Within 6 months after the abandonment of a permanent or temporary structure that has been demolished,
destroyed, or substantially damaged, or upon the expiration of a zoning permit for a structure not substantially
completed, the owner shall either:
1. Apply for a zoning permit under Section 6.10 of these regulations to resume repair, reconstruction or construction,
thus confirming the intent not to abandon the structure; or
2. Remove all improvements and materials from the site, restore the site to a normal grade and establish ground
cover sufficient to prevent erosion.
C. The demolition of structures listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places shall be prohibited unless
prior approval is received from the Vermont Division for Historic Preservation or a letter from a qualified Historic
Preservation consultant documents that the historical significance has been compromised and is no longer relevant.
A. Intent. Access and circulation elements of a site must be unencumbered to create a safe entry free of hazards.
Circulation areas should be designed to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance, and safety. Pedestrian circulation
areas must be convenient to use. Suitable landscaping and drainage shall be installed to enhance the utility and function
of parking and circulation, minimize the amount of impervious cover and shall be used to manage stormwater onsite.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply to all Zoning Districts with the exception of the Gateways Districts.
C. Frontage. No land development may be permitted on lots that do not have frontage on a public road or public
waters. For lots that have access on both a public road and public waters, only the access on a public road shall be
considered for the frontage required under this ordinance. Rights of way for new public roads shall be 60 feet in width,
however this may be reduced to 40 feet in width with approval from the Winooski City Engineer and DRB.
D. Access. Access onto public roads is subject to approval by the City of Winooski or, in the case of state highways,
approval by the Vermont Agency of Transportation. Access permits shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit. In the event approval by the DRB is required for the development, the access permit shall be obtained after DRB
approval. In addition, the following provisions shall apply:
1. No lot may be served by more than 1 curb cut in residential districts, and up to two curb cuts in other districts, by
approval from the DRB provided that:
a. The additional access is deemed necessary to ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety;
b. The additional access will improve vehicular and pedestrian safety and result in a traffic circulation and parking
arrangement within the site that better achieves the purposes of these regulations than would be possible
with a single access;
ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
SECTION 4.1 ABANDONMENT, STABILIZATION & DEMOLITION
SECTION 4.2 ACCESS, DRIVEWAYS, ROADS AND CIRCULATION
16 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
c. The lot(s) is occupied by a mixed-used development and the additional access would result in better traffic
circulation and safety than a single access; or
d. The strict compliance with this provision would, due to the presence of one or more physical features (e.g.,
rivers and streams, steep slopes, wetlands), result in a less desirable site layout and design than would be
possible with the allowance of an additional access;
e. The additional access would facilitate emergency vehicle access, as determined by the Winooski Fire Marshall
or ZA.
2. Where a property occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, access shall be on the less traveled road. This
provision may be waived by the DRB only if the applicant can demonstrate that access on the more heavily traveled
road would be safer.
3. Access to properties located along state highways may be limited to secondary roads or a common drive. In the
event that a common drive is planned (i.e., identified in the Winooski Municipal Development Plan, or any
adopted Official Map and/or Capital Budget), but is not yet constructed, temporary access may be permitted upon
approval from the DRB. In granting temporary access, the DRB may place appropriate conditions that the access be
relocated within a reasonable time after construction of the common drive.
4. In appropriate instances, including the presence of compatible adjacent uses, areas characterized by heavy traffic,
congestion and frequent and/or unsafe turning movements, or lots having direct access to state highways, the DRB
may require provision for shared access between adjoining properties. Construction of shared access may be
required at the time of project development if similar provision has been made on contiguous parcels, or may be
required at a later time contingent upon future development of neighboring properties.
5. Applicants for a zoning permit for any lot with more than one access shall eliminate or combine accesses in order to
meet the provisions of this section, unless otherwise approved by the ZA or DRB.
6. Subdivision of a parcel after the effective date of these regulations shall not create a right to construct more than
one access unless otherwise approved by the DRB.
7. In the case of excessively wide pre-existing driveways or uncontrolled access that extends along most of a
property’s frontage, the DRB shall require the reduction in access width as a condition of approval, unless the
applicant can demonstrate that such reduction would place an undue burden on the continued operation of a preexisting
land use.
8. Access shall be established approximately perpendicular to the street.
9. Access shall be available for fire, ambulance, and police vehicles within 100 feet of the principal entrance to
dwellings, commercial, or industrial establishments and institutions, or as required by an authority having
jurisdiction.
10. Existing structures which do not meet these standards because of pre-existing site conditions may be required to
make improvements necessary to bring the property into greater compliance with the provisions of this section as a
condition of approval in accordance with the provisions of Article VI.
E. Residential Driveways. New driveways serving not more than 3 dwellings shall meet the following standards:
1. Driveways shall be constructed to City of Winooski Public Works Standards and Specifications, Section 5.6.2.
2. Driveways shall be set back a minimum of 5 feet from adjoining property lines unless providing shared access to
contiguous properties.
3. Encroachment for Existing Residential Driveways. For purposes of allowing existing, developed, nonconforming lots
containing single family homes to create a driveway and provide a maximum of two side by side parking spaces
from the street, driveways may encroach into the required 5 foot setback up to 4 feet from the property line with
ZA approval, and additional encroachment with DRB approval.
a. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated necessity on the part of the property owner as well as unique
physical circumstances of the lot, and conditional use criteria and findings that there shall be no undue adverse
17 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
impact on all of the following items of concern: drainage, safety, protection of neighboring side yard, light and
air.
b. The maximum relief from the 5 foot minimum setback shall be the minimum necessary for the purposes of
creating such a driveway and parking spaces and shall be allowed only after a finding that driveway and
parking configuration cannot be otherwise located on the lot.
c. With such approval, the lot shall not be considered nonconforming due to the decreased setback for the
creation of the driveway and parking spaces.
d. Under no circumstances shall parking spaces be allowed within the front setback of the Zoning District.
F. Multi-Family and Non-Residential Driveways. New driveways serving more than 3 residential dwellings units,
non-residential lot(s) and parking garages shall meet the following standards:
1. Driveways shall be constructed to City of Winooski Public Works Standards and Specifications, Section 5.6.2 unless
otherwise approved by the DRB.
2. Excessively wide curb cuts shall not be permitted as they lack definition and direction, cause erratic maneuvers and
increase the number and angle of conflict points between vehicles. See Figure 1 – Access Drive Width:
3. Locate access points so as to neither obstruct the free flow of traffic on public streets nor from the site. Provide
adequate separation between intersections and access drives for adequate stacking space, ease of mobility, and
vehicle and pedestrian safety. See Figure 2 – Corner Clearance and Figure 3 – Intersection Stacking Space:
18 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
4. Driveways shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from adjoining property lines unless providing shared access to
contiguous properties.
G. Pedestrian Circulation. Sidewalks shall be provided between site circulation drives, parking areas, and buildings
to separate vehicular and pedestrian traffic. See Figure 4 – Sidewalks as a Component of the Site Design:
19 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
1. Increase walkway width when parking stalls directly abut a sidewalk to accommodate vehicle overhangs and reduce
conflicts. See Figure 5 – Avoid Conflicts – Provide Adequate Walkway Width in Parking Areas:
2. Alternative paving materials shall be used to designate walkway areas and building entrances, and add visual
interest and sense of pedestrian scale to sites. Alternatives to asphalt include, but are not limited to, textured and
exposed aggregate concrete, paver blocks, and bricks.
H. Evaluation of Traffic Impacts. The DRB may require an evaluation, and mitigation as needed, of traffic on
existing roadways.
1. A traffic impact analysis, prepared by a qualified transportation professional, using commonly accepted
transportation standards (e.g., Vermont Agency of Transportation, Institute of Transportation Engineers), shall be
used to identify trip generation rates and to evaluate traffic impacts, for any project that generates 75 or more
peak hour trips, or as otherwise deemed necessary by the DRB to address existing or proposed site, road and traffic
conditions. The study shall include directional distributions, levels of service, design considerations and capacity
determinations, and recommend appropriate traffic mitigation measures (including transportation demand
management strategies) and road improvements.
2. Proposed development shall incorporate planned highway improvements, including planned right-of-way
improvements or realignments, in site design and traffic analyses.
A. The conversion or change in use of land or structures to another use is subject to the provisions of these regulations
as follows:
1. The proposed use shall be subject to all the requirements of these regulations pertaining to such use, as well as any
other applicable municipal, state or federal regulations currently in effect.
2. A conversion or change of use from one permitted use to another permitted use, or from a conditional use to a
permitted use, may require a Site Plan approval from the DRB or ZA under Article VI of these regulations and
requires a zoning permit issued by the ZA under Article VI of these regulations.
3. A conversion or change of use from a permitted to a conditional use, or from a conditional use to another
conditional use, requires conditional use approval from the DRB under Article VI, and may require site plan
SECTION 4.3 CONVERSION OR CHANGE OF USE
20 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
approval from the DRB under Article VI, followed by a zoning permit issued by the ZA under Article VI of these
regulations.
A. Intent. The intent of these Design Review standards is to protect, preserve, develop and use Winooski's historic,
cultural, architectural and natural resources to stimulate a more meaningful environment for its citizens and the region;
to maintain the architectural and historical integrity of existing buildings or features; and to ensure the compatibility of
new construction or usage to adjacent properties.
B. Applicability. This section is applicable in all Zoning Districts in the City with the exception of the
Downtown Core, and any residential use of three or fewer units. This section is applicable to any alterations or
improvements to structures within the Gateway Districts that fall under the thresholds for conformance with
the Form Based Code as defined in Section 209: Non-Conformities of Appendix B. The following types of
development are subject to these standards:
1. Demolition of a building;
2. Movement of a building;
3. Any new construction of a structure subject to view from a public street;
4. Exterior remodeling or renovation of an existing structure;
5. Change in existing walls and fences, or construction of new walls and fences along the public right-of-way;
6. Change in exterior color or material;
7. Exterior lighting;
8. Exterior signage.
C. Standards for Review. Development subject to design review will be subject to the following standards:
1. Height. The height of a proposed building and its visual compatibility with adjacent buildings;
2. Setback. The building setback of new or remodeled construction in relationship to that of existing structures;
3. Rhythm. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facades of a building;
4. Proportion of Building’s Front FACADE. The relationship of the width of building to the height of the front elevation;
5. Relationship of Materials, Texture, and Color. The compatibility of these facets of a building with the predominant
materials used in the buildings to which it is visually related;
6. Scale of a Building. The size of a building and the mass of a building in relation to open spaces, windows, door
openings, porches and balconies;
7. Proportion of Openings within the Building. The relationship of the width of the windows to the height of the
windows;
8. Roof Shapes. The compatibility of the roof shape of a building with the buildings to which it is visually related;
9. Grading and Planting. Grade changes and landscape plantings incorporated so as to enhance the existing scale and
character of the site, and their relationship to adjacent areas;
10. Open Space. Open space designed as to add to the visual amenities of the area.
SECTION 4.4 DESIGN REVIEW
21 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
D. Historic & Cultural Resources. Adaptive reuse is intended to allow for the continued, economically viable use of
historic structures that have outlived their original purpose but contribute to the historic, architectural and/or cultural
fabric of the community. Accordingly, an alternative use may be allowed within the current dimensions of a historic
structure, subject to the above general design review standards, conditional use review under Section 6.7, and any
recommendations from Section 4.4.D above. In addition:
1. Methods shall be used to avoid undue adverse impacts on the National or State Registers of Historic Places and
those listed in the Municipal Development Plan as Local Historic and Architecturally Significant Buildings. The
demolition of structures listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places shall be prohibited unless a letter
from a qualified Historic Preservation consultant documents that the historical significance has been compromised
and is no longer relevant.
2. Methods shall be used to minimize undue adverse impacts to the historic and cultural resources listed on the
Vermont Historic Sites and Structures Survey for the City of Winooski and still considered eligible for listing on the
National or State Register of Historic Places according to the Vermont Division of Historic Preservation.
A. These regulations shall not have the effect of excluding the following from the City of Winooski:
1. Mobile homes, modular housing, or other forms of prefabricated housing, except upon the same terms and
conditions as conventional housing is excluded.
2. Housing necessary to meet the needs of the population, as identified in the housing element section of the
Winooski Municipal Development Plan.
3. Mobile home parks within any zoning district where it is an allowed use and where it meets all applicable
requirements for such use (see Section 5.8).
4. Multiunit or multifamily dwellings entirely from the City.
5. One accessory dwelling per principal single family dwelling, as a permitted use, if it meets the requirements of
these regulations (see Section 5.1).
6. A state licensed or registered care home or group home that serves no more than eight persons who have a
handicap or disability.
Provisions have been made for each of the above types of housing within designated zoning districts.
A. Fences are permitted in all districts provided they conform to the following requirements, however, fences and
walls in the Gateway Districts are exempt from this Section and shall conform to the standards of Section 605 of
Appendix B:
1. Fences shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet above finished grade, except those parcels that abut a common lot
line with an Urban General or Urban Storefront Gateway District may construct a privacy fence that shall not
exceed a height of eight (8) feet above finished grade;
SECTION 4.5 EQUAL TREATMENT OF HOUSING
SECTION 4.6 FENCES & WALLS
22 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
2. Fences may be located up to the property line but shall not be located on the property line;
3. No part of any fence shall be placed in such manner as to visually obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Fences
located on a corner lot shall either be placed outside the vision clearance angle or shall not exceed a height of three
(3) and one-half (1/2) feet above finished grade. The vision clearance angle is defined as the triangular area
enclosed by the centerline of two intersecting streets and a line joining the points on such centerlines at distances
of 75 feet from their intersections.
A. Intent. Landscaping shall be provided to enhance the overall appearance of the site and to maintain or establish
physical and visual compatibility with neighboring properties. Landscaping and natural screening shall be provided in
front and side yards, adjacent to parking areas, and where rear yards abut residential properties or public roads as
necessary to lessen and mitigate the physical and visual impacts of development.
B. Applicability. This section shall apply only to use and buildings newly constructed, changed, extended or restored
and shall not apply to those uses in and buildings lawfully repaired and improved where no increase in floor area or no
change of use is made. This section is applicable in all Zoning Districts in the City with the exception of the Downtown
Core, and any residential use of three or less units. This section is applicable to any alterations or improvements to
structures within the Gateway Districts that fall under the thresholds for conformance with the Form Based Code as
defined in Section 209: Non-Conformities of Appendix B.
C. Buffer Areas for More Intense Land Uses. In order to minimize the impact of one land use upon a less intense land
use, buffer areas are required with the following provisions:
1. Material. Buffer areas shall consist of a strip of land on which a fence or plantings have been installed.
a. Height. The fence or plantings shall have a minimum height of 5 feet.
b. Screening. The fence or plantings shall provide adequate privacy to the surrounding and less intense land uses.
c. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the use for which the buffer is required to maintain
and replace, when necessary such plantings or fences.
SECTION 4.7 LANDSCAPING & SCREENING
23 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
2. District Requirements. Buffer widths are as follows:
Zoning District Width of Land Abutting a Less Intense District
Central Business District (C1) 10 feet
General Commercial District (C2) 20 feet
Industrial District (I) 50 feet
D. General On-site Landscaping Requirements. Shade trees, shrubs and planting beds are to be used to interrupt the
facades of buildings, break-up expanses of parking, visually reduce the scale and bulk of large buildings, integrate the
site with the surrounding landscape and to enhance environmental quality—e.g., for wildlife habitat, soil stabilization,
storm water retention, air quality, and energy conservation.
1. Existing vegetation shall be incorporated in site design when physically feasible. Protect established vegetation
during construction; when possible, transplant and stockpile shrubs or trees which must be relocated to
accommodate construction. Preserve topsoil from the site for reuse in lawns, open space and buffer areas.
2. New landscaping shall be suited to USDA Zone 4 and the particular site. Trees recommended by Vermont Urban
and Community Forestry are preferred. The use of native species is recommended and may be required as
necessary to avoid the introduction and spread of nuisance or exotic species.
3. Landscaped areas shall be installed in the front and side yard areas, to include a mix of deciduous and coniferous
trees, shrubs and ground cover. Landscaped areas should enhance the general appearance of the site, define
planting strips and buffers, and reduce the amount of grass or lawn area.
4. Shade trees shall be a minimum of 2.5" caliper (trunk diameter), measured at a height of five feet, or, in the case of
coniferous trees, be a minimum of eight feet in height.
5. Install landscaping, as best as possible, during Vermont’s optimal planting seasons: between April 15th and June 15th,
and September 1st and October 30th.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain and replace, when necessary, such plantings. .
7. The DRB or ZA may require the submission of a landscaping plan, to be prepared by a certified landscape architect,
as required to determine conformance with these regulations.
E. Parking lot landscaping requirements. See Section 4.12.E.8 of these regulations for the required landscaping for
parking lots.
F. Street Tree Requirements. Street trees shall be required along any street, and along any existing public street. In
the event that the City has adopted a street tree plan for a district or road segment, the DRB may require tree plantings
that are consistent with that plan, or payment in lieu of trees to ensure plantings are done consistently with City parking,
utility and other street-scape improvement projects. Street trees shall be planted to City of Winooski Public Works
Standards and Specifications.
A. Intent. All development proposals throughout the City shall be designed to avoid and minimize undue adverse
impacts to significant natural resources with the ultimate goal of preserving and enhancing the Winooski River corridor
ecosystem, and public health. When feasible common open space areas to be used for parks, trails, urban forestry and
urban agriculture shall be provided in development proposals.
B. Applicability. All applications for development shall identify and conserve Winooski’s significant natural and scenic
features in accordance with these regulations.
SECTION 4.8 NATURAL RESOURCE AND OPEN SPACE
24 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
C. Standards. Site layout and design, to the extent physically feasible, shall incorporate and avoid undue adverse
impacts to significant natural and scenic resources identified in the Winooski Municipal Development Plan, maps and
related inventories, or through site investigation. These include but may not be limited to:
1. Steep Slopes. Development areas shall be located and configured to the extent physically feasible to minimize the
adverse impacts of development on steep slopes (15% or more); and to avoid site disturbance on very steep slopes
(25% or more). Methods to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts include but are not limited to the following:
a. Development shall be sized and configured to minimize the extent of clearing, site disturbance and
development in areas of steep slope (15% or more). The applicant shall submit a stormwater and erosion
control plan in accordance with Section 4.15.
b. Driveways, access roads and utility corridors, to the greatest extent feasible shall share access and rights-ofway,
follow existing contours to achieve angled ascents, and be located and designed to minimize surface
runoff and erosion, especially in areas of steep slope (15% or more).
c. Development shall be sited, to the greatest extent physically feasible, to avoid site disturbance and
development on very steep slopes (25% or more).
d. The DRB may require permanent protection of these resource areas as designated open space.
e. The DRB may require preparation and implementation of management plans for identified resources.
2. Surface Waters, Wetlands & Floodplains. Development areas shall be located and configured to avoid adverse
impacts to naturally occurring surface waters, wetlands, and special flood hazard areas (SFHAs), and setback or
undisturbed buffer areas shall be established between proposed development and identified resources. Methods
to avoid or mitigate undue adverse impacts include but are not limited to the following:
a. Setback and buffer areas of sufficient width to protect surface waters and wetlands from accelerated surface
runoff, soil erosion and sedimentation, and to preserve wildlife habitats, shall be designated and identified on
site plans and subdivision plats. The DRB may require larger setbacks or buffers, and/or buffer management
plans as necessary to minimize impacts resulting from site-specific slope and soil conditions. Setbacks and
buffer areas shall be:
i. 50 feet from Class II wetlands in accordance with the Vermont Wetland Rules.
ii. 50 feet setback from top of bank for streams with a watershed area less than 2 square miles.
b. Roads, driveways and utility corridors shall be located, to the extent physically feasible, to minimize the
number and extent of surface water and wetland crossings and associated areas of site disturbance.
c. Any development within Special Flood Hazard Areas shall be subject to review under Appendix A: Inundation
Hazard Area Regulations.
d. The DRB may require permanent protection of these resource areas as designated open space.
e. The DRB may require preparation and implementation of management plans for identified resources.
3. Natural Vegetative Cover. Existing vegetative cover shall be preserved on the site to the greatest extent
practicable.
4. The applicant, ZA and DRB may consult with state officials, and/or other qualified professionals to determine the
likely impact of a development on one or more of these resources, and appropriate mitigation measures.
25 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
D. Common Open Space Areas. The location, size and shape of lands set aside to be preserved and managed as
common open space areas shall be suitable for their intended purpose and use and approved by the DRB, in accordance
with the following:
1. Common open space areas may include significant natural and cultural features identified and designated for
protection in accordance with Section 4.8.C.
2. For common open space areas that are not designated for protection in accordance with Section 4.8.C., provisions
shall be made to allow common open space areas to be used for parks, trails, urban forestry and urban agriculture.
Management plans for parks, urban forestry and urban agriculture may be required by the DRB as necessary to
ensure their long-term management. The DRB may require installation of facilities or equipment such as, but not
limited to, benches, picnic tables, and playground equipment, as necessary to ensure proper use of common open
space areas.
3. Designated common open space areas may include a portion of a single lot, or extend over several contiguous lots;
however to the extent physically feasible, site layout and design shall minimize the subdivision and fragmentation
of contiguous common open space areas.
4. Utility and road rights-of-way or easements, and access and parking areas shall not be included within designated
common open space areas, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the DRB that they will in no
way disrupt or detract from the purposes or values for which the common open space area is to be protected or
used.
E. Legal Requirements. At a minimum, unless waived by the DRB:
1. Designated common open space areas shall be indicated on the final site plan or subdivision plat.
2. Common open space areas shall be subject to deed restrictions and owner agreements that stipulate the permitted
and restricted use of such land, and establish the person(s) or entity responsible for its maintenance and long term
stewardship.
3. Designated common open space areas shall be subject to management agreements that include terms for
administration, maintenance, and cost sharing. A draft management agreement shall be submitted with the
application for final subdivision approval.
4. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as indicating that the public has a right to access or recreate on
private property without permission of the landowner.
A. Purpose. Any lot, structure, part of a structure or use that is not in compliance with the provisions of these
regulations, but was lawfully established prior to the effective date of these regulations, shall be deemed a
nonconformity. It is the goal of the City of Winooski that nonconformities shall over time cease to exist, become
conforming or at a minimum continue to be used in a manner that does not increase their degree of nonconformity.
Nonconformities shall be regulated and only allowed to continue indefinitely as outlined in this section.
B. Development of Nonconforming Lots. An undeveloped nonconforming lot may be developed in accordance with
the standards of the district in which it is located if the lot:
1. Was in existence on or before the effective date of these regulations; and
2. Is at least 1/8 acre in area; and
3. Is at least 40 feet wide and deep.
SECTION 4.9 NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES RIGHT OF WAY (ROW) OR DRIVE, AND USES
26 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
C. Use of Nonconforming Lots. A lawfully developed nonconforming lot:
1. May continue in its current use and configuration.
2. May, after receiving all applicable approvals and permits, be further developed and used in accordance with the
standards of the district in which it is located.
D. Nonconforming Right of Way or Drive. Pre-existing, lawfully established, nonconforming Right of Way or drive
that was in existence on or before the effective date of these regulations:
1. Shall Conform with Public Works material and construction standards for public or private ROW—See section 5
of the City Winooski Public Works Standards and Specifications
2. May be used, expanded or improved in accordance fire dept., police dept. and public works approval.
3. May, after receiving all applicable approvals and permits, be further developed and used in accordance with the
standards of the district in which it is located.
E. Nonconforming Structures. A nonconforming structure:
1. May undergo normal repair and maintenance without a permit provided that such action does not increase the
structure’s degree of nonconformity.
2. May be restored or reconstructed after damage from any cause provided that the reconstruction does not increase
the degree of nonconformity that existed prior to the damage, and provided that a permit is obtained within 6
months of the date the damage occurred.
3. May be structurally enlarged, expanded or moved, after receiving a permit from the ZA, provided that the degree of
nonconformity is not increased. The following exceptions may apply: an increase in a structural nonconformity may
be permitted, after receiving a permit from the ZA, for an alteration or expansion in height above existing gross
floor area so long as the alteration or expansion does not result in any new structure located closer than 5’ from the
property line or exceed the maximum height requirement of the zoning district. The DRB may grant a waiver to
dimensional requirements that may allow increases in a structure’s degree of nonconformity subject to conditional
use approval by the DRB in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.7 of these regulations.
4. May, subject to conditional use approval by the DRB in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.7 of these
regulations, be structurally altered or expanded in a manner that would increase the degree of nonconformity for
the sole purpose of meeting mandated state or federal environmental, health, accessibility, safety or energy
regulations that would allow for the continued use of the structure.
F. Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use:
1. Shall not be moved from one lot to another where it is also a nonconforming use.
2. Shall not be re-established if the use has been changed to or replaced by a conforming use for a period greater than
6 months.
3. Shall not be re-established if the use has been discontinued for a period greater than 6 months.
4. Shall not be intensified by any means whatsoever, except with the approval of the DRB subject to conditional use
review in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.7 of these regulations.
5. Shall not be extended to displace a conforming use.
G. Nonconforming Non-residential Uses in the R-A, R-B and R-C Zoning Districts. The conversion of nonconforming,
non-residential uses in existence on January 1, 2012 in the R-A, R-B and R-C zoning districts to residential uses are
incentivized through an increased level of residential density than otherwise would be allowed. An applicant may
request approval under this provision if a minimum of 40% of the gross floor area of the structure is in active nonresidential
use. Conversion is subject to the following provisions:
1. Total, maximum residential density shall be:
a. 16 units per acre in the R-A and R-B districts; and
b. 24 units per acre in the R-C district.
2. Minimum habitable floor area shall be:
a. 600 square feet for each studio or efficiency unit;
b. 800 square feet for a 1-bedroom unit, plus, a minimum of 200 square feet for each additional bedroom.
3. A maximum of 4 bedrooms is allowed in each unit.
4. Each application for this conversion shall be subject to approval under the following provisions:
27 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
a. Conditional Use and Site Plan approval as specified in Articles VI and VII; and,
b. Design Review as specified in Section 4.4.
5. The conversion shall not result in any nonconformance or further nonconformance of the existing structure with
regards to setbacks, lot coverage and building height. The maximum height limit of the zoning district shall apply.
Any floor area(s) above the maximum height shall not be expanded beyond the pre-existing extent.
6. Parking shall be provided at the rate of 1 space per residential unit; all lot area in a vegetated condition without
hardscape improvements in place on January 1, 2012 shall not be reduced to accommodate parking, drives or site
circulation.
7. Non-residential uses will be considered abandoned upon conversion and shall not be re-established.
SECTION 4.10 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
A. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to ensure adequate lighting for night-time visibility, crime deterrence,
decoration, and to preserve the ambiance of the night; and to avoid lighting that is too bright, intense, creates glare,
hinders night vision, and creates light pollution.
B. Applicability. This section is applicable with respect to (i) Zoning Districts in the City with the exception of the
Downtown Core, (ii) any residential use of three or less units, and (iii) street lights.
C. Lighting Standards.
1. Utilize lighting that is of a pedestrian scale and style appropriate to the development and the neighborhood.
2. Lighting elements shall be LED, metal halide, or halogen elements with a spectrum of light more perceptively
“natural”. Lighting elements that cast a perceptively unnatural spectrum of light such as low pressure sodium, HID
or fluorescent lights (excepting compact fluorescent bulbs that screw into standard sockets) are not permitted.
Alternative lighting elements may be permitted by the ZA as technologies advance and produce additional
equivalent or better lighting elements.
3. Lighting fixtures shall be of a “cut-off” design, or be equipped with shields to avoid glare onto neighboring
properties or public streets. Fixtures shall provide light without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents from
glare.
4. The maximum height of luminaires shall be 16 feet, with appropriate spacing on a site by site basis to avoid
excessive fixtures. The maximum illumination at ground level shall not exceed 3 foot candles.
5. Site lighting shall be of a design, height and location so as to illuminate only the lot. An exterior lighting plan shall
be submitted and it shall document a score of zero foot candles at the property lines.
6. Flashing, traveling, animated, or intermittent lighting shall not be mounted on the exterior of any building whether
such lighting is of temporary or long-term duration.
7. Floodlights or directional lights (maximum 100-watt incandescent or equivalent) may be used to illuminate
common drives, parking garages and working (maintenance) areas, but shall be shielded or aimed in such a way
that they do not shine into other lots, or public streets.
8. Flood or uplighting may not be used to illuminate private building walls. Accent lighting may be permitted on civic
use buildings or monuments, to highlight architectural features (such as church steeples or courthouse domes).
9. The method of lighting operation shall be energy efficient and scheduled to minimize adverse impact on residential
neighbors. All-night lighting shall be activated by photo-sensor and turned off by timers.
10. Lighting for parking garages shall consider general Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) intent.
11. Temporary (per City regulations) Holiday Lighting is exempt from these regulations.
28 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
12. Streetlights shall be coordinated with the Department of Public Works.
SECTION 4.11 OUTDOOR STORAGE, MECHANICAL AND UTILITY EQUIPMENT
A. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to minimize the location of mechanical and similar equipment, garbage
cans, storage tanks, and similar elements in any public areas, be visible from the street, or detract/interfere with the
pedestrian space.
B. Applicability. This section is applicable in all Zoning Districts in the City with the exception of any residential use of
three or less units.
C. Mechanical and utility equipment, and outdoor storage shall meet the following standards:
1. The following shall be placed behind any buildings, may not be stored or located within any public street, and shall
be screened from view from the public sidewalk and street and neighboring properties: exterior storage areas, air
compressors, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and telephone company
transformers, meters or boxes, garbage cans, storage tanks, and similar equipment. Plantings, enclosures and
other mitigation screening methods shall be coordinated with the design of the principal building and shall be
utilized to minimize their auditory and visual impact on the public street and neighboring properties to the extent
practicable. Above ground utility structures associated with underground utilities may be allowed in front of a
building if no alternative location exists, however the equipment must be enclosed with a vegetative buffer.
2. Onsite utilities shall be placed underground whenever practicable.
3. Trash and recycling bins and dumpsters shall be located within, preferably, or behind buildings. They shall be
enclosed on all 4 sides to prevent blowing trash, and screened from public view.
4. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed away from the FACADE of the building and screened from view from the
public sidewalk and street.
5. Any development involving the installation of machinery or equipment which emits heat, vapor, fumes, vibration,
or noise shall minimize, insofar as practicable, any adverse impact on neighboring properties and the environment
pursuant to the requirements of Section 4.13 Performance Standards.
6. Storage of junk shall not be permitted on any property within the City, unless permitted as a State and City licensed
salvage yard facility. Junk includes but is not limited to rags, paper, rubbish, bottles, glassware, crockery, bags and
used and unregistered motor vehicles and parts there-of, and items of a similar nature.
SECTION 4.12 PARKING, LOADING AND SERVICE AREAS
A. Intent. These parking standards are intended to:
1. Enable people to conveniently park and access a variety of commercial, residential, and civic enterprises in
pedestrian friendly environments by encouraging shared parking.
2. Reduce fragmented, uncoordinated, inefficient, reserved single-purpose parking.
3. Avoid adverse parking impacts on neighborhoods adjacent to redevelopment areas.
4. Maximize on-street parking where available.
B. Applicability. These parking requirements shall apply only to uses and buildings newly constructed, changed,
extended, or restored and shall not apply to those uses and buildings lawfully repaired or improved where no increase in
gross floor area or change of use is made. The regulations in this section shall apply to all Zoning Districts except the
Downtown Core District; and only Section 4.12.C shall apply to the Gateway Districts.
29 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
C. Minimum Reserved Parking Requirements.
1. The quantity of parking spaces to be provided in each development proposal shall be determined based on the
following requirements. When calculating the spaces required, a decimal shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number.
Uses Base Parking Requirements
Residential in R-A, R-B and
R-C districts
2.0 space/dwelling unit,
except 1.0 space/accessory
unit
Residential – in all other
districts
1.0 space/dwelling unit + 0.50
space/3 bedroom or larger
dwelling unit + 1 space for
every 4 units (calculated at
increments of 4)
Commercial (retail, restaurant,
etc.)
3.0 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. of
gross floor area
Hotel/B&B 1.0 space/room
Theater 0.25 spaces/seat
Industrial 3.0 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. of
gross floor area
Office 4.0 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. of
gross floor area
2. The applicant shall provide a calculation of the parking spaces allocated for each use (including for employees and
for customers/clients) and by time period, and any proposed shared use or transportation demand management
reductions, and the location of the parking spaces. The required reserved parking spaces may be adjusted, with
approval from the DRB or ZA depending on the application requested, as follows:
a. Shared Use: Sites over 10,000 square feet in non-residential gross floor area, may be applicable for shared use
of the required reserved parking spaces. No more than 60% of the required reserved spaces may be shared.
Shared use calculations must be submitted and approved by the Applicable Authority.
b. Transportation Demand Management (TDM): Use of TDM strategies may be incorporated for a reduction of no
greater than 10% of the required reserved parking spaces. Specific strategies, and the associated single
occupancy vehicle trip reductions must be submitted and approved by the Applicable Authority.
c. Location: The applicant shall demonstrate sufficient parking for residents and employees are available and
reserved for use on the applicant's site or off-site within 1400 feet from the project site. No more than 20% of
the required reserved parking or 10 spaces, whichever is more, shall be allowed off-site. Each application
involving the provision of reserved parking spaces off-site shall submit written proof of contractual
arrangements with the owner of the lot which guarantees the continuous use of the required parking spaces
for the particular use(s) for the duration of the use(s). The off-site parking provision is not permitted for
development proposals within the Residential Zoning Districts.
d. Public Parking: The customer or client (non-employee) portion of the minimum parking requirements may be
accommodated in the City's public parking inventory upon approval of the Director of Public Works or
Downtown Parking Administrator. However, the parking associated with the public parking inventory will not
be reserved explicitly for any one business.
3. Handicapped –Accessible Parking Spaces. Parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be provided for all nonresidential
uses. The size, number, and location of spaces shall comply with the ADA Accessibility Guidelines.
Handicap accessible spaces are required to be eight feet (8'0") wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet (5'0")
30 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
wide. One in every eight (8) accessible spaces must have an access aisle eight feet (8'0") wide and must be signed
"van accessible". The number of accessible spaces to be provided in each development proposal shall be
determined based on the following requirements. When calculating the spaces required, a decimal shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole number.
Total
parking
spaces in
lot
1-25
26-50
51 -
75
76 - 100
101- 150
151-200
201-300
301-400
401-500
501-1000
> 1,000
Number of
accessible
spaces
required in
lot
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2% of
total
20 + 1
per 100
over
1,000
4. Required Bicycle Parking. Sites and/or projects over 10,000 square feet in land area have the following
requirements:
a. For non-residential uses, the Applicant must provide 1 employee bicycle parking rack (2- bike capacity) per
5,000 square feet of non-residential gross floor area and 1 visitor/customer bicycle parking rack (2-bike
capacity) per 10,000 square feet of non-residential gross floor area. The employee and visitor racks may be colocated.
b. For residential, the developer must provide 1 tenant bicycle parking rack (2- bike capacity) per 10 units and 1
visitor bicycle parking rack (2-bike capacity) per 25 units. Projects under 10 units shall have no requirement.
c. Bicycle parking facilities shall be visible to intended users. The bicycle parking facilities shall not encroach on
any area in the public right-of-way intended for use by pedestrians, nor shall they encroach on any required
fire egress.
D. Parking Standard Dimensional Requirements.
1. Parking spaces shall be a minimum width of 9 feet, minimum length of 18 feet, and if enclosed, a minimum ceiling
height of 7 feet.
2. The aisle space shall be as follows:
Parking Pattern Minimum One-Way Aisle Width Minimum Two-Way Aisle Width
90 degree perpendicular 20 feet 20 feet
60 degree angle 18 feet 18 feet
45 degree angle 16 feet 16 feet
30 degree angle 14 feet 16 feet
Parallel 12 feet 16 feet
E. Surface Parking Site Requirements.
1. No parking space shall be allowed within the minimum frontyard setback of the district in which the use or property
is located.
2. Parking shall be located at the rear or side of buildings, or within or under the structure, except in the R-A, R-B, R-C
and Industrial Zoning Districts.
3. All parking spaces, circulation areas and connected driveways shall be surfaced in accordance with the Public Works
Specifications.
31 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
4. A front yard landscape buffer shall be provided to create stacking and maneuverability space for vehicles entering
and exiting the development site, create a safety barrier between parked cars and pedestrians on the public
sidewalk, and provide screening. The front yard parking buffer shall be a minimum 20 feet wide to accommodate a
car length, and landscaping a maximum of 3 feet high so as to not obstruct sight distances. See Figure 6 – Frontyard
Buffer and Stacking Space:
5. Provide adequate maneuvering areas for vehicles, utility and emergency trucks to serve the property and avoid
back onto a public right-of-way. See Figure 7 – Indentation Area for Manuvering:
6. Adequate site lighting shall be provided for safety at intersections, in parking areas, along walkways, at entryways
and between buildings in accordance with Section 4.10 of these regulations.
7. Locations for dumpsters and other refuse containers shall be identified on the site plan and located at the rear or
side of the site out of the public view. Dumpsters shall be screened with walls, shelters, fencing, dense plantings or
a combination thereof. Screening shall be a minimum of 6 feet tall and provide sufficient year-round coverage.
8. Landscaping. The following are minimum requirements, unless evidence of existing site conditions, such as existing
vegetation or slope conditions, can be shown to meet the intent of these regulations:
32 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
a. Screening shall be provided along the perimeter of the parking lot to improve the appearance of the site and
minimize noxious characteristics. Utilize evergreens for screening and deciduous trees for shade within the lot
and adjacent to public streets. Canopy shade trees should be placed at an average distance not to exceed 30
feet on center and aligned parallel three to seven feet behind the property line. Plant land between trees with
shrubs, ground cover or lawn.
b. Place and maintain front yard landscaping so that it does not obstruct lines of sight at points of egress from the
site. See Figure 8 – Site Distance at Egress Points:
c. Landscaping shall be designed to filter and infiltrate stormwater runoff on the site wherever feasible.
d. In addition to the above requirements, parking lots in commercial or industrial districts that abut a residential
district shall provide a planting screen with a minimum height of 4 feet at the time of planting, and shall be of a
sufficient density throughout the year to provide adequate privacy to the residential district.
e. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which such parking and/or circulation is provided
to maintain and replace, when necessary, such plantings.
F. Loading Requirements. The off-street loading requirements shall apply only to commercial, business, industrial and
institutional buildings and uses constructed, enlarged or extended after enactment of these requirements. These
requirements shall not apply to buildings lawfully repaired or improved if no change of use or increase in floor space is
made.
1. Loading Standards. The number of loading spaces to be provided shall be as follows:
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Number of Loading Spaces
0 – 15,000 square feet 1
15,001 – 40,000 square feet 2
40,001 – 100,000 square feet 3
100,001 – 160,000 square feet 4
Each additional 80,000 square feet 1
2. Loading Dimensional Requirements. Loading spaces shall have the following dimensions:
Minimum Width 10 feet
Minimum Length 25 feet
33 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
Minimum Height if Enclosed 14 feet
3. Other Loading Requirements.
a. Access Alleys. In the event the parcel on which the off-street loading is to be located abuts upon an alley of
sufficient size to accommodate vehicles, the loading space shall use the alley for access and not the public
street.
b. Access Streets. When the loading space is to access upon a public street the maximum curb cut allowed shall
be 25 feet.
c. Turn-Arounds. All loading spaces shall provide adequate room for the vehicles to turn around so as to avoid
the necessity of backing into a street or alley.
4. Screening. Loading spaces shall be located at the rear of the site. Integrate facilities with building architecture and
provide a minimum 6 foot high screen within a minimum 6 foot wide buffer. See Figure 9 – Loading Area
Placement:
SECTION 4.13 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. All applications for a zoning permit shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the applicable nuisance
regulations and performance standards pursuant to the requirements of the Winooski Code of Ordinances, and all
applicable Federal and State laws and regulations. All such standards shall be met and maintained for all uses, except for
agriculture and forestry, in all districts, as determined or measured at the property line. In determining ongoing
compliance, the burden of proof shall fall on the applicant, property owner, and/or all successors and assigns. When a
34 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
question arises as to identification of or nature of any reasonably presumable hazard as identified below, the ZA may
require the applicant or owner of record to submit an analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer.
1. Noise. No regularly occurring noise that is excessive at the property line and represents a significant increase in
noise levels near the development so as to be incompatible with the reasonable use of the surrounding area shall
be permitted, in accordance with the Winooski Noise Ordinance.
2. Vibration. No clearly apparent vibration that, when transmitted through the ground, is discernible at property lines
without the aid of instruments shall be permitted. The ZA or DRB may modify or waive this requirement during
construction or similar special circumstance for a period of up to 1 year in accordance with Article VI of these
regulations.
3. Glare, Lights and Reflection. No glare, lights or reflection shall be permitted that adversely affect other property
owners or tenants that could impair the vision of a driver of any motor vehicle, or that are detrimental to public
health, safety and welfare. However, reflections from solar energy collectors that are part of an operating solar
energy system shall not be regulated under these performance standards.
4. Fire, Explosives and Safety. No fire, explosive or safety hazard shall be permitted that significantly endangers other
property owners, or that results in a significantly increased burden on municipal facilities. The storage of any highly
flammable liquid in above ground or underground storage tanks shall comply with City Ordinances, Vermont Fire
and Building Safety Code and other applicable State laws and regulations, and any applicable federal regulations.
The owner of record shall seek approval from the City Fire Chief before installation, and shall submit certification
that such use complies with all applicable Federal, State and local regulations.
5. Smoke, Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution. No emission shall be permitted that
can cause any property damage, pose a hazard to the health of people, animals or vegetation, or that can cause any
excessive soiling at any point on the property of others. All emissions shall comply with Vermont Environmental
Protection Rules and any applicable federal regulations.
6. Heat, Cold, Moisture, Mist, Fog or Condensation. No releases of heat, cold, moisture, mist, fog or condensation
that are detrimental to neighboring properties and uses, or the public health, safety, and welfare shall be permitted.
7. Liquid or Solid Waste and Refuse. No discharge shall be permitted at any point into any sewage disposal system or
water course or lake or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the state Department of
Health, Department of Environmental Conservation or other regulatory department or agency, of any materials of
such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or
offensive elements. There shall be no accumulation of solid wastes or refuse conducive to the breeding of rodents
or insects. No solids or liquid wastes may be disposed into the City sewage system except as stated in the Winooski
Sewage Use Ordinance.
8. Electromagnetic Radiation. It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, a planned or intentional source
of electromagnetic radiation for any purpose which does not comply with applicable Federal and State laws and
regulations.
9. Radioactivity and Other Hazards. No radioactive emission or other hazard that endangers the public health, safety
or welfare, public facilities, or neighboring properties, or that results in a significantly increased burden on
municipal facilities and services shall be permitted.
SECTION 4.14 SIGNS
35 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety of the general
public by regulating signs so as to reduce general hazards, traffic hazards and to preserve open space, natural beauty
and the character of the City. It is further the intent to ensure that signs are clear, informative to the public and durable.
Signs should be scaled and designed for their intended use. Signage that is glaring or too large creates distraction,
intrudes into or lessens the urban experience, and creates visual clutter.
B. Applicability. The regulations in this section shall apply to all signs in all Zoning Districts except the Gateway
Districts and the Downtown Core District. Outdoor advertising as regulated by 10 V.S.A., Chapter 21: Tourist
Information Services is not subject to these regulations. No signs, other than official street or highway signs, may be
permitted in any zoning district except as specifically provided herein and have obtained a sign permit from the ZA.
C. Substitution Clause. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this sign ordinance may substitute
noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made
without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other
non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
D. Unsafe or Illegal Signs. In the event that the ZA finds that any sign regulated by this ordinance is unsafe,
insecure, or a menace to the public, the ZA shall give written notice to the named owner of the sign and the owner of
record of the property on which the sign is located. Owner(s) so notified shall remove, repair, or bring into conformity
such sign within thirty (30) days from the date of said notice. If said sign is not removed or repaired within the thirty (30)
days the ZA shall revoke the permit issued for the sign, shall cite the owner for violation of the Zoning Regulations and
may remove or repair the sign and will assess all costs and expenses incurred in the said removal or repair against the
property owner of record.
E. General Sign Restrictions. These include but may not be limited to:
1. Direct Application. Signs painted directly on all street facing FACADEs are prohibited, but are permitted, subject to
approval by the ZA or DRB as applicable, on the side, rear, and courtyard exterior walls.
2. Illumination. No neon or illuminated sign shall be of such illumination or so located so as to diminish or detract in
any way from the effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning device. Above street-level
establishment signs may not be illuminated.
3. Vision Clearance. Signs located on a corner lot shall either be placed outside the vision clearance angle or shall not
exceed a height of three (3) and one-half (1/2) feet above finished grade. The vision clearance angle is defined as
the triangular area enclosed by the centerline of two intersecting streets and a line joining the points on such
centerlines at distances of 75 feet from their intersections.
4. Duality of Districts. In a situation where land is located in a less restrictive district and a sign is to be located in a
more restrictive district, the regulations of the more restrictive shall apply to the sign, unless the DRB determines
that the regulations of the less restrictive district will not jeopardize the purpose and intent of this section.
5. Non-conforming Signs. Non-conforming signs which are structurally altered, relocated, or replaced shall
immediately be brought into conformance with this regulation.
36 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
6. Removal and Repair of Signs. Any sign that no longer advertises an existing business conducted or product sold on
the premises shall be removed by the owner within 60 days. All signs shall be maintained in good condition. Any
sign that is abandoned, unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public may be removed by the city at the owner’s
expense if the owner takes no action to repair or remove the sign after a notice of violation per Article VII.B of
these regulations.
F. Temporary Signs. All signs temporary in nature may be granted a temporary permit from the ZA for a period not
to exceed 90 days. The DRB may grant an extension of the temporary permission for an additional 90 day period.
Temporary signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area, and shall not obstruct the vision clearance angle.
G. Permanent On-Premise Signs in Residential Districts. One sign per residence which conforms to the following
requirements is permitted in the R-A, R-B and R-C Zoning Districts. Illumination of signs in residential districts may not
cause any glare beyond the property boundaries.
1. One sign not exceeding 200 square inches and affixed to the building is permitted or;
2. One free-standing sign not exceeding 4 square feet, not exceeding the vision clearance height restrictions and
located within the required front yard setback is permitted.
H. Permanent On-Premise Signs in the Central Business District. In reviewing applications the following will be
considered:
1. All proposed signs will not relate to the architecture of the building on which they are to be located.
2. All proposed signs will be compatible with the building or structure in terms of the size, color, shape, material and
design.
3. Maximum Size. The maximum size of a sign or a series of signs for all establishments shall be determined as follows.
Different types of signs are permitted per lineal frontage per establishment provided the combined primary and
secondary signs do not exceed the maximum allowable sign area in square feet as listed here:
Lineal Frontage of Establishment Maximum Allowable Sign Area in Square Feet
36 feet or greater 40 square feet
between 24 and 35 feet 35 square feet
between 16 and 23 feet 30 square feet
between 11 and 15 feet 25 square feet
10 feet or less 20 square feet
a. Sign Area Calculation. To calculate the area of a sign use the following formulas. Structural members bearing
no copy which are not an integral part of the design shall not be included in calculating the surface area.
i. Hanging Sign (double faced). Use the area of one side.
ii. Three Dimensional Signs. Calculate the projected area of both the front view and the larger side
view of the sign, then use one-half the total of the front and large side to determine the area.
iii. Irregularly Shaped Signs. Use the area of the smallest plane geometric figure that will wholly
contain the sign.
iv. Square Footage. The primary and secondary sign area combined shall not exceed the maximum
allowable sign area in square feet in Section 4.14.H.3.a. A secondary sign shall be no greater than 40% of
the maximum allowable sign area, or less if the primary sign is greater than 60% of the maximum
allowable sign area, such that the combination of the signs do not exceed the total maximum allowable
sign area. The other permissible signs listed under Section 4.14.H.5.b below shall not be included in the
maximum allowable sign area calculation.
4. Height of Signs. Any sign for a street level establishment must be at least 8’ above the sidewalk and no higher than
the window-sills of the second floor.
5. Types of Permitted Signs. The following signs, or combination of signs, are permitted in the Central Business
District subject to the following provisions:
37 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
a. Primary and Secondary Signs. Primary signs are an establishment's major sign, which may be a combination of
signs, such as a wall sign plus a hanging sign. Secondary signs may be used to indicate the secondary or
alternate entrance or egress to a commercial establishment. The types of signs permissible as primary and
secondary signs, and included in the maximum allowable sign area, include:
i. Banner Signs. Any sign which is constructed of fabric and is not rigidly attached on all sides. Shall not
project more than 4’8” from a building or two-thirds (2/3) of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less.
ii. Hanging Signs. Any sign supported by a building wall and not parallel to it which projects 8 inches or
more. When a combination of sign types is allowed the hanging sign should consist for the most part of a
graphic display with a minimum of lettering.
iii. Wall Signs. Painted, incised or three dimensional letters affixed to a signboard which is then attached to
a building surface.
iv. Window Signs. Any sign which is permanently affixed to the surface of the glass of any part of any
establishment. Signs visible through a window on a permanent basis are considered window signs even though
they may not be affixed to the glass. Signs affixed to glass shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of
the glass area.
b. Other Permissible Signs. These signs are subject to review, but their area shall not be included in the
maximum allowable sign area calculation.
i. Plaque or Historic Markers. A permanent sign whose purpose is to indicate some significant fact about
the building.
ii. Plaza Signs or Free-Standing Signs. Any sign structurally separate from the building, being supported by
itself or on a stand and/or legs. These signs shall not exceed 8 feet in height and no more than 40 square feet
in area. The base of all permanent freestanding signs shall be landscaped with perennial and/or annual
plantings.
iii. Directory Signs. Any sign which contains listings of two or more commercial establishments who share a
common entrance. The maximum size of all directory signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet and no more
than one (1) square foot per establishment.
iv. Portable Signs. Portable signs, such as sandwich board signs, are designed for easy placement. Portable
signs may not exceed 12 SF on each face and must be removed when the business they advertise is closed.
Portable signs may take up no more than 30% of a pedestrian walkway and may not be placed in a public rightof-
way. Portable signs must be brought inside when the business with which they are associated is closed.
6. Dimensional Requirements and Sign Types for Signs above the Street-Level Establishments. Above street-level
establishments may use any of the signs allowed under Section 4.14.H.5 above, but may not be illuminated. The
maximum sign area for each establishment shall by twenty (20) square feet. In addition each establishment may
have one sign place on a directory sign.
I. Permanent On-Premise Signs in General Commercial (C-2), Industrial Zoning Districts. Each business is permitted
two signs including one applied FACADE sign and one free-standing sign, provided that said sign conforms to the following
requirements:
1. Applied FACADE Sign:
a. Such sign shall be applied onto and parallel to the face of the building.
b. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in area.
c. Such sign shall not project more than 12 inches beyond the face of the building.
d. No part of such sign shall be situated above the height of the wall to which it is attached.
2. Free-standing Sign:
a. Such sign shall not exceed an area of 25 square feet.
b. Such sign shall not be placed within any public right-of-way, and no closer than 5 feet to any sidewalk.
c. No sign shall exceed 16 feet in height from the top of the sign to the ground level.
38 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
d. Illumination of signs shall meet the requirements of the outdoor lighting standards in Section 4.11.
e. The base of all permanent freestanding signs shall be landscaped with perennial and/or annual plantings.
3. Accessory Signs:
a. Accessory signs are permitted provided that each such sign does not exceed a maximum area of 4 square feet
and shall not exceed a total height of 6 feet. Illumination of signs shall meet the requirements of the outdoor
lighting standards in Section 4.11.
J. Electronic message center. A sign that is capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be
electronically changed by remote or automatic means. Electronic message centers shall:
1. Meet all requirements of this section;
2. Transition in an instant/static fashion; and
3. Automatically dim to the ambient lighting with a maximum brightness of 0.3 foot candles over the ambient lighting.
K. Public Art. Public art includes sculptures, monuments, murals, and other objects of art that are not enclosed in
a building or other structure and that will be visible from a public way. Public art may also be incorporated into
functional objects like fountains, benches, lamp posts, bike racks and other streetscape features. It is not the intent of
this bylaw to limit freedom of expression, but the city does need an opportunity to enforce the distinction between
public art and signs. The city also needs to ensure that proposed public art does not constitute a hazard to drivers,
cyclists, or pedestrians. For this reason, proposed public art must be included in all development and a Zoning permit
will be required for the addition of public art to an approved development.
L. Application Information, Signs. The applicant shall submit the following information to the ZA:
1. A detailed drawing or blueprint showing the construction details, the lettering and/ or pictorial matter, the position
of lighting and other extraneous devices, the position of the sign on the land or building, the position of the sign in
relation to nearby buildings or structures and to any public or private sidewalk, street or highway. A photograph
may be submitted in addition to, or instead of, the building drawing, but it must show the information required on
the drawing.
2. A drawing, to scale, of the bracket, if any, including dimensions, color, material, and the method of affixing it to the
sign and to the building.
3. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected, in
the event the applicant is not the owner thereof.
4. A change in signage to a previously approved site plan shall require resubmission.
SECTION 4.15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
A. Intent. Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion control measures shall be used during all
phases of development as necessary to minimize surface runoff and erosion, protect water quality, and to avoid damage
to downstream properties and infrastructure in conformance with the following requirements.
B. Applicability. These stormwater and erosion control requirements shall apply to all development as required by
the Winooski Stormwater Regulations. The regulations in this section shall apply to all Zoning Districts.
C. Stormwater management and erosion control systems serving the development shall be designed, installed and
maintained in accordance with the City of Winooski Stormwater Regulations and best management practices accepted
by the State (including Green Stormwater Infrastructure and Low Impact Development strategies), based on the
39 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
upstream drainage area, size of storm events, soil and slope conditions, the proposed type and density of development,
including total lot coverage at build-out.
1. All stormwater management systems shall be designed to accommodate existing and anticipated runoff from the
site, including anticipated flows from storm events and total runoff generated at build-out and, avoid flooding or
damage to adjoining properties and downstream drainage facilities to the extent physically feasible to:
a. Maximize onsite infiltration and treatment through utilization of “Green Stormwater Infrastructure” (GSI)
including infiltration, evapotranspiration, storage and reuse, and minimize surface runoff through the use of
"Low Impact Development" (LID) strategies including minimize soil compaction, minimize total site disturbance,
protect natural flow patterns, protect riparian buffers, protect sensitive areas such as wetlands and steep
slopes, and reduce impervious surfaces (see VT DEC Watershed Management Division’s Green Infrastructure
website for more information on GSI and LID).
b. Integrate natural drainage systems on site and stormwater management system design.
c. Minimize the need for expensive system maintenance.
d. Integrate stormwater storage and treatment facilities (e.g, retention ponds) in site design.
e. Avoid flooding or damage to adjoining properties and downstream drainage facilities.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that existing storm/sewer systems infrastructure and downstream drainage
facilities will be able to accommodate any additional runoff from the site. If increased runoff exceeds the capacity of
downstream drainage facilities and infrastructure, storage or treatment facilities, the Publics Works Director, ZA and/or
DRB may require that the applicant install:
1. additional onsite stormwater infiltration, retention and treatment facilities and/or
2. off-site improvements to downstream drainage facilities and infrastructure as necessary to accommodate
additional runoff from the site.
E. A stormwater management and erosion control plan is required for development proposals with over 0.2 acres
disturbed, prepared or certified by a licensed professional engineer, or a certified professional in erosion and sediment
control, as necessary to determine conformance with these regulations. The plan shall incorporate best management
practices as recommended by the state in the most recent editions of the "Vermont Stormwater Management Manual"
and the "Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction Sites" or similar state-issued
publications.
F. The Publics Works Director, ZA and/or DRB may also require, as necessary to ensure conformance with these
regulations:
1. Project phasing as necessary to minimize the extent of soil disturbance and erosion during each phase of
development.
2. Increased surface water and wetland setback distances and buffer areas (under Section 4.8) and/or the submission
and implementation of a buffer management plan to protect surface waters and wetlands from accelerated runoff,
soil erosion and sedimentation.
3. Drainage easements or City approvals as necessary to accommodate drainage directed onto adjoining properties or
public rights-of-way.
4. Documentation that state stormwater and construction permits have been obtained, which may also serve as
documentation of compliance with applicable requirements of these regulations.
40 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
SECTION 4.16 UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE & PUBLIC FACILIITES
A. Intent. Proposed development shall be adequately served by utilities and facilities and shall not create an undue
burden on existing and planned public facilities.
B. Applicability. The regulations in this section shall apply to development in all Zoning Districts.
C. Fire Protection. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ZA or DRB that adequate fire protection
exists to serve the proposed development. The ZA or DRB, in consultation with the Winooski Fire Marshall, may require
that the applicant provide adequate distribution facilities for fire protection in accordance with department
specifications. If required, the applicant shall install fire hydrants as required by the DRB to serve the development, and
shall ensure adequate access to developed lots and buildings for emergency response vehicles.
D. Other Municipal Services. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ZA or DRB that adequate
school, and emergency services exist to serve the proposed development. The applicant shall consult with appropriate
municipal and school officials and emergency service providers to determine whether adequate capacity exists to serve
the development. In addition:
1. For major subdivisions or site plans or developments, the DRB may require, as a condition of preliminary
subdivision approval, that the applicant submit documentation from appropriate officials, or a fiscal impact analysis
to be paid for by the applicant, that identifies potential impacts of the subdivision on public facilities and services
and methods for mitigating such impacts, which may include the phasing of development in accordance with a duly
adopted capital budget and program.
E. Water and Wastewater. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ZA or DRB that adequate potable
water supplies exist, and that adequate wastewater system capacities exist to serve the proposed development in
accordance with the Winooski Water/Wastewater Ordinance. In addition:
1. Applicants shall provide a State Wastewater and Potable Water Supply Permit.
2. All applicable connection fees shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements of the Winooski
Water/Wastewater Ordinance.
3. Final as-builts of all infrastructure associated with connection to the Winooski Water/Wastewater system shall be
submitted prior to certificate of occupancy, or in accordance with the Winooski Water/Wastewater Ordinance.
4. Any new public infrastructure shall be built and coordinated with the City in accordance with the Winooski
Water/Wastewater Ordinance and Public Works Specifications.
F. Utilities. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the ZA or DRB that adequate utilities, including but
not limited to electric and gas, or alternative energy supplies, exist to serve the development. The location of all existing
and proposed utilities, including but not limited to electric, gas, telephone, and cable television utilities, shall be shown
on the development application. In addition:
1. All new service utilities associated with development shall be located underground.
2. The applicant shall coordinate the development design with utility companies to ensure that suitable areas are
available for above ground or underground installation, within and adjacent to the proposed development. Utility
easements of sufficient width shall be provided to serve both the proposed development, and future service
extensions to adjoining properties. Such easements shall be identified on the final subdivision plat or site plan.
3. Utility corridors shall be shared with other utility and/or transportation corridors where feasible, and be located to
minimize site disturbance, adverse impacts to public health and safety, and to significant natural, cultural and
scenic resources, in accordance with Section 4.8.
41 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
42 ARTICLE IV - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS | City of Winooski
SECTION 5.1 ACCESSORY DWELLING
A. Accessory dwelling units are a permitted use in all districts where single-unit detached dwellings are permitted. An
accessory dwelling unit is an efficiency or one-bedroom apartment that is part of or detached from a single-unit owneroccupied
dwelling, and has facilities and provisions for independent living, including sleeping, food preparation, and
sanitation, provided there is compliance with all the following:
1. The property has a sufficient wastewater allocation;
2. The accessory unit does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total habitable floor area of the single-unit dwelling;
and,
3. Setback, coverage, and off-street parking requirements specified in the bylaws are met.
B. A Zoning Permit is required for any accessory dwelling unit. In addition, it shall require Conditional Use approval if
it involves or requires any of the following:
1. Construction of an addition or new accessory structure;
2. An increase in the building height or habitable floor area of the existing dwelling; or
3. An increase in the dimensions of the parking area.
C. At time of sale or transfer of title the accessory residential use shall continue provided that one of the dwelling
units is and remains owner-occupied.
SECTION 5.2 DAY CARE FACILITY (HOME CHILD CARE, DAY CARE FACILITY)
A. A home child care business, the owner of which is licensed or registered by the state, which serves no more than six
children shall be considered a permitted accessory use to single-unit dwellings. A zoning permit shall be required under
Section 6.10 only for purposes of documenting and recording the use in the land records of the city. A home child care
business that serves no more than six full time and four part-time children, is a permitted accessory use to single-unit
dwellings, but shall be subject to site plan review under Section 6.6, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
B. A state-licensed nonresidential child care or adult day care facility may be allowed in Gateway, C-1, C-3, DC and I
zoning districts subject to site plan review under Section 6.6, except Gateway and DC (see Appendix B and C for those
review procedures).
SECTION 5.3 FILLING OR REMOVAL WITH EARTH PRODUCTS
A. In any district the removal or filling with loam, gravel, stone, fill, topsoil or other similar materials, except when
incidental to or in connection with the construction of a building on the same lot, shall be permitted only upon issuance
of a permit from the ZA. Any removal or filling incidental to or in connection with the construction of a building on the
same lot shall be considered development. In considering such a permit the ZA may consider and impose conditions
relating to the following factors:
1. Depth of excavation, especially in proximity to roads or adjacent properties.
ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
43 ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS | City of Winooski
2. Existing grade and proposed grade created by this removal or addition of material.
3. Effect upon public health, safety and welfare.
4. Erosion potential due to removal of vegetative cover.
5. Slope stability problems created by the activity.
6. Effect upon use of adjacent properties by reason of noise, dust or vibrations.
7. Effect upon traffic hazards in residential areas or excessive congestion or physical damage on public ways.
B. Permit Conditions. When issuing a zoning permit, the ZA may:
1. Limit the duration of the permit to any length of time deemed appropriate;
2. Require the submission of an acceptable plan for the rehabilitation of the site at the conclusion of operations;
3. Limit the hours of operation, routes of transportation or materials removed; and
4. Require a suitable bond or escrow deposit to assure compliance with provisions of this Section for the proper
rehabilitation of the site.
C. Any such activity proposed for the floodplain shall be permitted only if it meets regulations in Appendix A:
Inundation Hazard Area Regulations.
SECTION 5.4 GARAGE SALES
A. Garage sales are permitted provided such sales conform to the following provisions:
1. One garage sale not to exceed ten consecutive days, or two garage sales not exceed 72 hours each shall be
permitted per residential unit in one calendar year.
2. One temporary sign per garage sale is permitted on the property provided that such sign conforms to Section 4.14.F
of this ordinance. Such sign shall not create a public hazard. The ZA may remove or cause to be removed any
unsafe sign.
3. The ZA shall request the cessation of any non-conforming garage sale.
SECTION 5.5 GAS STATION AND FUEL SALES
A. Gas Stations and fuel sales are only allowed in the Gateway Zoning Districts and are subject to review and approval
under Appendix B of these regulations.
B. Sale of fuel is not an allowed accessory use of convenience stores.
SECTION 5.6 GROUP, BOARDING AND RESIDENTIAL CARE HOMES
A residential care home or group home, to be operated under state licensing or registration, serving not more than eight
(8) persons who have a handicap or disability as defined in 9 VSA § 4501, shall be considered a permitted single-unit
residential use of property. A zoning permit shall be required to document and record the use in the land records of the
city. A residential care home or group home within 1,000 feet of another existing or permitted home shall be subject to
Conditional Use Review and approval, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
SECTION 5.7 HOME OCCUPATION
44 ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS | City of Winooski
A. Customary home occupations are permitted residential accessory uses in all districts. Nothing in this regulation
shall infringe upon the right of any resident to use a minor portion of a dwelling for an occupation which is customary in
residential areas and which does not change the character thereof, and which meets the following standards:
1. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal dwelling;
2. The home occupation shall be carried on by residents of the household and no more than one non-household
employee;
3. No exterior displays or signs or other advertising material shall be permitted, accept as allowed under Section 4.14
of this regulation;
4. Exterior storage of material shall not be permitted and the home occupation shall not include servicing of
motorized vehicles or motorized equipment;
5. No traffic shall be generated in greater volumes than would normally be expected in the neighborhood;
6. No objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat or glare shall be produced;
7. The home occupation shall not utilize more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total square footage of the
dwelling.
SECTION 5.8 MOBILE HOME PARK
A. In accordance with the Act [§ 4412(1)], these regulations shall not have the effect of excluding mobile homes and
mobile home parks from the city. For the purposes of this ordinance, all mobile homes used for residential purposes
shall be considered single-family detached dwellings. Mobile home parks shall be allowed where all single family homes
are allowed, and constructed and operated in accordance with 10 V.S.A. Chapter 153. Each mobile home in a mobile
home park shall meet the requirements of this ordinance applicable to single-family detached dwellings.
SECTION 5.9 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL USES
A. Neighborhood Commercial Uses. Neighborhood commercial uses are intended to primarily serve the nearby
residential area in the R-B and R-C zoning districts subject to the following:
1. Neighborhood commercial uses shall be limited to a single story on the street level of any structure.
2. Neighborhood commercial uses shall be treated as a conditional use.
3. The neighborhood commercial use shall be counted against the property’s allowable residential density; every
1,000 ft2 counts as one residential unit or portion thereof.
4. The sale of fuel for motor vehicles, or new or expanded gas station canopies, servicing of motor vehicles, and
exterior storage of material shall be prohibited.
5. Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00am to 11:00pm seven days per week. Any expansion in the hours of
operation of an existing neighborhood commercial use shall require conditional use review by the DRB.
6. All building height and setback requirements for the underlying residential district shall apply, and the lot coverage
shall not exceed 60%.
7. Signage shall be subject to Section 4.14 of this regulation.
8. No objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat or glare shall be produced.
9. Home occupations as defined and regulated under this article are not restricted by the provisions of this section.
45 ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS | City of Winooski
SECTION 5.10 PROTECTED USES, PUBLIC FACILITY
A. The following uses may be regulated only with respect to the location, size, height, building bulk, yards, courts,
setbacks, density of buildings, off-street parking, loading facilities, traffic, noise, lighting, landscaping, and screening
requirements, and only to the extent that regulations do not have the effect of interfering with the intended functional
use:
1. State- or community-owned and operated institutions and facilities.
2. Public and private schools and other educational institutions certified by the state department of education.
3. Churches and other places of worship, convents, and parish houses.
4. Public and private hospitals.
5. Regional solid waste management facilities certified under 10 VSA Chapter 159.
6. Hazardous waste management facilities for which a notice of intent to construct has been received under 10 VSA §
6606(a).
SECTION 5.11 SWIMMING POOLS
A. Outdoor swimming pools are permitted and shall be considered accessory use provided they conform to the
following requirements:
1. Such a swimming pool shall be located within the dimensional setback requirements applicable to the district in
which the pool is to be located;
2. Such a swimming pool shall be completely enclosed by a wall, fence or other substantial structure adequate to
prevent the accessibility to the pool by small children;
3. The owner obtains an electrical permit detailing the installation of electrical appliances for such a swimming pool;
and
4. No swimming pool be constructed on a required front yard.
SECTION 5.12 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
A. Temporary Structures in Residential Districts. Temporary structures shall be considered residential accessory uses
when they are incidental to the principal residential use or structure located on a residential lot. Any temporary
structure with a permanent foundation or which exceeds 100 square feet shall conform to the requirements of this
regulation for the district in which it is located.
B. Temporary Structures in All Other Districts. Temporary structures shall be considered accessory uses when they are
incidental to the principal use or structure located on a lot. The DRB may grant conditional use approval for a temporary
non-conforming use provided that the use is in conformance with the following provisions:
1. That such a use is incidental to the development of a neighborhood or project.
2. That a bond or an escrow account has been properly filed with the City Manager conditional upon the payment to
the City of the costs of the removal of such a building or use upon the revocation or the expiration of such a permit
if such a use or building is not removed by the owner within the permit period.
3. That conditional use approval for such a use shall limit the period of time to a maximum of one (1) year; and
46 ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS | City of Winooski
4. That, upon application, the DRB may grant an extension for one (1) year, provided that the total time for any such
permit and extensions shall not exceed two (2) years.
SECTION 5.13 VEHICLE SERVICE & SALES
A. Motor Vehicle Service and Sales. The display of three or more vehicles for sale at any time on a property shall be
considered a commercial motor vehicle sales establishment allowed within designated zoning districts in accordance
with Table 2.4, and all other applicable requirements of these regulations. The occasional and temporary display for sale
of up to two motor vehicles on a lot, which are owned by the resident or property owner, are exempted from these
regulations.
B. In addition to applicable sections of Article IV, site plan standards and, if required, conditional use standards,
commercial motor vehicle service and sales establishments must also meet the following requirements:
1. No more than ten vehicles for sale or lease may be parked in outdoor display areas at any time.
2. Motor vehicles intended for sale or lease shall be displayed in an enclosed building or within a designated exterior
display area approved by the DRB that meets required side and rear setbacks for the district in which it is located.
Exterior display areas may be located within the front setback area, however no vehicle shall be parked within a
public right-of-way.
3. The DRB may require landscaping and/or fencing as it deems appropriate for public safety, and to screen exterior
display areas from adjoining properties.
4. Vehicles scheduled for repair shall be parked within an enclosed structure or within a designated yard or parking
area approved by the DRB, which meets all setback requirements for the district in which it is located and shall be
located to the side or the rear of the garage or maintenance building. The Board may require landscaping and/or
fencing as it deems appropriate for public safety, and to screen the yard or parking area year-round from adjoining
properties and public rights-of-way.
5. No more than three unregistered vehicles shall be stored on-site unless the property is a licensed salvage yard.
6. All maintenance and repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed structure which meets all applicable
municipal and state regulations for water supply, wastewater and waste disposal.
7. Fuel and hazardous materials stored and used on the premises shall be limited to those materials necessary for the
operation of the business, and shall be stored in an enclosed and secure structure in accordance with all applicable
state and federal regulations.
47 ARTICLE V – SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS | City of Winooski
Introduction: No land development or subdivision of land, as defined under Article IX, may commence in the City of
Winooski until all applicable municipal land use permits and approvals have been issued as provided for under the Act [§
4446] and these regulations, unless the development is specifically exempted from municipal regulation under Section
6.13. This Article of the Winooski Zoning Regulations provides a comprehensive overview of development review
procedures that apply to all types of development throughout the city: subdivision and other land conveyances, planned
unit developments, site plan, conditional use, variance, appeal, zoning permit and certificate of compliance/occupancy.
This Article also identifies uses and structures that are exempt from Winooski development review.
A. Permit Requirements. Municipal land use permits and approvals under these regulations include:
1. Zoning permits issued by the ZA under Section 6.10 for all development.
2. Site plan approval issued by the DRB under Section 6.6 for all permitted uses that require site plan review.
3. Conditional use approval issued by the DRB under Section 6.7 for all conditional uses listed under Article II, and for
other development as specified in these regulations.
4. Subdivision approvals issued by the DRB under Section 6.2 for the subdivision or re-subdivision of land.
5. Planned unit development (PUD) approval under Section 6.3 for planned development.
6. Certificates of occupancy issued by the ZA under Section 6.12, for development for which a zoning permit has been
issued prior to occupancy or use.
B. Additional Permits and Approvals. Additional municipal, state and federal permits or approvals may be required
for activities associated with land development and subdivision including, but not limited to the following:
1. Highway Access Permits issued by the Public Works Department and/or City Council to access or work within town
highway rights-of-way, or the Vermont Agency of Transportation (VTrans) to access or work within state right-ofways.
2. City building permits, water/wastewater allocations and connection permits, sewer connection permits issued by
the Building Code Officer, Public Works Director and/or the City Fire Marshall.
3. A variety of state permits or certifications including but not limited to: wastewater (septic) system and potable
water supply permits, construction and stormwater permits, wetlands permits, stream alteration or crossing
permits, public health and safety permits, child care facility licenses and Act 250 permits.
a. As required under the Act [§ 4449(e)], municipal application forms and municipal land use permits or
approvals issued under these regulations shall include a statement, in content and form approved by the
Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources, that state permits may be required and that the applicant or
permittee should contact the state's regional permit specialist or individual state agencies to determine which
state permits must be obtained before any construction may commence.
b. The ZA or DRB may require that an applicant submit a state project review sheet with their application that
identifies state and federal permits to be obtained by the applicant.
ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES
48 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
4. Documentation that state, federal and other municipal permits and approvals have been obtained by the applicant
may be required, as applicable, prior to:
a. the issuance of a certificate of occupancy under Section 6.12;
b. submitting an application for final subdivision review under Section 6.2, unless waived by the DRB; and
c. recording a subdivision plat in the land records of the City under Section 6.2.
SECTION 6.1 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING
A. Intent. All applicants or their authorized agents are encouraged to meet with the ZA prior to filing an application for
any type of development in the City. The purpose of this meeting is to provide the applicant with the necessary forms
and information needed to file a complete application, and to discuss review procedures and requirements.
B. At this meeting, the ZA will:
a. Review and discuss the proposed development with the applicant to classify the development review process
needed under these regulations, and to help identify options for design that best meet the needs of the
applicant and the requirements of these regulations.
b. Provide application forms and checklists, and identify for the applicant what materials will be needed to file a
complete application for referral to the DRB, before site visits and hearings can be scheduled.
c. Explain the timing requirements for submissions, hearings, decisions, and plat recording.
d. Identify any other applicable city ordinances and permit requirements that pertain to the development, and
recommend that the applicant address these requirements in design.
e. Direct the applicant to contact the state's Regional Permit Specialist to complete a state project review sheet
that identifies state or federal permits that also may be required.
C. Meeting Follow-up. Within 15 business days of the meeting, the ZA will issue a written letter to the applicant that:
a. summarizes the content of the meeting, including issues to be addressed in the application;
b. classifies the type of development; and
c. outlines the requirements for the submission of a complete application.
SECTION 6.2 SUBDIVISIONS
A. Purpose. Subdivision regulations, in accordance with the Act [§ 4418], are intended to address the relocation of
property boundaries, the creation of new lots, and the recording of plats in the City Land Records. Subdivision review
and approval by the DRB ensures that lots meet applicable zoning district requirements and are suited for their intended
use. Often, but not always, land development that creates new lots also includes the placement of buildings and other
site improvements. The specific regulation and review of such buildings and site improvements are elsewhere in this
ordinance.
B. Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land, as defined under Article IX, that are located
within the City of Winooski. No land shall be subdivided within the city until the applicant has obtained final subdivision
approval from the DRB and the approved subdivision plat is recorded in the Winooski land records. Subdivision approval
by the DRB is required prior to:
49 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. The transfer, sale or long-term lease of title to property (as defined under 32 V.S.A. § 9601) of any portion of an
existing lot. See C.2 below for exemptions.
2. Predevelopment site work, including site clearing, grading, and the construction or installation of infrastructure or
other site improvements that are intended to serve more than one lot (excluding forestry, agricultural, and land
surveying activities).
3. Recording a subdivision plat or the deed for subdivided lot in the land records of the city.
4. Applying for a zoning permit to develop a subdivided lot.
C. Exemptions. The following are exempt from subdivision review under these regulations:
1. Rights-of-way or easements that do not result in the subdivision of land.
2. Condominium developments, footprint lots, and other similar ownership structures, on one parcel of land shall
require Site Plan review and approval, not Subdivision review and approval.
3. Revisions to existing lot lines in accordance with Section 6.4.
4. A parcel or portion of a parcel of land leased for agriculture or forestry that does not require the sale or transfer of
land, or the establishment of permanent roads, infrastructure or structures.
D. Classification of Subdivisions. For purposes of these regulations, subdivisions of land will be classified by the ZA as
either "minor" or "major" subdivisions as follows:
1. Minor subdivisions include:
a. The subdivision of land or the re-subdivision of a previously subdivided lot which results in the creation of no
more than three lots including previously subdivided lots, regardless of any change in ownership; and which
does not require the installation or extension of a road or municipal utilities.
b. An amendment to an approved subdivision or subdivision plat that does not substantially or materially alter
findings and prior conditions of subdivision approval.
2. Major subdivisions include:
50 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
a. The subdivision of land or re-subdivision of a previously subdivided lot which results in a total of four or more
lots including previously subdivided lots, or requires the installation or extension of a road right-of-way or
municipal utilities.
b. An amendment to a previously approved major subdivision which alters the number of lots, the density of
development, the location of building envelopes, rights-of-way or easements, or otherwise substantially or
materially alters the findings, terms or conditions of prior subdivision approval.
c. All planned unit developments under Section 6.3.
E. Modifications & Waivers. The DRB may waive any standard under this article that it determines does not apply to a
particular subdivision.
1. In accordance with the Act [§ 4418(2)], the DRB also may modify or waive a standard under this article, subject to
conditions if it determines that, due to circumstances specific to a particular application:
a. The standard is not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, or the standard is
inappropriate because of the inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the
subdivision; and
b. The modification or waiver will not nullify the intent and purpose of these regulations, the Winooski Municipal
Development Plan, or other city bylaws and ordinances in effect at the time of application.
2. Requests for modifications or waivers under this section shall be submitted by the applicant in writing with the
application for preliminary or final subdivision review. The applicant must provide sufficient information for the
DRB to make findings that justify the modification or waiver, with or without conditions.
3. The DRB may require an independent technical review of a proposed modification or waiver, as specified under
Subsection B above, that identifies related impacts and mitigation measures that may be incorporated under
associated conditions of approval.
4. In granting a modification or waiver, the DRB shall make explicit findings that:
a. Specify the circumstances that justify granting a modification or waiver.
b. State how granting the modification or waiver will not nullify the intent and purpose of these regulations or
the Winooski Municipal Development Plan, including the plan's stated goals and objectives for the relevant
zoning district(s), and other regulations in effect at the time of application.
c. State what conditions, if any, shall be required of the applicant in exchange for granting the modification or
waiver, as necessary to mitigate adverse impacts.
F. Additional Information. The DRB may require, as necessary to assist in its evaluation and determine project
conformance with these standards:
51 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. Written disclosure of the intended use of land to be subdivided and general plans for the subsequent development
of any land to be retained by the owner or applicant when only a portion of an existing parcel is to be subdivided.
2. The submission of additional information or studies under one or more standards of review, including an
independent technical review prepared by a qualified professional retained by the DRB and paid for by the
applicant.
3. The modification of subdivision lot layout and design, the phasing of development, or other reasonable and
necessary measures to avoid or mitigate undue adverse impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision and
subsequent development of subdivided lots.
G. Coordination of Review. Subdivision review and approval by the DRB is required prior to site plan or conditional
use review by the DRB or the issuance of zoning permits for the subsequent development of subdivided lots. The
conditions of subdivision approval shall apply under subsequent review processes. However, site plan or conditional use
review may be conducted concurrently by the DRB with final subdivision review.
H. General Standards. All land to be subdivided shall be suitable for the intended use and proposed density of
development. The subdivision shall not result in undue adverse impacts to public health and safety, the natural
environment, neighboring properties and uses, or the character of the area in which it is located. Subdivision
applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the following standards:
1. Development Density. The allowed density of development within a subdivision shall be calculated by dividing the
total land area to be subdivided, excluding existing and proposed road rights-of-way, by the minimum lot size
specified for the zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is located (see Article II), except as modified for planned
unit developments under Section 6.3.
2. Existing Site Conditions. Subdivision layout and design, to the extent physically feasible, shall incorporate and
avoid undue adverse impacts to significant natural, historic and scenic resources identified from the Winooski
Municipal Development Plan, maps and related inventories, or through site investigation in accordance with
Section 4.8, the Historic Structure Section of Design Review in Section 4.4, and other relevant sections of these
regulations.
3. Winooski Municipal Development Plan & Regulations. Subdivisions shall conform to clearly stated policies and
objectives in the Winooski Municipal Development Plan as most recently amended, other provisions of these
regulations, adopted capital improvement programs, and other city bylaws, ordinances and regulations in effect at
the time of application.
4. District Settlement Patterns. A subdivision shall be designed and configured to reflect the desired settlement
pattern for the zoning district(s) in which it is located, as defined under Article II and the Winooski Municipal
Development Plan. To this end, the following standards shall apply to subdivisions within respective zoning districts:
52 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
a. Residential Zoning Districts. Subdivision within this district shall be designed and configured to reinforce a
compact residential, pedestrian scale and pattern of development. Lots and building envelopes shall be sized
and located to maintain a consistent building line and streetscape along roads, and to maintain privacy in the
rear. Subdivisions in this district also shall be designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads,
sidewalks and utility corridors. Sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities shall be provided where physically
feasible; new roads in these districts shall be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and
circulation.
b. Commercial Zoning Districts. Subdivision within this district shall be designed and configured to reinforce a
compact, multistory commercial, residential and/or mixed use, pedestrian scale and pattern of development.
Lots and building envelopes shall be sized and located to place buildings at the sidewalk with entrances and
windows across the FACADE. Lots adjacent to residential zoning districts shall maintain a buffer to ease the
transition from high intensity commercial districts to the residential districts. Subdivisions in this district also
shall be designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads, sidewalks and utility corridors.
Sidewalks, pedestrian and bike facilities shall be provided where physically feasible; and new roads in these
districts shall be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and circulation. Parking shall be placed
behind buildings as best as possible. Parking shall be placed either behind, within, or to the side of structures.
Any development within the Downtown Core district is subject to the Master Plan as described in Article II.
c. Industrial Zoning Districts. Subdivisions within the Industrial Districts shall be designed and configured to
avoid undue adverse impacts to existing natural resources. Lots adjacent to residential zoning districts shall
maintain a buffer to ease the transition from industrial uses to residential uses. Subdivisions in this district also
shall be designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads, sidewalks and utility corridors.
Sidewalks, pedestrian facilities, bike facilities shall be provided where physically feasible; and new roads in
these districts shall be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and circulation. Parking shall be
placed behind buildings to the extent possible.
5. Lot Layout. Lots and lot layouts shall be configured to:
a. be suitable for their intended use, for subsequent development (building lots) or for public use or common
open space areas;
b. conform to desired district settlement patterns, as required under Subsection H.4;
c. meet minimum lot size and density requirements under Article II, except as modified for planned unit
developments under Section 6.3;
d. avoid irregularly shaped lots (e.g., with curves, jogs, dog-legs, etc.), unless warranted due to topographic or
other physical site constraints, or to minimize the fragmentation of natural, scenic or cultural resources under
Section 4.8.
6. Building Envelopes. The designation of building envelopes to limit the location of structures, parking areas, and
associated site improvements to one or more portions of a lot shall be required for all subdivided lots, as shown on
the subdivision plat. The location, size and shape of each building envelope shall be established in accordance with
53 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
these regulations, including zoning district requirements under Article II, and resource protection standards under
Section 4.8. The DRB also may require the identification of specific building locations (footprints) if, in its judgment,
such information is needed to determine conformance with these regulations.
7. Survey Monuments. The locations of all proposed permanent surveying monuments and corner markers, as
required under the Rules of the Board of Land Surveyors, shall be identified on the final subdivision plat. The DRB
may also require that the corner points of designated building envelopes be marked on the ground with iron pins
and identified on the final subdivision plat.
8. Landscaping & Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be provided, in accordance with Section 4.7.
9. Energy Conservation. Subdivision design and layout, to the extent physically feasible, should encourage energy
efficient design by:
a. Locating and orienting sites (e.g., building lots, envelopes) to maximize southern exposures where available,
and solar access for solar energy and heating systems.
b. Clustering development (e.g., building lots, envelopes) to minimize road and utility line extensions and to allow
for group net-metering.
c. Incorporating existing topography, natural vegetation and landscaping to provide wind breaks, seasonal shade
and solar access, and to reduce building heating and cooling needs.
10. Common Open Space Areas. The location, size and shape of lands set aside to be preserved and managed as
common open space areas shall be suitable for their intended purpose and use and approved by the DRB, in
accordance with Section 4.8.
11. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion
control measures shall be used during all phases of subdivision development as necessary to limit surface runoff
and erosion, protect water quality and to avoid damage to downstream properties in conformance with Section
4.15. In addition, building envelopes, driveways, road and utility corridors shall be located to minimize site
disturbance on steep slopes (15% or more) and, to the greatest extent feasible, avoid site disturbance on very steep
slopes (25% or more) in accordance with Section 4.8.
12. Access & Driveways. Access to the subdivision and to individual lots within the subdivision shall at minimum meet
the requirements of Section 4.2 (Access) and the relevant sub-parts of Section 4.10 (Parking), and the following:
a. All lots created after the effective date of these regulations that are intended for development must meet
minimum applicable frontage requirements along public road rights-of-way for the district(s) in which they are
located unless modified or waived by the DRB for planned unit development under Article IX. The DRB may
also reduce or waive district lot frontage requirements for:
i. minor (up to three lot) subdivisions accessed by a shared driveway; or
54 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
ii. lots that will be maintained in perpetuity as undeveloped open land to be used only for passive outdoor
recreation or resource conservation.
b. Access permits, as required under Section 4.2, are required prior to filing an application for final subdivision
review.
c. Access to a subdivision shall conform to adopted state or municipal access management plans and capital
improvement plans. Planned highway and access improvements, including proposed rights-of-way, shall be
incorporated in subdivision design. Right-of-way reservations may be required as necessary to accommodate
planned improvements.
13. Driveways. Driveways serving minor subdivisions of three or fewer lots shall meet the requirements of Section 4.2
and the Winooski Public Works Specifications in effect at the time of application. For the purposes of these
regulations, driveways serving four or more lots shall be considered development roads subject to the
requirements of Subsection H.14.
14. Development Roads. The following road standards shall apply to all rights-of-way serving or accessing four or more
lots. Roads shall be considered private roads until such time as they are accepted by the City of Winooski as a
public road in accordance with adopted city road policies, ordinances and state statutes.
a. Layout. To promote safety, to facilitate traffic flow and emergency vehicle access, and to protect significant
resources, roads shall, to the extent physically feasible, be laid out to:
i. Provide a right-of-way for access to adjacent lots for future development.
ii. Follow existing linear features where physically feasible (e.g., utility corridors, tree and fence
lines), and meet other requirements for the protection of identified resource and hazard areas under
Section 4.8.
iii. Logically relate to topography, following contour elevations, to minimize the amount of cut and
fill required and to maintain reasonable finished grades and safe intersections.
iv. Extend or connect to existing or planned roads adjoining the subdivision, under joint agreement
or in common or public ownership.
15. Improvements. The proposed subdivision shall not unduly burden town or state highways, including roads and
intersections in the vicinity of the project. Any highway access, drainage, lane, or other infrastructure or traffic
control improvements necessitated by the proposed subdivision shall be paid for and installed by the applicant,
unless otherwise approved by the DRB in consultation with the City Council or state highway officials. The DRB also
may require as conditions of approval, as necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations:
a. Performance bonding or other form of surety acceptable to the City Council to ensure that required road,
intersection and related infrastructure improvements are installed as approved by the DRB.
b. The phasing of development in relation to planned state or municipal transportation infrastructure
improvements included in adopted capital improvement programs.
55 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
c. A development agreement approved by the City Council governing the timing, installation and any agreed
upon cost-sharing arrangements between the subdivider and the city or other affected property owners.
16. Names, Signs and 911 Locator Numbers. Road names shall be approved by the Winooski City Council as part of the
subdivision process. Approved road names and assigned 911 locator numbers for each parcel shall be clearly
depicted on the final plat, and identified on signs approved by the ZA.
17. Transit Facilities. The DRB may require that subdivisions located on existing or planned transit routes, including
school bus routes, incorporate a sheltered transit or bus stop in subdivision design.
18. Public Facilities & Utilities. The DRB shall find that the proposed subdivision does not create an undue burden on
existing and planned public facilities in accordance with Section 4.16. The applicant and DRB may consult with
appropriate municipal and school officials and emergency service providers to determine whether adequate
capacity exists to serve the subdivision.
19. Legal Requirements.
a. Common open space areas may be held in common ownership or in separate individual ownership from
contiguous parcels. At minimum, land designated as common open space areas shall be indicated with
appropriate notation on the final subdivision plat. In addition, the DRB may consider, as required for long-term
protection:
i. A restriction prohibiting the further subdivision of a conserved lot or other protected open
space area, as noted on the final plat and in accompanying legal documentation.
ii. The dedication of such land, either in fee or through a conservation easement approved by the
DRB, to the municipality, an owners’ association comprised of all present or future owners of
subdivided lots, the applicant, and/or a nonprofit conservation organization with the
demonstrated capacity and qualifications to manage conservation easements.
b. The applicant shall provide documentation and assurances that all required improvements, associated rightsof-
way and easements, and other common lands or facilities will be adequately maintained in accordance with
an approved management plan, either by the applicant, an owners’ association, or through other legal means
acceptable to the DRB. Draft management plans and documentation must be submitted with the application
for final subdivision review, for approval by the DRB. The DRB may forward submitted documentation to the
City Council and City attorney for review. All legal documents, as approved by the DRB, shall be filed in the
land records of the City in association with recording the final subdivision plat.
c. All required improvements shall be constructed to approved specifications in accordance with a construction
schedule approved by the DRB. The DRB may require the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance to ensure that
all such improvements are completed prior to the issuance of zoning permits for the subsequent development
of subdivided lots.
56 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
I. Sketch Plan Review.
1. Sketch plan review is an informal, pre-application review process intended to acquaint the DRB with a proposed
subdivision during the conceptual stage of the design process, before the applicant incurs significant expense in
preparing a formal application. As such, the sketch plan review process and letter do not bind the municipality or
the applicant, and are not subject to appeal under Section 6.9. This informal review and discussion at a regular
meeting of the DRB helps identify the type of subdivision and subdivision layout that will best meet the needs of
the subdivider and the requirements of these regulations. An applicant is required to submit a sketch plan prior to
the submission of a formal application to the DRB. At minimum, the following will be addressed at the Sketch Plan
review:
a. Consider whether the subdivision, as initially proposed, would be classified as a major or minor subdivision, or
planned unit development to be reviewed as a major subdivision.
b. Discuss the subdivision review process and any proposed waivers requested by the applicant.
c. Discuss the proposed subdivision’s general conformance with the Municipal Plan, these regulations, and any
other municipal regulations, ordinances or capital improvement programs currently in effect.
2. Sketch Plan Submissions. An applicant shall submit:
a. One original and six copies of a sketch of the proposed subdivision;
b. A brief project description that generally addresses applicable sections under Subsection 6.2.H (Subdivision
General Standards);
c. A description of any proposed modifications or waivers under applicable standards;
d. A list of abutting property owners;
e. Application fees; and
f. An electronic submission of all of the these materials.
3. Sketch Plan Meetings. The ZA shall schedule time at the next available regular meeting of the DRB to consider the
sketch plan, and will notify the applicant and adjoining property owners in writing of the date and time of the
meeting.
a. The applicant, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall attend the sketch plan meeting to present and
discuss the proposed plan with the DRB.
b. The DRB may request additional meetings with the applicant as needed to fully review the sketch plan, which
may include a site visit with the applicant to examine the land proposed for subdivision.
4. Sketch Plan Letter. Within 15 days of the date of the final sketch plan meeting, the DRB shall issue a sketch plan
letter that, based on available information:
a. Indicates whether the subdivision as proposed would be reviewed as a minor or major subdivision, or planned
unit development, and outlines the associated review process.
b. Indicates whether the proposed subdivision generally conforms to these regulations, or will require
modifications to conform to the regulations.
57 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
c. Identifies specific areas of concern to be addressed in subdivision application, including potential impacts to
adjoining property owners, significant natural or scenic resources, municipal roads and infrastructure, and
community facilities and services.
d. Recommends additional information, studies or supporting documentation to be submitted with the
application for subdivision review.
5. Effect of Sketch Plan Review. Sketch plan review is intended to provide guidance to the applicant on a proposed
subdivision, based on preliminary information submitted by the applicant. As such, the sketch plan review process
and letter do not bind the municipality or the applicant, and are not subject to appeal under Section 6.9. Sketch
plan letter recommendations remain in effect for one year from the date of issuance. If an application is not filed
within the year, another sketch plan review shall be required.
J. Preliminary & Final Subdivision Application Requirements.
1. Application Requirements. Applications for preliminary and final subdivision review shall be submitted to the ZA
on forms provided by the City, as specified for each step of the subdivision review process.
a. Applications shall include required fees, information specified in application checklists and ZA correspondence,
and any written requests to waive or modify specific subdivision review standards under Section 6.8 of these
regulations.
b. The ZA shall refer complete applications to the DRB and, for preliminary subdivision review or for final
subdivision review if no preliminary subdivision review will be required, copies of application information and
public hearing notices to the following for review and comment:
i. City departments, including but not necessarily limited to the Public Works Community Services, and
Police and Fire Departments.
ii. The clerk of the adjoining municipality for a subdivision located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary.
iii.The Vermont Agency of Transportation for a subdivision located on or accessed from a state highway.
iv.The Vermont Agency of Transportation for any requested reductions in front setback requirements from
state highway rights-of-way.
v.The State National Flood Insurance (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources,
Department of Environmental Conservation, River Management Program, for subdivisions in the Flood
Hazard Area District.
c. No municipal approval for a subdivision shall be issued until written comments have been received or thirty
days have elapsed from the date of referral. The failure of the ZA to notify the above listed parties shall not
constitute grounds for appeal.
d. The DRB, at any time during the hearing process, may require the applicant or other interested persons to
submit additional information, or an independent technical review to be paid for by the applicant or other
interested person, as needed to determine project conformance with the standards of these regulations.
58 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
K. Preliminary Subdivision Review.
1. Purpose. The purpose of preliminary subdivision review is to review a draft subdivision plat and supporting
documentation in order to determine preliminary conformance with the municipal plan, these regulations and
other municipal ordinances in effect at the time of application; to identify particular issues or concerns associated
with a proposed subdivision; to recommend modifications necessary to achieve conformance; and to identify any
additional information required for submission for final subdivision review prior to the preparation of a final survey
plat, engineering plans and legal documents for the subdivision and related site improvements.
2. Waiver. The DRB may waive preliminary subdivision review for any subdivision, including Planned Unit
Developments, as recommended under sketch plan review to expedite the hearing process for well planned
subdivisions with a combined preliminary and final subdivision review hearing.
3. Application. The applicant shall submit one original and six 11" x 17" copies of the draft subdivision plat, required
fees, engineering drawings, draft legal documents, and any other required information or supporting
documentation identified from application checklists, or as specified by the ZA.
4. Hearing. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete preliminary application, the ZA shall schedule a public hearing at
its next available meeting, to be warned in accordance with the Act [§ 4464]. The DRB may recess and continue the
hearing to a date and time specified, to conduct site visits or to allow for the submission of additional information
from the applicant or other interested persons. No additional information or comments will be taken following
hearing adjournment.
5. Decision. The DRB shall issue written findings and a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application for preliminary subdivision approval within 45 days of the date of hearing adjournment, in accordance
with the Act [§ 4464]. Failure to act within this 45 day period, as decided on appeal, shall be deemed to be
approval on the 46th day. The DRB may specify as conditions of preliminary subdivision approval:
a. Modifications or changes to the preliminary plat or supporting documentation necessary to achieve
compliance with the standards of these regulations.
b. Documentation to be submitted with the application for final subdivision review that all other required
municipal and state approvals have been obtained.
c. Infrastructure improvements and associated easements or other dedications as required to serve the
proposed subdivision, or to mitigate off-site impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision, to be installed or
paid for by the applicant.
d. The submission of additional supporting information including, but not limited to impact studies, legal
documents, development agreements, performance bonds or other sureties, for consideration under final
subdivision review.
59 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
6. Appeal. The applicant or another interested person must file any request for reconsideration by the DRB, or an
appeal of the DRB decision to the Environmental Division of Superior Court, within 30 days of the date of issuance
in accordance with Section 6.9.B.
7. Effect. Preliminary subdivision approval is intended to document application and submission requirements for final
subdivision review. It does not constitute approval of a subdivision plat for recording in the land records of the City
under Section 6.2.M. A preliminary approval shall remain in effect for one year from the date of issuance.
L. Final Subdivision Review.
1. Purpose. Final subdivision review and approval is required prior to recording a subdivision plat in the land records
of the city. The purpose of final subdivision review is to determine final project conformance with the municipal
plan, these regulations, and other municipal ordinances in effect at the time of application.
2. Application.
a. The application for final subdivision review shall be submitted within one year of the date of preliminary
approval by the DRB, but not before the initial 30-day appeal period has expired. If an application has not
been filed within one year, the applicant will be required to submit a new application for preliminary review
under Section 6.2.J.
b. The applicant shall submit required fees and one original and six copies of the information specified for final
plans and plats, including 11" x 17" copies of the final subdivision plat, engineering drawings and other
supporting information and documentation as specified in application checklists and the conditions of
preliminary subdivision approval.
3. Hearing. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the ZA shall schedule a public hearing at the next
available DRB meeting to be warned in accordance with the Act [§ 4464]. The DRB may recess and continue the
hearing to a date and time specified to conduct site visits or to allow for the submission of additional information
from the applicant or other interested persons. No additional information or comment will be taken following
hearing adjournment.
4. Decision. The DRB shall issue written findings and a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application for final subdivision approval within 45 days of the date of hearing adjournment, in accordance with the
Act [§ 4464]. Failure to act within this 45 day period, as decided on appeal, shall be deemed to be approval on the
46th day. The DRB may require as conditions of approval:
a. Measures necessary to mitigate adverse impacts of the subdivision under the standards of these regulations.
b. Subdivision phasing as required to avoid overburdening the available capacity of existing or planned public
facilities and infrastructure, in conformance with specific municipal plan policies and adopted capital or
transportation improvement programs, and that additional subdivision plans and plats be filed for each phase
of development.
60 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
c. Infrastructure improvements and associated easements or other dedications as required to support the
proposed subdivision, or to mitigate off-site impacts resulting from the proposed subdivision, to be installed or
paid for by the applicant.
d. Compliance with the Winooski Public Works Specifications for any infrastructure intended to be dedicated to
the City for public ownership.
5. Appeal. The applicant or another interested person must file a request for reconsideration by the DRB, or an
appeal of a DRB decision to the Environmental Division of Superior Court, within 30 days of the date of issuance in
accordance with Section 6.9.B.
6. Effect. No subdivision plat shall be recorded in the land records of the City until final subdivision approval has been
issued by the DRB and recorded in the land records of the City under Section 6.2.L. Final subdivision approval shall
not be construed to constitute acceptance by the City of Winooski of any street, easement, utility, park, recreation
area, or other open space shown on the final plat. A formal resolution of the Winooski City Council is required for
municipal acceptance of dedications by the applicant, in conformance with adopted city policies, ordinances and
state law. Roads shown on an approved plat shall be considered private roads until such time as they may be
formally accepted by the Winooski City Council. Final subdivision approval by the DRB shall remain in effect and
run with the land, and legally recorded subdivision plats, as approved by the DRB, shall not expire once the plat is
recorded as described in Section 6.2.M. For purposes of these regulations, any lot approved by the DRB as part of a
planned unit development under Article IX is considered a conforming lot.
M. Plat Recording Requirements
1. Within 180 days of the date of final subdivision approval by the DRB, or by the courts on appeal, the applicant shall
file a Mylar of the approved plat, as signed by the surveyor and the Chair or other appointed agent of the DRB, in
the land records of the City in accordance with the Act [§ 4463(b)] and state plat filing requirements (27 V.S.A.
Chapter 17). The applicant shall also submit one paper and one digital copy of the plat, in a format specified by the
City, to the ZA.
2. All subdivision and recording fees must be paid in full prior to recording a subdivision plat.
3. The plat to be recorded shall:
a. Measure a minimum of 18" x 24" or multiple thereof,
b. Have margins outside border lines of 1.5" on the left for binding, and 0.5" on all other sides.
c. Be certified and signed by the surveyor.
d. Carry the following endorsement, to be signed by the Chair or other authorized representative of the DRB:
ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
Approved by decision of the Development Review Board, City of Winooski, Vermont, issued on the day of
(month), (year), subject to all requirements and conditions of subdivision and plat approval. Signed this day of
(month), (year), by _, Chairperson.
61
4. The subdivision plan (site plan) as approved by the DRB shall also be submitted on Mylar with the subdivision plat,
for recording in the land records of the City.
5. An approved subdivision plat that is not recorded within the 180-day period shall expire, and reapplication shall be
required. A recorded plat shall not expire, and may be modified only in conformance with Sections 6.2 and 6.4.
SECTION 6.3 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Purpose: The purposes of Planned Unit Developments are:
1. To provide a method of development for existing parcels which because of physical, topographical, or geographical
conditions could not otherwise be developed in strict conformance with the dimensional requirements to the
fullest extent.
2. To encourage infill appropriate to the particular character of the site and its surroundings, compact, pedestrianoriented
development and redevelopment, and to promote a mix of residential uses and/or nonresidential uses as
permitted or conditional in the Zoning Districts.
3. To provide for flexibility in site and lot layout, building design, placement and clustering of buildings, use of open
areas, provision of circulation facilities, including pedestrian and bicycle facilities and parking, and related site and
design considerations that will best achieve the goals for the area as articulated in the municipal plan and bylaws
within the particular character of the site and its surroundings.
To achieve these objectives, the DRB (DRB) may modify the dimensional requirements, with the exception of density, lot
coverage and height, of applicable zoning provisions in accordance with these regulations.
B. Authority and Applicability: These regulations are enacted under the provisions of 24 V.S.A. Section 4417. PUDs
are allowed in all Zoning Districts except the Gateway Districts and the Downtown Core. To encourage integrated
master planning, a PUD may include multiple adjoining properties in common ownership, or in separate ownership if a
joint application by all property owners is submitted. PUDs may involve the creation of separate building lots and/or
development in which multiple buildings or uses are located on a single parcel in common ownership. Ownership within
a PUD can be conveyed or leased along building lines. In addition, PUDs may be configured as FOOTPRINT LOTS. Such
transfers will not violate lot coverage, minimum lot area, frontage or setback requirements. For the purposes of a PUD,
lot is defined as a parcel of land dedicated to the entire PUD, and not any subdivision or leasing of land and/or building
within the PUD. With the approval of the DRB, the lot size, frontage, and setback dimensional requirements, excluding
the density and lot coverage, may be altered for a planned unit development. More than one principal use and more
than one principal structure may be permitted on a single lot.
C. Review Process: Review of a request for PUD Approval shall be considered to also be a request for Site Plan
Approval, Subdivision Approval (if applicable), and as Conditional Use Approval (if applicable) so that, if granted, PUD
Approval shall constitute Site Plan Approval, Subdivision Approval, and Conditional Use Approval for any use or structure
governed by that PUD Approval. A decision by the DRB to grant or not grant a PUD Approval may be appealed pursuant
to Section 6.9.B. In addition, approved modifications and other conditions of approval shall be specifically identified in
the written decision granting subdivision and planned development approval and noted on or appended to the survey
plat and recorded in the land records.
D. Application Requirements: A person requesting a PUD Approval shall submit a complete application to the ZA on a
form specified by the City. The application shall include:
62 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. Six (6) sets of a Site Plan of the proposed development, as well as one (1) copy of the Site Plan of the proposed
development in digital electronic format acceptable to the ZA, that includes or depicts in sufficient detail, drawn to
scale, and with sufficient legibility the following:
a. The scale used;
b. Natural and proposed grade elevations on contour intervals of not less than 2'-0";
c. Existing and proposed drainage devices and patterns;
d. Existing and proposed water and wastewater infrastructure;
e. Existing and proposed landscaping elements (including trees, fences and walls);
f. Proposed, existing and adjoining streets, driveways, parking and loading spaces, traffic circulation spaces;
g. Existing and proposed structures and areas dedicated to existing and proposed uses;
h. Existing and proposed easements, building lines/footprints/envelopes, yards and other spaces required by this
Ordinance;
i. Existing and proposed exterior lighting;
j. Existing and proposed signs, including dimensions and locations;
2. a Survey prepared by a licensed surveyor including the location of existing and proposed lot lines, if the PUD
involves a subdivision of lots, or adjustment of lot lines;
3. elevations and a description of the materials proposed to be used on the FACADE of each proposed building;
4. a statement setting forth the nature of all requested waivers to the lot size, frontage, and setback dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which the project is located. This statement must include the reasons why
such modifications or changes are necessary in order to implement the PUD purposes as listed in Section 6.3.A.;
5. Management plans for any natural areas or open space to be conserved, and for all common areas, facilities and
services within the PUD, to include a description of ownership, use, and long-term maintenance or management,
and associated legal agreements, easements or covenants; and
6. Density calculations used to determine the overall density of development within the PUD, in accordance with the
following:
a. The maximum number of building units or lots within a PUD shall not exceed the number which could be
developed on a parcel based on total parcel acreage, lot size and lot coverage density requirements for the
zoning district(s) in which the PUD is located.
b. This calculation of the site’s overall “yield” shall be used to determine the number of building units or lots that
may be clustered or grouped at higher densities on those portions of the parcel that are suitable for
development.
c. For PUDs within two or more zoning districts, the allowed overall density of development shall be the sum of the
allowed density calculated for each area of the PUD within a particular zoning district, using the dimensional
standards for that district; however building lots or units may be transferred from that portion of the parcel
within the lower density zoning district(s) to developable areas of the parcel within the higher density zoning
district(s).
d. For PUDs on two or more adjoining parcels, the allowed overall density shall be calculated as the sum of the
allowed density for each lot, however building lots or units may be transferred from one parcel to developable
areas on another parcel.
63 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
E. Standards: The following requirements shall be met for the DRB to approve a PUD:
1. The proposed PUD shall include only those uses Permitted by right or a Conditional Use in the district in which the
proposed use would be located.
2. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the Winooski Municipal Development Plan
currently in effect, the purpose of the zoning district(s) in which it is located, and all applicable regulations not
modified through PUD review and approval.
3. The proposed PUD shall comply with the Site Plan standards of Section 6.6, the Conditional Use standards of
Section 6.7 if applicable, and the Subdivision standards of Section 6.2.H if applicable.
4. The proposed PUD shall present an environmentally sensitive, effective and unified treatment of the site(s), that:
a. locates development on the most developable portions of the site(s), and excludes from development
environmentally sensitive areas in accordance with Section 4.8 of these regulations, and preserves, to the
extent feasible, natural and scenic qualities of open space, and the historical quality of existing buildings (in
accordance with Section 4.4.E of these regulations);
b. is compatible with planned patterns and densities of development for the zoning district(s) in which it is
located, including building type, site layout, and pedestrian-scale and orientation while minimizing site
disturbance and infrastructure development costs as best as possible;
c. provides the minimum rear setback required for the zoning district in which the PUD is located along the
periphery of the project, and landscaping within the setbacks to maintain district character and to minimize
adverse physical or visual impacts from adjoining properties and uses; and
d. integrates vehicular, bicyclist and pedestrian circulation with neighboring properties and public rights-of-way,
and incorporates adequate parking and access in accordance with Sections 4.2 and 4.12 of these regulations.
5. The proposed PUD shall provide such public and nonpublic improvements as may be determined by the Board to
conform with the Winooski Municipal Development Plan.
6. If needed, the proposed PUD shall specify reasonable periods within which development of each phase of the PUD
may be started and shall be completed.
7. If waivers are needed and requested by the Applicant, grant one or more waivers of the lot size, frontage, and
setback dimensional requirements, otherwise applicable under this Ordinance, if the nature of all requested
waivers is necessary in order to implement the PUD purposes as listed in Section 6.3.A.
8. If public infrastructure is proposed, require as a condition of PUD Approval that the applicant furnish to the City
security to assure the proper development of the PUD according to the standards, conditions, and restrictions
specified by the DRB.
SECTION 6.4 REVISIONS TO EXISTING LOT LINES
A. Modifications or revisions to an approved subdivision plan, plat or the conditions of subdivision approval require a
subdivision amendment approved by the ZA or DRB. Any modifications or revisions made to an approved plat without
such approval shall be considered null and void, and subject to municipal enforcement as a violation under Article VII.
B. Modifications or revisions to existing lot lines legally in existence as of the effective date of these regulations
require approval by the ZA or DRB. Any modifications or revisions made to an approved plat without such approval shall
be considered null and void, and subject to municipal enforcement as a violation under Article VII.
64 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
C. Administrative Amendments.
1. The following are eligible for review and administrative approval by the ZA, unless the ZA determines that the
request may not meet these criteria and should instead be referred to the DRB for review under Subsection C.
a. Boundary (lot line) adjustments between two or more adjoining parcels that do not result in the creation of
new or nonconforming lots and do not materially or substantially alter the findings and conditions of a
previous subdivision approval. The adjustments must be prepared and surveyed by a licensed surveyor.
b. Merging of two or more lots into one that does not result in the creation of nonconforming lots and do not
materially or substantially alter the findings and conditions of a previous subdivision approval. The
adjustments must be prepared and surveyed by a licensed surveyor.
c. The relocation, modification or expansion of building footprints, parking areas and site improvements within
approved building envelopes, as long as such relocations, modifications or expansions comply with the
conditions of subdivision approval and other applicable requirements of these regulations.
d. The relocation or modification of roadways, utilities and related improvements within approved rights-of-way
or utility corridors that otherwise comply with the findings and conditions of subdivision approval and other
applicable requirements of these regulations.
e. Approval of as-built plans that deviate from approved plans to the extent that such deviations do not
substantially or materially alter the findings and conditions of subdivision approval.
f. Modifications to approved landscaping and screening requirements to allow for the substitution of materials,
provided the substitutions meet the conditions of subdivision approval.
g. Modifications specifically authorized for administrative review and approval by the DRB in its written decision
and conditions of final subdivision approval.
2. The ZA shall issue, post and record administrative amendments in the same manner that zoning permits are issued
under Section 6.10, mail a copy of the amendment to all adjoiners of record and interested parties to the original
subdivision proceedings, and forward a copy to the DRB. An administrative subdivision amendment may be
appealed within 15 days of the date of issuance to the DRB under Section 6.9.A.
D. All other subdivision amendment applications shall be classified by the ZA under Section 6.2, and referred to the
DRB for review.
SECTION 6.5 SITE PLANS, CONDITIONAL USE & VARIANCES
65 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
A. Development review procedures and related standards under this section apply only to development applications
that must be reviewed and approved by the DRB, following a public hearing, before a zoning permit can be issued by the
ZA. For land subdivision review procedures, see Part 1 of this Article. Development review procedures under this article
include:
1. Site Plan Review. See Section 6.6.
2. Conditional Use Review. See Section 6.7.
3. Waivers and Variances. See Section 6.8.
B. Coordination of Review. If land subdivision is also proposed, final subdivision approval is required prior to site plan
or conditional use review for the development of a subdivided lot; however site plan or conditional use review may be
conducted concurrently with final subdivision review under Article VII as long as the application, notice, procedural
requirements and review standards for each are met. Flood hazard area review under Article VI also may be conducted
concurrently with site plan or conditional use review under this article.
1. For the review of development on a lot that has received prior subdivision approval, the DRB shall consider and
incorporate all conditions of subdivision approval applicable to that lot. In the event that a condition of site plan,
conditional use or flood hazard area approval is inconsistent with the conditions of subdivision approval, the more
restrictive shall apply.
C. Application Requirements. Applications for site plan or conditional use review shall be submitted to the ZA on
forms provided by the City.
1. Applications shall also include:
a. All required fees;
b. One original and six 11" x 17" copies of a site development plan;
c. Letter of Intent from the Agency of Transportation for access from State Highways;
d. Draft legal documents as applicable;
e. Other required information or supporting documentation identified from application checklists, or as specified
by the ZA; and
f. Any written requests to waive or modify specific development review standards under Articles II and IV.
2. The ZA shall refer complete applications to the DRB and copies of application information and public hearing
notices to the following for review and comment as appropriate:
a. Community officials, including the Police, Fire & Rescue, Code Enforcement, Public Works (highway access,
water, sewer, stormwater, etc), Community Service Departments, and the School Superintendent for
development that requires or may adversely affect community facilities and services.
b. The State National Flood Insurance (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources,
Department of Environmental Conservation, River Management Program, for development within the Flood
Hazard District (see Appendix A).
66 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
3. The applicant is encouraged to contact the above listed officials prior to submitting an application for development
review to the DRB, and to incorporate their recommendations in site layout and project design.
4. No DRB approval shall be issued until written comments have been received or thirty days have elapsed from the
date of referral. The failure of the ZA to notify the above listed parties shall not constitute grounds for appeal.
D. Hearing. Within 30 days of receipt of a substantially complete application, the ZA shall schedule a public hearing
on the application at the next available DRB meeting to be warned in accordance with the Act [§ 4464].
1. If the hearing includes a variance request on appeal to the DRB, it must be held within 60 days of the date of the
filing of a notice of appeal.
2. The DRB may waive one or more required application materials if it determines that such information is
unnecessary to make findings under applicable criteria of these regulations. The DRB also may request additional
information, including independent technical analyses, as needed to determine conformance with these regulations.
An application will not be considered complete by the DRB until all necessary materials have been submitted.
3. The Board may recess and continue the hearing to a date and time specified, as necessary to conduct site visits or
to allow for the submission of additional information from the applicant or other interested persons. No additional
information or comments shall be taken following hearing adjournment.
E. Decision. Within 45 days of the date of hearing adjournment, the DRB shall issue written findings and a decision to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Failure to act within this 45-day period, as decided on appeal,
shall be deemed to be approval on the 46th day. The DRB may specify as conditions of approval:
a. Modifications or changes to the proposed site layout and project design.
b. The submission of supporting documentation necessary to achieve or monitor compliance with the standards
of these regulations and conditions of approval.
c. Documentation to be submitted with the application for a certificate of occupancy that all other required
municipal and state approvals have been obtained.
d. Infrastructure improvements and associated easements or other dedications as required to serve the
proposed development, or to mitigate off-site impacts resulting from the proposed development, to be
installed or paid for by the applicant.
e. The submission of a development agreement, performance bond or other surety acceptable to the Winooski
City Council.
F. Appeal. The applicant or another interested person who participated in the hearing process may either request
that the DRB reconsider a decision, or file an appeal of the DRB decision to the Environmental Division of Superior Court,
within 30 days of the date of issuance, in accordance with Section 6.9.B. In accordance with the Act [§ 4470], the DRB
may reject a request for reconsideration without hearing and render a decision, including findings of fact, within 10 days
of the date of filing if it considers the issues raised in the request have been decided in an earlier appeal or involve
substantially or materially the same facts as presented by or on behalf of the appellant.
67 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
G. Effect. Site plan and conditional use approval by the DRB shall expire with the expiration of the zoning permit, and
may be extended only in accordance with Section 6.11.A.2, or as provided for abandoned structures under Section 4.1.
Once approved uses or structures are established, site plan and conditional use approvals shall remain in effect and run
with the land.
SECTION 6.6 SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Intent. Site plan review is intended to ensure that site layout and development design are functional, safe,
attractive, and consistent with the purpose and character of the district(s) in which the development is located.
Standards specifically relate to the internal layout of the site, its physical design, and the functional and visual
integration of the site with adjoining properties, uses and infrastructure.
B. Applicability. Site plan review is required for all “permitted uses” listed by zoning district under Article II, except for
single (one) and two family dwellings, associated accessory structures and accessory dwellings as specified under Section
5.1, home occupations and home child care facilities as specified under Sections 5.2 and 5.7, signs if not associated with
a development proposal, and other uses specifically exempted from these regulations under Section 6.13. Uses listed as
“conditional uses” under Article II do not require separate site plan review and approval, but must meet applicable site
plan review standards under Section 6.6.
C. Standards. The DRB may consider and impose appropriate safeguards, modifications and conditions relating to the
following standards:
1. Existing Site Features. Site layout and design, to the extent physically feasible, shall incorporate and avoid undue
adverse impacts to significant natural, historic and scenic resources identified from the Winooski Municipal
Development Plan, maps and related inventories, or through site investigation in accordance with Section 4.8, and
the Historic Structure Section of Design Review in Section 4.4.D. and other relevant sections of these regulations.
The DRB may require one or more of the following measures as necessary to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts to
natural, scenic and historic resources in the vicinity of the proposed development:
i. Increased setback distances or undisturbed buffer areas between proposed development and identified
resources.
ii. The designation of building envelopes sited to exclude identified resource areas, and to limit the extent of
site clearing and disturbance.
iii. Permanent protection of identified resource areas as designated open space.
iv. The screening of development as viewed from public vantage points and for privacy from neighbors.
v. The preparation and implementation of management plans for identified resources.
2. Site Layout & Design. The location and orientation of structures, and supporting infrastructure on the site shall be
compatible with their proposed setting and context, as determined from specific policies of the Winooski Municipal
Development Plan, zoning district objectives, existing site conditions and features, adjoining or facing structures in
the vicinity, and other applicable provisions of these regulations, including density, setback, height and buffering
requirements. To ensure that development is designed in a manner that is consistent with the existing and desired
character of the district within which it is located, the following general standards shall apply as specified for
particular district:
68 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
a. Residential Zoning Districts. Subdivision within this district shall be designed and configured to reinforce a
compact residential, pedestrian scale and pattern of development. Lots and building envelopes shall be sized
and located to maintain a consistent building line and streetscape along roads, and to maintain privacy in the
rear. Subdivisions in this district also shall be designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads,
sidewalks and utility corridors. Sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities shall be provided where physically
feasible; new roads in these districts shall be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and circulation.
b. Commercial Zoning Districts. Subdivision within this district shall be designed and configured to reinforce a
compact, multistory commercial, residential and/or mixed use, pedestrian scale and pattern of development.
Lots and building envelopes shall be sized and located to place buildings at the sidewalk with entrances and
windows across the FACADE. Lots adjacent to residential zoning districts shall maintain a buffer to ease the
transition from high intensity commercial districts to the residential districts. Subdivisions in this district also
shall be designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads, sidewalks and utility corridors. Sidewalks,
pedestrian and bike facilities shall be provided where physically feasible; and new roads in these districts shall
be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and circulation. Parking shall be placed behind buildings
to the extent possible. Parking shall be placed either behind, within, or to the side of structures. Any
development within the Downtown Core district is subject to the Master Plan as described in Article II.
c. Industrial Zoning Districts. Subdivisions within the Industrial Districts shall be designed and configured to avoid
undue adverse impacts to existing natural resources. Lots adjacent to residential zoning districts shall maintain
a buffer to ease the transition from industrial uses to residential uses. Subdivisions in this district also shall be
designed to incorporate, extend, or connect to existing roads, sidewalks and utility corridors. Sidewalks,
pedestrian facilities, bike facilities shall be provided where physically feasible; and new roads in these districts
shall be designed to maximize pedestrian and bicycle safety and circulation. Parking shall be placed behind
buildings to the extent possible.
3. Vehicle Access. Vehicular access, including road intersections, shall meet applicable City and state access
management and design standards, including those set forth in Section 4.2. Curb cuts and road intersections shall
not create hazards to vehicles, pedestrians or bicyclists on site or on adjoining roads, sidewalks and pathways. To
ensure safety and manage access in a manner that maintains road capacity the DRB, in consultation with the City or
state highway officials may:
a. Limit the number and size of curb cuts in accordance with Section 4.2.
b. Require the reduction, consolidation or elimination of noncomplying curb cuts.
c. For parcels having direct access to more than one road, limit access to a side street or secondary (less traveled)
road.
d. Require shared access between adjoining properties with compatible uses, to be installed immediately if
similar provision has been made on a contiguous parcel, or to be contingent upon the development or
redevelopment of a contiguous parcel(s).
e. Require access and driveway redesign as necessary to allow for emergency vehicle access.
4. Parking, Loading & Service Areas. On-site parking, loading and service areas shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of Section 4.12, and the following, with particular attention given to pedestrian and vehicular
safety:
69 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
a. Parking areas shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building(s), unless otherwise permitted by the
DRB due to site constraints that would prevent reasonable use of the property or result in unsafe traffic
conditions.
b. Parking areas shall be landscaped to avoid large, uninterrupted paved areas in accordance with Section 4.12,
and screened to minimize their visibility from public rights-of-way and neighboring properties.
c. Shared parking and/or driveway connections to parking areas on adjacent properties with compatible uses, or
provisions for future shared parking or driveway connections to adjoining parcels contingent upon their
development or redevelopment, shall be required where physically feasible. In the event that such
connections allow for shared parking between properties, overall parking requirements may be reduced
pursuant to Section 4.12.
d. Loading and service areas shall be provided onsite in accordance with Section 4.12, and shall be adequate to
meet the anticipated needs of the use in a manner that does not interfere with parking, internal circulation,
and landscaping. Such areas shall be located, landscaped, and/or screened to minimize their visibility from
public rights-of-way and neighboring properties.
e. The outdoor storage or display of goods, supplies, vehicles, equipment, machinery or other materials is
prohibited unless specifically approved by the DRB within a designated area, or as otherwise allowed for a
specific use. Secured, covered and screened areas shall be provided for the collection and on-site storage of
trash and recyclables generated by the proposed development.
5. Site Circulation. Provision shall be made for adequate and safe onsite vehicular and pedestrian circulation, with
consideration given to the intended use of the property, the location of accesses, buildings, parking areas, and
existing facilities onsite and on adjoining properties in accordance with Sections 4.2 and 4.12.
a. The site plan shall include clearly marked travel lanes, pedestrian crossings, and pedestrian paths or sidewalks
that connect buildings, parking areas, and adjoining properties, unless it is determined by the DRB that such
facilities are unnecessary to ensure vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience.
b. The site plan shall incorporate sidewalks, recreation paths, proposed rights-of-way and related infrastructure
improvements identified in duly adopted municipal improvement plans (e.g., sidewalk or streetscape plans),
capital budgets or programs.
6. Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting installations shall meet the requirements of Section 4.10. The DRB may
require the submission of an outdoor lighting plan, prepared by a qualified engineer or lighting expert, for projects
determined by the DRB to pose a potential for significant off-site lighting impact due to the number, location
and/or intensity of proposed lighting fixtures.
7. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control. Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion
control measures shall be used during all phases of development as necessary to minimize surface runoff and
70 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
erosion, protect water quality, and to avoid damage to downstream properties and infrastructure in conformance
with Section 4.15.
8. Landscaping and Screening. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.7.
SECTION 6.7 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
A. Purpose. These conditional use regulations are enacted to provide for a more detailed consideration of
development proposals which may present a greater impact on the community. Typically, land uses are subject to
conditional use review because their scale, intensity and potential for off-site impacts warrant more careful scrutiny by
the DRB. Standards and conditions relate to the identification, avoidance and/or mitigation of potential impacts.
B. Applicability. Conditional Use review is required for the approval of all development identified as “Conditional Use”
or “CU” in the Use Table in Section 2.4, any particular circumstances listed under Article IV that elevates a development
proposal to a Conditional Use review status, and any Special Use identified as needing Conditional Use review in Article
V.
C. General Standards. Conditional use approval shall be granted by the DRB only upon finding that the proposed
development shall not result in an undue adverse effect on any of the following:
1. The capacity of existing or planned community services or facilities. The applicant and DRB shall consider the
demand for community services and facilities resulting from the proposed development in relation to the available
capacity of existing and planned community services and facilities. Community facilities and services that may serve
a proposed development include schools, emergency services, municipal water supply and wastewater treatment,
public parks and trail networks, and public utilities as identified from the Winooski Municipal Development Plan, an
adopted municipal capital improvement program, or through site investigation.
a. Available capacity shall be determined through consultation with municipal and state officials having
jurisdiction over affected services and facilities, and consideration of any duly adopted municipal capital
budget and program in effect.
b. Conditions will be imposed as necessary to ensure that the demand for community facilities or services does
not exceed available capacity. Such conditions may include the phasing of development, the installation of
facilities or improvements by the developer as required to serve the proposed development, and the
submission of a development agreement, performance bond, or other surety, as approved by the City Council,
for the installation of such facilities or improvements.
2. The character of the area affected. The applicant and DRB shall consider the location, scale, type, density and
intensity of the proposed development in relation to the character of the area affected, as defined by zoning district
purpose statements and specifically stated and relevant policies and standards of the Winooski Municipal
Development Plan.
a. Mitigation measures shall be employed by the applicant as necessary to avoid undue adverse impacts to the
character of the area. These measures may include site plan or building design modifications; increased
setback distances, buffers, or screening; the designation of building envelopes to minimize impacts to
significant natural, historic or scenic resources or other measures acceptable to the DRB.
71 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
3. Traffic on roads and highways in the vicinity evaluated in terms of increased demand for parking, travel during
peak commuter hours, safety, contributing to congestion, as opposed to complementing the flow of traffic and/or
parking needs.
a. Conditions shall be imposed as necessary to mitigate undue adverse impacts to existing and planned road and
intersection improvements, levels of service (LOS) and volume-to-capacity (v/c) ratios. Rather than focusing
on incremental and often inconsequential changes between different levels of service, the v/c measure
provides information on whether capacity of an intersection is being fully utilized and recognizes that areas
intended for additional development will have an impact on traffic congestion that cannot be wholly avoided,
nor should it be for a thriving urban environment. In addition, LOS measures quality of service of a
transportation facility from a driver’s perspective based on how quickly vehicles can move through an
intersection, and this is not necessarily the best measure for safety and adequacy of roadways for bicyclists
and pedestrians. Such conditions may include the phasing of development in relation to planned highway
improvements, traffic management strategies including transportation demand management strategies, or
physical improvements to the road network required to serve the proposed development, to be paid for and
installed by the applicant, and the submission of a development agreement, performance bond, or other
surety as approved by the City Council, for the installation of such improvements.
4. Bylaws in effect. The applicant and DRB shall consider whether the proposed development complies with all
municipal bylaws and ordinances in effect at the time of application, including other applicable provisions of these
regulations and the Municipal Development Plan. No development shall be approved in violation of existing
municipal bylaws and ordinances.
a. Conditions may be imposed by the DRB as necessary to ensure compliance with municipal bylaws and
ordinances. Certificates of occupancy for an approved project shall not be issued until all required municipal,
state and federal permits have been obtained.
5. The utilization of renewable energy resources. The proposed development shall not interfere with the sustainable
use of renewable energy resources, including access to, or the direct use or future availability of such resources.
a. Conditions may be imposed as necessary to ensure long-term access, use, and availability of such resources
onsite or on adjoining properties.
C. Specific Standards. The DRB also may consider the following standards and impose conditions as necessary to
reduce or mitigate any identified adverse impacts of a proposed development:
1. Performance Standards. The proposed use shall comply with all performance standards set forth in Section 4.13.
In determining compliance, the DRB may consult with state officials and consider accepted industry standards. To
ensure compliance, the DRB may include as conditions of approval:
a. Require documentation that proposed uses, processes, or equipment will comply with applicable performance
standards.
b. Require increased setback distances and buffers from property lines.
c. Reasonably limit hours of operation.
2. Legal Documentation. Legal documentation shall be provided as necessary to ensure that that all required
improvements, rights-of-way and easements, and other common lands or facilities will be installed and adequately
maintained either by the applicant, an owners association, or through other legal means acceptable to the DRB.
72 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
SECTION 6.8 WAIVERS & VARIANCE REVIEW
A. Applications & Review Standards. The DRB may waive application requirements, and site plan or conditional use
review standards under Sections 6.6 and 6.7, that it determines are not relevant to a particular application.
B. Dimensional Waivers. The DRB, in association with site plan or conditional use review, or on appeal of a ZA's
determination, may reduce minimum district setback requirements (under Table 2.5) or minimum surface water and
wetland setbacks (under Section 4.8) in accordance with the Act [§ 4414] and the following requirements.
1. A waiver request, including information regarding the specific circumstances, need and justification for the waiver
shall be submitted in writing with the application for site plan or conditional use review.
2. A waiver under this section may be granted by the DRB only as necessary to:
a. Allow for the reasonable development and use of a pre-existing nonconforming lot under Section 4.9.
b. Allow for additions or improvements to a pre-existing nonconforming structure under Section 4.9.
c. Comply with federal or state public health, safety, access and disability standards.
d. Allow for the siting of renewable energy structures.
3. The minimum required setback distance shall be reduced by no more than 50% under this provision. Variance
approval under Section 6.8 shall be required for any further reduction in dimensional requirements.
4. In granting a waiver under this section, the DRB shall find, based upon clear and convincing evidence of a specific
need and circumstances that:
a. No reasonable alternative exists for siting the structure, addition or improvement outside of the required
setback area.
b. The reduced setback is not contrary to public health, safety and welfare, stated objectives and policies of the
Winooski Municipal Development Plan, or the intent of these regulations.
c. The waiver represents the minimum setback reduction necessary to allow for the proposed development.
d. Any potential adverse impacts resulting from reduced setbacks on adjoining properties, surface waters or
wetlands shall be mitigated through site design, landscaping and screening, or other accepted mitigation
measures.
C. Variances. In accordance with the Act [§ 4469], a variance from the provisions of these regulations may be granted
by the DRB for a structure only if literal enforcement of these regulations results in undue hardship to the appellant that
precludes any reasonable use of the property.
73 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. The DRB shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the appeal procedures under Section 6.9.
Variance requests also may be considered concurrently with site plan or conditional use review. The request for a
variance shall include:
a. Information required under Section 6.9 and the Act [§ 4466] for a notice of appeal, including:
i. a copy of the application, or brief description of the property in question for which a variance is being
requested,
ii. a reference to the regulatory provisions from which a variance is requested,
iii. a description of the relief requested, and
iv. the grounds why the requested relief is proper, under the circumstances.
b. Information necessary to make findings under each of the variance criteria specified below.
2. The DRB shall grant a variance, and render a decision in favor of the applicant or appellant, only if all of the
following facts are found, and the findings are specified in its written decision:
a. There are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and
that unnecessary hardship is due to these conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of these regulations in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
b. Because of such physical circumstances and conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of these regulations and that the authorization of a variance
is necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
c. The unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant or appellant.
d. The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, reduce access to renewable energy resources, or be detrimental to the public welfare.
e. The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum that will afford relief and will represent the least
deviation possible from these regulations and from the plan.
3. Variances within the Flood Hazard Area District. In addition to requirements under Section 6.8.C, variances from
flood hazard area development standards are also subject to requirements in Appendix A.
SECTION 6.9 APPEALS
A. Zoning Administrator Decisions. An applicant or other "interested person" as defined under the Act [§ 4465] may
appeal a decision or act of the ZA within 15 days of the date of the decision or act by filing a notice of appeal with the
Clerk of the DRB, and by filing a copy of the notice with the ZA.
74 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. Notice of Appeal. A notice of appeal filed with the DRB under this section shall be in writing and include the
following information:
a. the name and address of the appellant;
b. a brief description of the property with respect to which the appeal is taken;
c. a reference to applicable provisions of these regulations;
d. the relief requested by the appellant, including any request for a variance from one or more provisions of
these regulations; and
e. the alleged grounds why such relief is believed proper under the circumstances.
2. Variances. A variance request under the Act [§ 4469] and Section 6.8 may be considered on appeal, or concurrently
with site plan or conditional use review, as long as the requirements of this section are met. Applicants or
appellants shall submit information sufficient for the DRB to make required findings under all variance criteria
under Section 6.8 and, for development within Special Flood Hazard Areas, also under Section Appendix A.
3. Hearing. The DRB shall hold a public hearing on a notice of appeal within 60 days of its filing. The DRB shall give
public notice of the hearing under the Act [§ 4464], and shall mail a copy of the hearing notice to the appellant not
less than 15 days prior to the hearing date.
4. In accordance with the Act [§ 4470], the DRB may reject an appeal without hearing, and render a written decision
that includes findings of fact, within 10 days of the filing of the notice of appeal, if the DRB determines that the
issues raised by the appellant have been decided in an earlier appeal or are based on substantially or materially the
same facts by or on behalf of the appellant.
5. All appeal hearings shall be open to the public. Any interested person or body may appear and be heard in person
or be represented by an agent or attorney at the hearing. The hearing may be adjourned and continued by the
Board from time to time, provided that the date and place of the adjourned hearing shall be announced at the
hearing.
6. A decision on appeal shall be rendered within 45 days after the adjournment of the hearing. The decision shall be
sent by certified mail to the appellant within the 45-day period. Copies of the decision also shall be mailed to every
person or body appearing and having been heard at the hearing, and filed with the ZA and the City Clerk as part of
the public records of the municipality, in accordance with the Act [§ 4464].
7. The City Council shall set the fee for appeals of ZA decisions. All costs incurred by the city in association with the
appeal shall be borne by the appellant.
B. DRB Decisions. The applicant, appellant, or any other interested person who has participated in an appeal
proceeding of the DRB under this section may appeal a decision rendered by the DRB, within 30 days of such decision, to
the Environmental Division of Vermont Superior Court in accordance with the Act [§ 4471].
75 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. “Participation” in a board proceeding shall consist of offering, through oral or written testimony, evidence of a
statement of concern related to the subject of the proceeding.
2. The notice of appeal shall be filed by certified mailing, with fees, to the Environmental Court and by mailing a copy
to the ZA who shall supply a list of interested persons (including the applicant if not the appellant) to the appellant
within five business days. Upon receipt of the list of interested persons, the appellant shall, by certified mail,
provide a copy of the notice of appeal to every interested person. If any one or more of those persons are not then
parties to the appeal, upon motion they shall be granted leave by the court to intervene.
C. Reconsiderations. A request for reconsideration of a DRB decision may be submitted to the DRB by an interested
party within 30 days of the date of the decision. The request must include new information that the DRB had not
previously considered. In accordance with the Act [§ 4470], the DRB may reject the request for reconsideration without
hearing and render a decision, including findings of fact, within 10 days of the filing of the application if the DRB
determines that the issues raised on appeal have been decided in an earlier appeal, or involve substantially or materially
the same facts by or on behalf of the appellant.
SECTION 6.10 ZONING PERMITS
A. Applicability. No land development subject to these regulations shall commence in the City of Winooski until a
zoning permit has been issued by the ZA, in accordance with the Act [§ 4449].
B. Application Requirements. The application for a zoning permit must be submitted to the ZA on forms provided by
the city, along with any application fees as established by the Winooski City Council. In addition, the following will be
required as applicable:
1. Applications for permitted uses shall include a statement describing the existing and intended use of the land and
structures and/or any proposed structural changes, and be accompanied by a copy of a sketch plan, no smaller than
8.5” x 11", drawn to scale, that accurately depicts the following:
a. the dimensions of the lot, including existing and proposed property boundaries;
b. the location, footprint, and height of existing and proposed structures and additions;
c. the location and dimensions of existing and proposed accesses (curb cuts), driveways and parking areas;
d. the location of existing and proposed easements, rights-of-way and utilities;
e. setbacks from property boundaries, road rights-of-way, surface waters, and wetlands;
f. the location of existing and proposed water and wastewater connections; and
g. such other information as may be needed to determine compliance with these regulations as specified by the
ZA.
2. For development requiring one or more approvals from the DRB and/or City Council prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit, application information and fees shall be submitted concurrently with the application for a zoning
permit. The ZA shall refer the application to the appropriate board or municipal official following submission.
76 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
3. Additional copies of applications for development within Special Flood Hazard Areas under Appendix A, as provided
by the applicant, must be forwarded by the ZA to the State Floodplain Coordinator within 10 business days of
receipt of the application. All other applications that require referral to a state agency shall be done by the
applicant with evidence of that submission provided to the ZA prior to the issuance of any zoning permit.
4. The ZA or DRB may reject an application that misrepresents any material fact, in accordance with the Act [§ 4470a].
C. Issuance of Zoning Permits. A zoning permit shall be issued by the ZA only in accord with the following provisions:
1. No zoning permit shall be issued by the ZA for any use or structure that requires approval of the DRB until DRB
approval has been obtained. DRB decisions, including approvals, may be appealed under Section 6.9.B; however,
administrative zoning permits issued by the ZA for DRB-approved development cannot be separately appealed
under Section 6.9.B.
2. No zoning permit shall be issued by the ZA for the development of a lot for which subdivision approval is required
until subdivision approval has been granted by the DRB.
3. For uses requiring state agency referral, no zoning permit shall be issued until a response has been received from
the state, or the expiration of 30 days following the submission of the application to the state, whichever is sooner.
4. If public notice has been issued by the Winooski City Council for their first public hearing on a proposed
amendment to these regulations, the ZA shall issue a zoning permit for development that is subject to the proposed
amendment only in accordance with the requirements of the Act [§ 4449(d)].
5. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, including all application materials, fees and required approvals,
the ZA shall act to either issue or deny a zoning permit in writing, or to refer the application to the DRB. If the ZA
fails to act within the 30-day period, on appeal to the DRB a permit shall be deemed issued on the 31st day.
6. All zoning permits shall include a statement of time within which appeals may be taken under Section 6.9.A; and
shall require the posting of a notice of permit, on a form prescribed by the city, within view of the nearest public
right-of-way most nearly adjacent to the subject property until the time for appeal has expired.
7. The ZA shall deliver a copy of the permit to the Assessor and post a copy of the permit at the city office within three
days of the date that the permit is issued. The permit shall be posted for a period of 15 days from the date of
issuance.
SECTION 6.11 EFFECTIVE DATES AND PERMIT RENEWALS
A. Zoning Permits. No zoning permit shall take effect until the time for appeal under Section 6.9.A has passed or, in
the event that a notice of appeal is properly filed, until the appeal has been decided. Permits shall remain in effect for
one year from the date of issuance, unless the permit specifies otherwise.
77 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. Development authorized by a zoning permit shall be substantially commenced within this period or the zoning
permit shall become null and void, unless a permit extension is obtained by the permittee.
2. A one-year administrative extension may be granted by the ZA if the extension is requested prior to the permit
expiration date and the ZA determines that there was reasonable cause for delay in starting development.
"Reasonable cause for delay" shall be based on a determination that:
a. The delay is the result of delays in a state or federal permitting process; or
b. The applicant has made a good faith effort to exercise his rights under the permit and, though the use or actual
construction of structures authorized permit has not begun, the permittee is conducting work at the site in
furtherance of the permitted project.
3. Only recording fees shall be assessed for an administrative extension.
4. A one-year permit extension granted under this subsection is not renewable. Should the permittee fail to
substantially commence the project within the one-year extension period, he or she will be required to submit a
new application for development.
B. DRB Approvals. DRB approvals shall remain in effect as follows:
1. Subdivision Approval. Final subdivision approval by the DRB shall remain in effect and run with the land, and
legally recorded subdivision plats, as approved by the DRB. For purposes of these regulations, any lot approved by
the DRB as part of a planned unit development under Section 6.3 is considered a conforming lot.
2. Site Plan and Conditional Use Approval. Site plan and conditional use approval by the DRB shall expire with the
expiration of the zoning permit, and may be extended only in accordance with Section 6.11.A.2 above; or as
provided for abandoned structures under Section 4.1. Once approved uses or structures are established, site plan
and conditional use approvals shall remain in effect and run with the land.
3. Variance Approval. Variance approval expires with the expiration of a zoning permit. Variance approval shall
remain in effect and run with the land for structures or structural alterations that are constructed in strict
compliance with the conditions of variance approval.
SECTION 6.12 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE
A. Certificate of Occupancy/Compliance. A certificate of occupancy issued by the ZA is required prior to the use or
occupancy of land, a principal structure, or part thereof, for which a zoning permit has been issued. The purpose of this
certificate is to ensure that the use or structure, as established, conforms to these regulations and the conditions of
approval.
78 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
Certificates of occupancy shall not be required for certain exterior residential accessory structures, unless those
structures are located within a Flood Hazard Overlay District (Special Flood Hazard Areas). Those exterior residential
accessory structures, outside of the Flood Hazard Overlay District (Special Flood Hazard Areas), which are exempt from
obtaining a certificate of occupancy are: satellite dishes, play structures, tree houses, doghouses, and sheds under 100
sq. ft. All exterior residential accessory structures must, however, comply with all other requirements of these
regulations and conditions of approval.
1. The applicant shall submit an application for a certificate of occupancy including as-built drawings where applicable,
to the ZA upon substantial completion of required improvements, but prior to the use or occupancy of the land or
structure.
a. Substantially Complete. A development shall be deemed substantially complete if it meets all applicable
permit requirements and conditions, and is habitable or otherwise able to be occupied or used for its intended
purpose.
b. Certificates of occupancy may be issued on a unit by unit basis.
2. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until:
a. The applicant documents that all necessary permits and approvals required by these regulations, including
applicable state and federal permits, have been obtained.
b. The applicant provides certification from a professional engineer or site technician (designer) licensed by the
state that wastewater and water supply systems have been installed and tested as approved by the state.
c. The applicant provides certification from a licensed engineer that all permitted road and driveway
improvements have been completed in conformance with approved plans.
d. The ZA determines that the development has been completed in conformance with permits and approvals,
from as-built drawings submitted by the applicant and/or site inspection.
3. The ZA shall inspect the premises to ensure that all work has been completed in conformance with the zoning
permit and associated approvals prior to issuing a certificate.
4. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued or denied by the ZA within 14 business days of receipt of the complete
application. If the ZA fails to either grant or deny the certificate of occupancy within 14 days of the submission of an
application, the certificate, on appeal, shall be deemed issued on the 15th day.
5. Certificates of occupancy shall be posted, delivered and recorded in the Winooski land records and in the zoning file
for the property in the same manner as zoning permits.
6. The ZA's decision to issue or deny a certificate of occupancy may be appealed to the DRB under Section 6.9.A.
79 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
SECTION 6.13 EXEMPTIONS
A. The following uses and structures have been determined to impose no impact or a de minimus impact on the
surrounding area and the overall pattern of land development in the City in accordance with the Act [§ 4446] and, unless
otherwise regulated under the Flood Hazard Area Overlay District (Article VI), are exempted from these regulations.
Outside of Special Flood Hazard Areas, no municipal permits or approvals shall be required for:
1. The normal maintenance and repair of existing structures, utilities and infrastructure which does not result in any
expansion or relocation, including any change to the footprint or height of a structure, or a change in use.
2. Residential entry stairs (excluding decks and porches), handicap ramps, walkways, and fences or walls in
accordance with Section 4.6.
3. Exterior patios constructed without a permanent foundation.
4. Minor fill, grading or excavation that is incidental to regular driveway maintenance, and to residential lawn and
yard maintenance and which does not change the existing elevation of land by more than two feet over a total
area of no more than 2,000 square feet.
5. Resurfacing an existing driveway that does not result in driveway or road widening or relocation.
6. Recreational trails or paths located outside of required stream and wetland buffer areas under Section 4.8 that do
not involve or require the development, construction or use of structures or parking areas (e.g., walking, hiking,
cross-country skiing and/or snow mobile trails).
7. One accessory structure per lot, with written notification to the ZA, provided that the structure does not exceed
100 square feet in floor area and 10 feet in height and meets all setback distances for the district in which it is
located.
8. Transit or bus stop shelters approved by the Winooski City Council or the Vermont Agency of Transportation, which
do not exceed 200 square feet in area and 12 feet in height, are set back at least five feet from edge of the travel
lane, and do not otherwise interfere with corner visibility or sight distances for vehicular traffic.
9. Garage sales in accordance with Section 5.4.
10. A home occupation in accordance with Section 5.7.
B. The following uses are specifically exempted from local land use and development regulations in accordance with
the Act [§§ 4412, 4413]. No zoning permit or approval shall be required for:
80 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
1. Accepted agricultural and best management practices (AAPs, BMPs) as those practices are defined by the Secretary
of the Agency of Agriculture, Food and Markets, including farm structures as defined under the Act [§ 4413].
Written notification, including a sketch plan showing structure setback distances from road rights-of-way, property
lines, and surface waters shall be submitted to the ZA prior to any construction, as required under AAPs. Such
structures shall meet all setback requirements under these regulations, unless waived by the Secretary.
2. Accepted management practices (AMPs) for silviculture (forestry) as defined by the Commissioner of Forests, Parks,
and Recreation.
3. Public utility power generating plants and transmission facilities regulated by the Vermont Public Service Board
under 30 V.S.A. § 248, including net metered renewable energy facilities (e.g., wind generators, solar panels).
4. Telecommunications facilities as defined under 30 V.S.A. § 248a, when and to the extent that jurisdiction for such
facilities are assumed by the Public Service Board.
5. Hunting, fishing and trapping on public or private land as specified under 24 V.S.A. § 2295. This specifically does not
include facilities that support such activities, such as firing ranges and rod and gun or fish and game clubs, which are
subject to these regulations.
C. Decisions of the ZA as to whether a use is exempt from permit requirements under this section may be appealed to
the DRB under Section 6.9.
81 ARTICLE VI – DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES | City of Winooski
A. Violations. In accordance with the Act [§§ 4451, 4452), the commencement or continuation of any land
development, subdivision or use that is not in conformance with the provisions of these regulations shall constitute a
violation. Each day that a violation continues after notice of violation per subsection B below shall constitute a separate
offense. The ZA shall institute in the name of the City of Winooski, any appropriate action, injunction or other
proceeding to enforce the provisions of these regulations. All fines imposed and collected for violations shall be paid
over to the city.
B. Notice of Violation. No action may be brought under this section unless the alleged offender has had at least seven
days notice by certified mail that a violation exists, as required under the Act [§ 4451]. The warning notice shall state
that:
1. a violation exists;
2. that the alleged offender has an opportunity to cure the violation within the seven days;
3. that the alleged offender will not be entitled to an additional warning notice for a violation occurring after the
seven days; and
4. that action may be brought without notice and opportunity to cure if the alleged offender repeats the violation of
the regulations after the seven- day notice period and within the next succeeding 12 months.
C. Limitations on Enforcement. An action, injunction or other enforcement proceeding relating to the failure to
obtain or comply with the terms and conditions of any required or duly recorded municipal land use permit may be
instituted against the alleged offender if the action, injunction or other enforcement proceeding is instituted within 15
years from the date the alleged violation first occurred, and not thereafter, in accordance with the Act [§4454]. The
burden of proving the date the alleged violation first occurred shall be on the person against whom the enforcement
action is instituted. No enforcement proceeding may be instituted to enforce an alleged violation of a municipal land use
permit unless the permit or a notice of the permit has been recorded in the land records of the municipality in
accordance with Section 6.10.
ARTICLE VII – VIOLATIONS & ENFORCEMENT
82 ARTICLE VII – VIOLATIONS & ENFORCEMENT | City of Winooski
A. Appointments. The following appointments shall be made by the Winooski City Council in association with the
administration and enforcement of these regulations:
1. Zoning Administrator (Administrative Officer). The City Manager shall appoint a ZA. An acting ZA, who shall have
the same duties and responsibilities of the ZA, may be appointed in the ZA’s absence. The ZA shall literally
administer and strictly enforce the provisions of these regulations, and in doing so shall inspect development,
maintain records, and perform other related tasks as is necessary and appropriate.
2. Development Review Board. DRB members and alternates shall be appointed by the City Council for specified
terms. The DRB shall adopt rules of procedure and rules of ethics with regard to conflicts of interest to guide its
official conduct. The DRB shall have all powers and duties as set forth in the law and these regulations.
3. Planning Commission. Planning Commission members shall be appointed by the City Council. The Commission shall
adopt rules of procedure and rules of ethics with regard to conflicts of interest to guide its official conduct. The
Commission shall have the following duties in association with these regulations:
a. Prepare proposed amendments to these regulations, and consider proposed amendments submitted by others,
include amendments submitted by petition.
b. Prepare and approve written reports on any proposed amendment to these regulations as required.
c. Hold one or more warned public hearings on proposed amendments to these regulations, prior to submission
of a proposed amendment and written report to the City Council.
B. Fee Schedule. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees to be charged in administering these regulations,
with the intent of covering the city’s administrative costs. Such fee schedule may be reviewed and revised periodically.
C. Technical Review. Should the DRB or the ZA require the assistance of an independent technical review when
reviewing applications:
1. The ZA or DRB shall prepare a scope for the technical review. The scope shall be strictly limited and relevant to
specific review criteria upon which findings and a decision must be made under the regulations.
2. The review shall be conducted in a timely manner.
3. The review shall be conducted by an independent consultant who is clearly qualified and demonstrates necessary
expertise in the pertinent field(s), and, where applicable, is licensed by the state.
4. The cost of the review shall be paid for by the applicant.
D. Public Notice. In accordance with the Act [§ 4464(a)], warned public hearings shall be required for site plan and
conditional use review, appeals, variances, and preliminary and final subdivision review. Notice shall be the
responsibility of the ZA and shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing by all of the
following:
1. Publication of the date, place and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of
Winooski.
ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION
83 ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION | City of Winooski
2. Posting of the same information in three public places: the Winooski City Hall, and two other locations.
3. Posting of a notice of hearing within view from the public right-of-way nearest to the property for which the
application is being made.
4. Written notification, sent by certified mail return receipt requested, to the applicant and to owners of all properties
adjoining the property subject to development, without regard to public rights-of-way, which includes:
a. a description of the proposed project;
b. information that clearly informs the recipient where additional information may be obtained; and
c. notice that participation in the local proceeding is a prerequisite to the right to take any subsequent appeal.
5. For hearings on subdivision plats located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, written notification to the clerk
of the adjoining municipality.
6. For applications in which a waiver or variance is sought regarding setbacks from a state highway, written
notification to the Secretary of the Agency of Transportation.
7. Cost of all required notice shall be borne by the applicant.
E. Meetings and Hearings.
1. Development Review Board. All meetings and hearings of the DRB, except for deliberative and executive sessions,
shall be open to the public. The DRB shall adopt rules of procedure and rules of ethics that at minimum address the
following, in accordance with the Act [§ 4461] and Vermont Open Meeting Law:
a. The conduct of any meeting and the taking of any action.
b. Quorums which shall be not less than a majority of the members of the DRB.
c. The DRB shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating this, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions
which shall be filed immediately in the City Office as public zoning records.
d. Public hearings shall be noticed and warned in accordance with Subsection D. In any regulatory hearing of the
DRB there shall be an opportunity for each person wishing to achieve status as an interested person, for
purposes of participation or appeal under Section 6.9 to demonstrate that the criteria for achieving such status
are met. The Board shall keep a written record of the name, address, and participation of each of these
persons.
e. The DRB may recess the proceedings on any application pending submission of additional information, and
should close evidence promptly after all parties have submitted requested information.
84 ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION | City of Winooski
f. No member of the DRB shall communicate on any issue in an application proceeding, directly or indirectly,
with any party, party’s representative, party’s counsel, or any interested person in the outcome of the
proceeding while the proceeding is pending without additional notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate. All ex parte communications received by DRB members, all written responses to such
communications, and the identity of the person making the communication shall be entered into the record.
g. Members of the DRB shall not participate in the decision on an application unless they have heard all the
testimony and reviewed all the evidence submitted in the hearing. This may include listening to a recording, or
reading the minutes or transcripts of testimony they have missed, and reviewing all exhibits and other
evidence prior to deliberation.
F. Decisions. The DRB may recess proceedings on any application pending the submission of additional information.
The DRB will close evidence promptly after all parties have submitted requested information, and shall issue a decision
within 45 days after the adjournment of the hearing. Failure to issue a decision within the 45-day period, on appeal,
shall be deemed approval and shall be effective the 46th day.
1. All decisions shall be issued in writing and shall separately state findings of fact and conclusions of law. Findings of
fact shall explicitly and concisely restate the underlying facts that support the decision, based exclusively on
evidence of the record. Conclusions shall be based on the findings of fact. The decision shall also include a
statement of the time within which appeals may be taken under Section 6.9.
2. DRB decisions shall also include a statement, in content and form approved by the Secretary of the Agency of
Natural Resources, that state permits may be required and that the applicant or permittee should contact the
state's regional permit specialist or individual state agencies to determine which state permits must be obtained
before certificates of occupancy or compliance are issued, or any construction may commence.
3. In rendering a decision in favor of the applicant, the DRB may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
deems necessary to implement the purposes of the law, these regulations, and the municipal plan currently in
effect.
4. All decisions shall be sent by certified mail, within the required 45-day period, to the applicant or to the appellant
on matters of appeal. Copies of the decision also shall be mailed to every person or body appearing and having
been heard at the hearing, and filed with the ZA and City Clerk as part of the public record of the municipality, in
accordance with Subsection G.
5. Administrative Amendments. Any decision issued by the DRB may authorize subsequent changes or amendments
to an approved project subject to administrative review by the ZA, rather than DRB review, in accordance with the
following, which shall be specified in the DRB’s decision:
a. The decision shall clearly specify the thresholds and conditions under which administrative review and
approval shall be allowed.
b. The thresholds and conditions shall be structured such that no new development shall be approved that
results in substantial impact under the requirements of these regulations, or any of the thresholds or
conditions set forth in the decision.
85 ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION | City of Winooski
c. No amendment issued as an administrative review shall have the effect of substantially altering the findings of
fact of any DRB approval in effect.
Any decision of the ZA authorized in this manner may be appealed to the DRB in accordance with Section 6.9.
G. Recording Requirements.
1. Within 30 days of the issuance of a municipal land use permit or notice of violation, the ZA shall deliver either the
original, a legible copy, or a notice of the municipal land use permit or notice of violation to the City Clerk for
recording in the land records of the city generally as provided in 24 V.S.A. § 1154(c), and file a copy in City Hall in
the zoning files. The applicant shall be charged for the cost of the recording fees.
2. For development within the Flood Hazard Area District, the ZA shall also maintain a record of all permits, elevation
certificates, elevations, floodproofing certifications and variance actions issued for development within the district
as required under Appendix A.
3. Approved subdivision plats and plans shall be recorded by the applicant in the city land records in accordance with
the requirements of Section 6.2.
H. Availability & Distribution of Documents. Copies of these regulations, other related municipal regulations and
ordinances, and the City plan shall be made available to the public during normal business hours in the Winooski City
Hall.
86 ARTICLE VIII - ADMINISTRATION | City of Winooski
In this Regulation, the following terms shall have the following meanings (Italicized terms and their permissible uses in
zoning districts are found in Table 2.4 - the Land Use Matrix). There are other definitions unique to the Downtown Core
District, Gateway Districts and the Flood Hazard Area Districts that can be found in the respective appendices; and
therefore these definitions do not apply to those districts unless expressly stated.
Abandonment: An intentional and absolute relinquishment and cessation of a use for 6 months without intention to
resume said use.
Accessory: A use, activity, structure, or part of a structure that is subordinate and incidental to the main activity or
structure on the lot.
Accessory Dwelling: An accessory dwelling is an independent efficiency or one bedroom dwelling unit that is located
within or appurtenant to an owner-occupied single-unit dwelling, that is clearly subordinate to that dwelling.
Addition: New construction performed on a building which increases the outside dimensions of the structure. An
addition increases floor area of a structure.
Adult establishment: An establishment that utilizes five percent (5%) or more of its retail selling area for the purpose of
sale, rental or viewing of printed and visual materials which are distinguished by their emphasis on creating sexual
interest through sight, sound or touch.
Alterations: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, other than cosmetic or decorative, or any change in
the structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Alcohol Manufacturing Facility: A facility where alcoholic beverages can be manufactured, stored, bottled and sold at
wholesale or at retail in sealed containers for consumption off premises. The facility may include a tasting or tap room as
an accessory use.
Animal care provider/ Veterinarian: Any facility which provides medical care to animals, and may include facilities for
keeping animals overnight as part of veterinary care. Also includes establishments which provide overnight boarding and
caring for animals not part of veterinary care.
Assisted Living & Residential Care Homes: State-licensed facilities that provide rooms, meals, and personal care services
in living arrangements designed to meet the needs of people who cannot live independently and usually do not require
the type of care provided in a nursing home.
Association, fraternal organization, social club: A membership organization that holds regular meetings, has formal
written membership requirements, and that may, subject to regulations controlling such uses, maintain dining facilities,
serve alcohol, or engage professional entertainment for the enjoyment of dues paying members and their guests. There
are no sleeping facilities.
Bar: A licensed establishment subject to State and municipal licensing and regulations in which the principal business is
serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Food may also be served as an accessory use subject to
Vermont Health Regulations.
Bed-and-breakfast (B&B): A single-dwelling residence with four or fewer rooms for rent, accommodating a maximum of
ten guests, for short-term overnight lodging by the day or by the week. The single-dwelling residence must be the
primary residence of the owner or operator of the bed and breakfast. Employment shall not exceed one (1) full-time
ARTICLE IX - DEFINITIONS
87 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
employee in addition to the owner. It may provide meals for compensation incidental to the provision of
accommodation.
Brew pub: A restaurant where malt beverages can be manufactured, stored, bottled and sold to be consumed on the
premises. Licensing for brew pubs are regulated by VSA Title 7 and other relevant State and municipal regulations.
Buffer: A strip of land, fence, or border of trees, etc., between one use and another, which may or may not have trees
and shrubs planted for screening purposes, designed to set apart one use area from another. An appropriate buffer may
vary depending on uses, districts, size, and separations.
Building: A structure having a roof and used for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any
kind.
Building height and location map: Only applicable to the Downtown Core Zoning District. The building height and
location map is included in Appendix C. The locations of the areas designated on the Building Height and Locations
Map shall be determined by the distances designated on the Map; these shall be construed as distances are not
applicable due to curving right of way lines or otherwise, or if the location of the Green Space Boundary shown on the
Map is in question, the locations of the areas or location of the Green Space Boundary shall be determined from the
scale of the official Building Height and Location Map in the office of the Administrative Officer.
Certificate of Fitness: The written approval, signed by the Code Enforcement Officer, or duly authorized municipal
official, setting forth that the building, structure and premises comply with the Municipal & State Codes, this Certificate
of Fitness is required prior to a dwelling unit, and or a public building, to be occupied.
Certificate of Occupancy: The written approval of the ZA certifying that a newly constructed structure, addition and or
alterations to an existing structure, or an existing structure undergoing a change in use is in full compliance with the
zoning provisions of Municipal By-laws, Ordinances and Codes adopted under the authority of the City Charter.
Crematorium: A facility containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation.
Cultural facility: A public or non-profit establishment open to the public providing for the documentation, display,
performance, or gathering space for the enjoyment of heritage, culture, history, science or the arts, such as a library,
museum, performance venue or community center. May include the occasional sale or provision of refreshments,
souvenirs, or other articles as related to and accessory to the activities occurring at the center.
Curb cut: A legally designated vehicular point of access from a street to a driveway.
Daycare facility: An establishment providing care for children, the elderly or individuals with disabilities in a protective
setting for a portion of a 24-hour day. This use includes a state registered or licensed child care provider serving more
than six full-time and four part-time children.
Demolition permit: A permit that gives the applicant/owner the right to demolish a building and to ensure that no
unsafe condition exists on the site when the demolition is complete.
Detached Cottage: A detached building or structure containing only one dwelling unit, which shall not exceed 1,000
square feet of finished habitable floor area. In the R-A and R-B zoning districts a detached cottage shall take the place of
the permitted accessory dwelling unit.
DRB: City of Winooski Development Review Board
Dwelling, Multi-Unit (or Multi-family): A building or structure or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units.
88 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
Dwelling, Single-Unit (or Single Family Dwelling): A detached building or structure containing only one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Two-Unit (or Two Family Dwelling): A detached building or structure containing only two dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof contain complete house-keeping facilities for only
one family, and having no enclosed space other than vestibules, entrances, or other hallways, in common with any other
dwelling unit. A boarding house, rooming house, convalescent home, fraternity or sorority house, hotel, inn, lodging,
nursing, or other similar home or similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling unit.
Education Facility: An establishment providing instruction to students and including accessory structures and uses
traditionally associated with a program of study, which is operated under state licensing and/or professional
accreditation.
Family Child Care Home: A state registered or licensed child care home or facility serving six or fewer children
considered by right in 24 V.S.A. Section 4412(5) as a permitted single-family residential use of property; and a state
registered or licensed child care home or facility serving no more than six full-time and four part-time children.
Floor area: The total area of all floors of the building or buildings on a lot as measured from the exterior faces of exterior
walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. The floor area shall include halls, stairways, elevator
shafts, porches, balconies, garages, and accessory use. The floor area shall not include cellars, basements and attics.
Floor area, gross: The total floor area of a building or structure designed for occupancy and exclusive use, including
basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the outside face of the exterior
walls and from the centerline of common walls or joint partitions. This excludes stairwells, elevator shafts, mechanical
rooms, space related to the operation and maintenance of the building, and lobbies and bathrooms located for common
or public use rather than for internal use.
Frontage: That lot line or property line or lines which is coincident with a public right-of-way. Corner lots with frontage
on two or more roads must meet frontage on primary road right-of-way and lot depth on secondary road right-of-way as
determined by the ZA.
Funeral home: A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities
for (a) embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial; (b) the storage
of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and (c) the storage of funeral vehicles.
Garage sale: A short term sale of household goods from a residence which shall include similar terms such as porch,
lawn, or cellar sales. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school athletic events shall not be deemed to
constitute garage sales.
Garage, parking: A garage, other than a private or storage garage, which is used for the short-term parking of vehicles.
Government facility: Any building held, used, or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch
of government, federal, state, county, or municipal, without reference to the ownership of the building or of the realty
upon which it is situated.
Group Home: A residential establishment operated under state licensing or registration, serving not more than eight
persons who have a disability as defined in 9 V.S.A. § 4501. Group homes are considered by right a permitted singlefamily
residential use of property, except shall be considered a Conditional Use when such home is located within 1,000
feet of another existing or permitted group home.
89 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
Healthcare facility: Any facility maintained and operated to provide licensed medical care, including, but not limited to
hospitals, nursing homes, clinics and private healthcare provider offices.
Height: The vertical distance measured from the average (or mean) elevation of the finished grade immediately adjacent
to the structure to:
a) the highest point of a flat roof, mansard roof, stepped building or terraced building OR
b) the mean height level between eaves and peak for all other roof types.
Height calculation of a building shall not include rooftop apparatus such as chimneys, solar collectors, heating & cooling
equipment, antennas or similar projections, unless the projections are greater than 10 vertical feet. See the following
illustration for guidance in defining building height:
Source: http://www.mass.gov/envir/smart_growth_toolkit/pages/CS-fbc-lowell.html
Home Occupation: An occupation, profession, activity or use that a) is clearly a customary, secondary, and incidental use
of a dwelling unit, b) is carried on for gain by a resident of the dwelling, and c) does not alter the exterior of the property
or affect the character of the area. Home occupation considered a permitted right in VSA 24 Chap 117 §4412(4) as a
permitted residential use of property.
Household: One (1) or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, provided that a household other than an
extended household may not contain more than five (5) persons who are not related by blood or marriage.
Household, extended: A household that contains at least six (6) persons who are not related by blood or marriage, but
does not contain more than eight (8) persons who are not related by blood or marriage.
Industry: A business use or activity at a scale greater than home occupation involving processing, manufacturing,
fabrication, assembly, finishing, warehousing, and/or storage. Finished or semi-finished products may be temporarily
stored outdoors pending shipment.
90 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
Laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of
the laboratory.
Land development: Means the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or
enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining operation, excavation or landfill, and any change in the
use of any building or other structure, land or extension of use of land. Also see "Development" as defined for purposes
of flood hazard area management and regulation in Appendix A.
Loading space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lodging establishment: A facility, other than a bed and breakfast, offering transient lodging accommodations for a fee
to the general public which may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational
facilities.
Lot: Land whose boundary lines have been established by a duly recorded conveyance.
Lot, corner: A lot at the junction of an abutting two or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection
does not exceed 135 degrees; on a curved street the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot
lines with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot coverage: A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion of a site that is impervious (i.e. does not
absorb water). This portion includes but is not limited to all areas covered by buildings, parked structures, driveways,
roads, sidewalks, and any area of pavement. In all districts, the following shall not be counted as lot coverage: Lawns,
gardens and unpaved landscaped areas; Open play structure without roofs and not located on a paved surface;
Fountains; Swimming pools (Note: aprons, decks and walks adjacent to swimming pools shall be considered as lot
coverage); Fences; and, Ramps for the disabled, for which the sole purpose is to provide access for the disabled, and
which have no more than the minimum dimensions required to meet accessibility standards.
Lot depth: The minimum distance from the street line of a lot to the rear lot line of such lot.
Lot line: A boundary of a lot other than a street line.
Lot line, rear: The lot line generally opposite the street line; if the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot
comes to a point in the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be that line as nearly parallel to the frontage as possible
and lying farthest from the frontage, having a length of not less than 10 feet.
Master plan: The master plan for the Winooski Falls Riverfront Downtown Project which the City created with an intent
to recreate a traditional urban environment in the downtown core and riverfront of the City, with a high density mix of
uses, including offices, basic retail and services and a range of housing options. The Master Plan was approved by the
State of Vermont District Environmental Commission in Land Use Permit 4C1065 (Revised) July 6, 2001 and Land Use
Permit 4C1065-1 (Corrected) dated November 1, 2002, and which may be further revised by the City.
Municipal development plan: The comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of
the City of Winooski; included are analyses, recommendations and proposals for the community’s population, economy,
housing, transportation, community facilities, and land use.
91 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
Nonconforming lots or parcels: Means lots or parcels that do not conform to the present bylaws covering dimensional
requirements but were in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of
the present bylaws, including a lot or parcel improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.
Nonconforming structure: Means a structure or part of a structure that does not conform to the present bylaws but was
in conformance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws,
including a structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.
Nonconforming use: Means use of land that does not conform to the present bylaws but did conform to all applicable
laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws, including a use improperly authorized as
a result of error by the administrative officer.
Nonconformity: Means a nonconforming use, structure, or lot.
Office: Administrative, executive, professional, research, or similar organizations, and laboratories having only limited
contact public, provided that no merchandise or merchandising services are sold on the premises, except such as are
incidental or accessory to the principal permissible use.
Person: Means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, and any other incorporated or unincorporated
organization or group.
Personal service establishment: A business that provides services of a personal nature including but not limited to:
beauty salons, apparel cleaning or repair, banks, and pet grooming shops. Sales of products must be clearly incidental to
the services provided.
Planned unit development: Means one or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land to be developed as a single entity, the
plan for which may propose any authorized combination of density or intensity transfers or increases, as well as the
mixing of land uses. This plan, as authorized, may deviate from bylaw requirements that are otherwise applicable to the
area in which it is located with the exception of density, lot coverage and height.
Principal structure: A building or structure which contains the main or principal use of the lot on which said building on
structure is located.
Recreation and entertainment, Commercial: Recreation and entertainment facilities operated for profit including, but
not limited to, health clubs, instructional studios, and theaters. Excludes adult establishments.
Recreation and entertainment, Non-commercial: Recreation and entertainment facilities owned or operated by a public
or non-profit entity including, but not limited to, sports fields, parks and trails, playgrounds, recreation centers and
farmers markets.
Religious facility: Places of worship, such as churches, chapels, mosques, synagogues, and temples, including facilities
customarily related to a place of worship, such as: rectory or convent, parsonage, private school, meeting hall, offices for
administration of the institution, licensed child or adult daycare, playground, cemetery.
Restaurant: A licensed commercial establishment subject to Vermont Health Regulations where food and beverages are
prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building and adjacent street-space, and where a minimum
of 60% of gross sales must be created by the sale of food. See also RESTAURANT, café and RESTAURANT, with drive-thru.
92 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski
Restaurant, café: A licensed commercial establishment subject to Vermont Health Regulations containing less than or
equal to 2,000 gross square feet where food and non-alcoholic beverages are prepared, served and consumed either on
or off premises.
Restaurant, with drive-thru: A licensed commercial establishment subject to Vermont Health Regulations where
customers order and are served food and non-alcoholic beverages at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages
prepared to leave the premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed.
Retail Sales, Neighborhood commercial: Non-residential establishments intended to serve or accommodate the needs
of a limited geographic segment of a community or area. Such uses include but are not limited to: neighborhood
convenience stores, hardware and general merchandise; pharmacies, and cafes.
Retail sales: Establishments engaged in selling an assortment of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal
or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Setback: The distance between the nearest portion of a building projection on a lot and the right-of-way of the street or
property line. Corner lots with frontage on two or more roads must meet front setback requirements for each adjoining
road right-of-way. Above grade projections from a building such as roof overhangs, balconies, sills, cornices or similar
architectural features may be permitted to extend up to 30 inches into required setbacks, except that no projection shall
extend over a public or private right-of-way unless otherwise specified in these regulations.
Storage, outdoor: The keeping, in an area outside of a building, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the
same place for more than 24 hours, except for merchandise placed in an area for outdoor display.
Structure: Means an assembly of materials for occupancy or use, including a building, mobile home or trailer, sign, wall,
or fence.
Structure, temporary: An assembly of material for occupancy or use which lacks a permanent foundation and can be
easily removed.
Subdivision: The division of any lot, parcel, or tract of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, parcels of other division for
any purpose. See Section 6.2 for exemptions.
Technical deficiency: Means a defect in a proposed plan or bylaw, or any amendment or repeal thereof, correction of
which does not involve substantive change to the proposal, including corrections to grammar, spelling, and punctuation
as well as the numbering of sections.
Vehicle Repair & Sales: A building or establishment where the following activities may occur: selling or leasing vehicles,
general repair, engine rebuilding, reconditioning of vehicles, collision repair, painting, and general maintenance. No
abandoned vehicles shall be stored on the premises.
Wetlands: Means those areas of the state that are inundated by surface or groundwater with a frequency sufficient to
support vegetation or aquatic life that depend on saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and
reproduction. Such areas include marshes, swamps, sloughs, potholes, fens, river and lake overflows, mud flats, bogs,
and ponds, but excluding such areas as grow food or crops in connection with farming activities.
6720339_4:10780-00007
93 Article IX - DEFINITIONS | City of Winooski



Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
CITY OF WINOOSKI INUNDATION HAZARD AREA
REGULATIONS
Adopted by Mayor and Council February 22, 2010 and
Effective March 15, 2010
Incorporated into Unified Land Use & Development
Regulations in 2016
I. Statutory Authorization and Effect .......................................................................................... 1
II. Statement of Purpose............................................................................................................... 1
III. Other Provisions ................................................................................................................... 2
IV. Lands to Which these Regulations Apply ............................................................................ 2
V. Summary Table: Development Review in Hazard Areas ...................................................... 3
VI. Development Review in Hazard Areas ................................................................................ 3
VII. Development Standards ....................................................................................................... 6
VIII. Administration ..................................................................................................................... 8
IX. Certificate of Occupancy ....................................................................................................... 9
X. Enforcement and Penalties ................................................................................................... 10
XI. Definitions ............................................................................................................................ 10
I. Statutory Authorization and Effect
In accordance with 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32, and V.S.A. Chapter 117 §4424, §4411 and §4414, there is
hereby established a bylaw for areas at risk of flood damage in the City of Winooski, Vermont. Except as
additionally described below, all administrative procedures follow municipal procedures under 24 VSA
Chapter 117.
II. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this bylaw to:
A. Implement the goals, policies, and recommendations in the current municipal plan;
B. Avoid and minimize the loss of life and property, the disruption of COMMERCE, the impairment of the
tax base, and the extraordinary public expenditures and demands on public services that result from
flooding;
C. Ensure that the selection, design, creation, and use of development is reasonably safe and accomplished
in a manner that is consistent with public wellbeing, does not impair flood plain services or the stream
corridor,
D. Manage the flood hazard area designated pursuant to 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 § 753, the municipal hazard
mitigation plan; and make the City of Winooski, its citizens, and businesses eligible for federal flood
insurance, federal disaster recovery funds, and hazard mitigation funds as may be available.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
III. Other Provisions
A. Precedence of Bylaw
The provisions of these flood hazard bylaws shall not in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other local, state, or federal laws or regulations. Where this
flood hazard regulation imposes a greater restriction the provisions here shall take precedence.
B. Validity and Severability
If any portion of this bylaw is held unconstitutional or invalid by a competent court, the
remainder of this bylaw shall not be affected.
C. Warning of Disclaimer of Liability
This bylaw does not imply that land outside of the areas covered by this bylaw will be free
from flood damages. Neither these regulations nor implementation hereof shall create any
liability whatsoever on the part of the City of Winooski, or any municipal official or employee
thereof.
IV. Lands to Which these Regulations Apply
A. Regulated Flood Hazard Areas
These regulations shall apply to the Special Flood Hazard Area in and on the most current
flood insurance studies and maps published by the Department of Homeland Security, Federal
Emergency Management Agency, National Flood Insurance Program, as provided by the
Secretary of the Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32 § 753, which
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of these regulations. The location of
the boundary shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator (ZA). If the applicant
disagrees with the determination made by the ZA, a Letter of Map Amendment from FEMA
shall constitute proof.
Where available, base flood elevations and floodway limits provided by the National Flood
Insurance Program and in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps shall be used to
administer and enforce these regulations. In Special Flood Hazard Areas where base flood
elevations and/or floodway limits have not been provided by the National Flood Insurance
Program in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps, it is the applicant's
responsibility to develop the necessary data. Where available, the applicant shall use data
provided by FEMA, or State, or Federal agencies.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations -
Appendix A. Page 2.
B. Base Flood Elevations and Floodway Limits in Special Flood Hazard Areas
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
V. Summary Table: Development Review in Hazard Areas
The hazard areas are not appropriate sites for new structures nor for development that
increases the elevation of the base flood.
# Activity Hazard Zone
P Permitted
C Conditional Use Review
X Prohibited
A Exempted·
Special Flood
Hazard Area
Floodway
1 New Structures X X
2 Storage X X
3 Improvements to Existing Structures P, C C
4 Small Accessory Structures P X
5 At Grade Parking P C
6 Replacement water supply or septic systems C C
8 Fill as needed to elevate existing structures C C
9 Fill X X
12 Grading C C
13 Road maintenance A A
14 Road improvements C C
15 Bridges and culverts C C
16 Channel management C C
17 Recreational vehicles P P
18 Open space, recreation A A
19 Forestry A A
20 Agriculture A A
VI. Development Review in Hazard
Areas A. Permit
A permit is required from the Zoning Administrator for all development in all areas defined in
Section IV. Development that requires conditional use approval, non-conforming use
approval, or a variance from the Development Review Board (DRB) under these flood hazard
regulations, must have such approvals prior to the issuance of a permit by the ZA. Any
development subject to municipal jurisdiction in the designated hazard areas shall meet the
criteria in Section VI and VII. Any permit issued will require that all other necessary permits
from State or Federal Agencies have been received before work may begin.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations -
Appendix A. Page 3.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
B. Permitted Development
For the purposes of review under these regulations, the following development activities in the
Special Flood Hazard Area where outside of the Floodway, and meeting the Development
Standards in Section VII, require only an administrative permit from the ZA: ·
1. Non-substantial improvements;
2. Accessory structures;
3. Development related to on-site septic or water supply systems;
4. Building utilities;
5. At-grade parking for existing buildings; and,
6. Recreational vehicles.
C. Prohibited Development in Special Flood Hazard Area
1. New residential or non-residential structures (including the placement of manufactured
homes);
2. Storage or junk yards;
3. New fill except as necessary and reasonable to elevate structures above the base flood
elevation;
4. Accessory structures in the floodway;
5. Critical facilities are prohibited in all areas affected by mapped flood hazards; and,
6. All development not exempted, permitted, or conditionally permitted.
D. Conditional Use Review
Conditional use review and approval by the DRB is required prior to the issuance of a permit by
the ZA for proposed development within the following:
1. Substantial improvement, elevation, relocation, or flood proofing of existing
structures;
2. New or replacement storage tanks for existing structures;
3. Improvements to existing structures in the floodway;
4. Grading, excavation; or the creation of a pond;
5. Improvements to existing roads;
6. Bridges, culverts, channel management activities, or public projects which are
functionally dependent on stream access or stream crossing;
7. Public utilities;
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 4.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
E. Exempted Activities
The following are exempt from regulation under this bylaw:
1. The removal of a building or other structure in whole or in part;
2. Maintenance of existing roads and storm water drainage;
3. Silvicultural (forestry) activities conducted in accordance with the Vermont
Department of Forests and Parks Acceptable Management Practices; and,
4. Agricultural activities conducted in accordance with the Vermont Department of
Agriculture's Accepted Agricultural Practices (AAP). Prior to the construction of farm
structures the farmer must notify the ZA in writing of the proposed activity. The notice
must contain a sketch of the proposed structure including setbacks.
F. Variances
Variances may be granted in writing by the DRB only in accordance with all the criteria in 24
V.S.A. § 4469, § 4424 (E), and 44 CFR Section 60.6, after a public hearing noticed as
described in Section VIII.
Any variance issued in the Special Flood Hazard Area will not increase flood heights, and will
inform the applicant in writing over the signature of the Zoning Administrator that the issuance
of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation increases risk to life and
property and will result in increased flood insurance premiums. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions.
G. Nonconforming Structures and Uses
The DRB may, after public notice and hearing, approve the repair, relocation, replacement, or
enlargement of a nonconforming structure within a flood hazard area provided that:
1. The proposed development is in compliance with all the Development Standards in
Section VII of this bylaw;
2. A nonconforming structure that is substantially damaged or destroyed may be
reconstructed only in circumstances when the structure cannot be relocated to a less
hazardous location on the parcel. The lowest floor of the reconstructed structure must
be rebuilt to one foot or more above the base flood elevation, and the structure must
otherwise comply with all requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
3. Nonconforming structures or uses shall be considered abandoned where such structures
or uses are discontinued for more than 12 months; and
4. An individual manufactured home lot in an existing manufactured home park that is
vacated shall not be considered a discontinuance or abandonment of nonconformity.
Replacement manufactured homes must be placed so as to meet the development
standards in this bylaw.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 5.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
VII. Development Standards - The criteria below are the minimum standards for
development in the flood hazard areas. Where more than one zone or area is involved, the
most restrictive standard shall apply to the entire property being developed.
A. Special Flood Hazard Area
1. All development shall be:
a. Reasonably safe from flooding;
b. Designed, operated, maintained, modified, and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, release, or lateral movement of the structure;
c. Constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
d. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
e. Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
f. Adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
g. Located so as to minimize conflict with changes in channel location over time and
the need to intervene with such changes; and,
h. Required to locate any fuel storage tanks (as needed to serve an existing building
in the Special Flood Hazard Zone) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to prevent flotation; or storage tanks may be
placed underground, if securely anchored as certified by a qualified professional.
2. In Zones AE, AH, and A l -A30 where base flood elevations and/or floodway limits have
not been determined, development shall not be permitted unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated encroachment, will not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.00 foot at
any point within the community. The demonstration must be supported by technical data that
conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles and certified by a registered
professional engineer.
3. Structures to be substantially improved in Zones A, Al-30, AE, and AH shall be
located such that the lowest floor is at least one foot above base flood elevation, this
must be documented, in as-built condition, with a FEMA Elevation Certificate;
4. Non-residential structures to be substantially improved shall:
a. Meet the standards in VII A 3; or,
b. Have the lowest floor, including basement, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities be designed so that two feet above the base flood elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy; A permit for flood proofing shall not be issued until a
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 6.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
registered professional engineer or architect has reviewed the structural design,
specifications and plans, and has certified that the design and proposed methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this subsection.
5. Fully enclosed areas below grade on all sides (including below grade crawlspaces
and basements) are prohibited.
6. Fully enclosed areas that are above grade, below the lowest floor, below BFE and subject
to flooding, shall
a. Be solely used for parking of vehicles, storage, or building access, and such a
condition shall clearly be stated on any permits; and,
b. Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Such designs must be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria: A minimum of two openings on two walls having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
7. Recreational vehicles must be fully licensed and ready for highway use;
8. A small accessory structure of 500 square feet or less that represents a minimal investment
need not be elevated to the base flood elevation in this area, provided the structure is placed
on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and
shall meet the criteria in VII A 6 (above).
9. Water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems.
10. Sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
11. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
12. The flood carrying and sediment transport capacity within the altered or relocated portion
of any watercourse shall be maintained, and any alteration or relocation shall not result in
any decrease of stream stability;
13. Bridges and culverts, which by their nature must be placed in or over the stream, must have
a stream alteration permit from the Agency of Natural Resources where applicable.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 7.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
14 Subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments must be accessible by dry land access
outside the special flood hazard area.
15. Existing buildings, including manufactured homes, to be substantially improved in Zone
AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade, at least as high as the depth number specified on the community's FIRM, or at least
two feet if no depth number is specified.
B. Floodway Areas
1. Encroachments or development above grade and less than one foot above the base flood
elevation, are prohibited unless hydrologic and hydraulic analyses are performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice, by a registered professional engineer,
certifying that the proposed development will:
a) Not result in any increase in flood levels (0.00 feet) during the occurrence of the base
flood;
b) Not increase any risk to surrounding properties, facilities, or structures from erosion or
flooding.
2. Public utilities may be placed underground, and the analyses may be waived, where a
registered professional engineer certifies that there will be no change in grade and the
utilities will be adequately protected from scour.
VIII. Administration
C. Application Submission Requirements
1. Applications for development shall include:
a. Where applicable, a site plan that depicts the proposed development, all water
bodies, Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, any existing and proposed
drainage, any proposed fill, and pre and post development grades, and the elevation
of the proposed lowest floor, as referenced to the same vertical datum as the
elevation on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps;
b. A Vermont Agency of Natural Resources Project Review Sheet for the proposal.
The Project Review Sheet shall identify all State and Federal agencies from which
permit approval is required for the proposal, and shall be filed ·as a required
attachment to the municipal permit application. The identified permits, or letters
indicating that such permits are not required, shall be submitted to the ZA and
attached to the permit before work can begin;
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 8.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
B. Referrals
1. Upon receipt of a complete application for a substantial improvement or new construction
the ZA shall submit a copy of the application and supporting information to the State National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, in
accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4424. A permit may be issued only following receipt of comments
from the Agency, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was mailed to the
Agency, whichever is sooner.
2. If the applicant is seeking a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, copies of
the application shall also be submitted to the adjacent communities, the Stream Alteration
Engineer at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, and the Anny Corps of Engineers.
Copies of such notice shall be provided to the State National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental
Conservation. A permit may be issued only following receipt of comments from the Vermont
Agency of Natural Resources, or the expiration of 30 days from the date the application was
mailed to the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, whichever is sooner. The Board should
consider comments from the NFIP Coordinator at ANR.
C. Records
The Zoning Administrator shall properly file and maintain a record of:
1. All permits issued in areas covered by this bylaw;
2. Elevation Certificates with the as-built elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation
on the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps for the community) of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all new or substantially improved buildings (not including accessory buildings)
in the Special Flood Hazard Area
3. All flood proofing and other certifications required under this regulation; and,
4. All decisions of the Board (including variances and violations) and all supporting findings
of fact, conclusions and conditions.
IX. Certificate of Occupancy
In accordance with 24 V.S.A. Chapter 117 §4449, it shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or
permit the use or occupancy of any land or structure, or part thereof, created, erected, changed,
converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure within Special Flood
Hazard Area until a certificate of occupancy is issued therefore by the Zoning Administrator,
stating that the proposed use of the structure or land conforms to the requirements of these
bylaws. A certificate of occupancy is not required for structures that were built in compliance
with the bylaws at the time of construction and have not been improved since the adoption of
this bylaw. Within 14 days of the receipt of the application for a certificate of occupancy, the
ZA shall inspect the premises to ensure that all permits identified on the Project Review Sheet
have been acquired and all that all work has been completed in conformance with the zoning
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 9.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
permit and associated approvals. If the ZA fails to grant or deny the certificate of occupancy
within 14 days of the submission of the application, the certificate shall be deemed issued
on the 15th day. If a Certificate of Occupancy can not be issued, notice will be sent to the
owner and copied to the lender.
X. Enforcement and Penalties
A. This bylaw shall be enforced under the municipal zoning bylaw in accordance with 10
V.S.A. § 1974a, and 24 V.S.A § 4451, and § 4452. A copy of the notice of violation will be
mailed the State NFIP Coordinator.
B. If any appeals have been resolved, but the violation remains, the ZA shall submit a
declaration to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program requesting a denial
of flood insurance to the property pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968, as amended.
C. Violations of the Accepted Agricultural Practices shall be enforced under this Section as
violations of this bylaw. Such violations shall also be immediately reported to the Secretary
of Agriculture for enforcement under 6 V.S.A. § 4812.
)
XI. Definitions
"Accessory Structure" means a structure which is: 1) detached from and clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of or structure on a lot, 2) located on the same lot as the
principal structure or use, and 3) clearly and customarily related to the principal structure or
use. For residential uses these include, but may not be limited to garages, garden and tool sheds,
and playhouses.
''Area of Special Flood Hazard" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "special flood
hazard area" for the purposes of these regulations.
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year (commonly referred to as the "100-year flood").
"Base Flood Elevation" (BFE) is the elevation of the water surface elevation resulting from a
flood that has a 1 percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. On the
Flood Insurance Rate Map the elevation is usually in feet, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced
in the Flood Insurance Study report, or the average depth of the base flood, usually in feet,
above the ground surface. ·
"BFE" see Base Flood Elevation
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 10.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
"Common plan of development" is where a structure will be refurbished over a period of
time. Such work might be planned unit by unit.
"Critical facilities" - include police stations, fire and rescue facilities, hospitals, shelters,
·schools, nursing homes, water supply and waste treatment facilities, and other structures the
community identifies as essential to the health and welfare of the population and that are
especially important following a disaster. For example, the type and location of a business
may raise its status to a Critical Facility, such as a grocery or gas station.
"Development" means any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
"Fill" means any placed material that changes the natural grade, increases the elevation, or
diminishes the flood storage capacity at the site.
"FIRM" see Flood Insurance Rate Map
"Flood" means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and mudslides which are proximately
caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally
dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current. (b) The
collapse or subsidence of land along the shore
of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash
flood or abnormal tidal surge, or by some
similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding.
"Flood Insurance Rate Map" (FIRM) means an
official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. In some
communities the hazard boundaries are available
in paper, pdf, or Geographic Information System
formats as a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map
(DFIRM).
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A.Page 11.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
"Flood Insurance Study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, the corresponding water surface elevations or an examination,
evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and /or flood related erosion hazards.
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of "flood").
"Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes,
or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot at any point. Please note that Special Flood Hazard Areas
and floodways may be shown on a separate map panels.
''Floodway, Regulatory in the City of Winooski", means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any
point.
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless
it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register
of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c)
individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an approved state program as
determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.
"Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)" is a letter issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency officially removing a structure or lot from the flood hazard zone based on information
provided by a certified engineer or surveyor. This is used where structures or lots are located
above the base flood elevation and have been inadvertently included in the mapped special flood
hazard area.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 12.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, except
an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. ·
"Manufactured home (or Mobile home)" means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home"
does not include a "recreational vehicle".
"New construction" for regulation under this bylaw, means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulation
adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
"Non-residential" includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
nursing homes, farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), pool houses, clubhouses,
recreational buildings, government buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural and industrial
structures, and warehouses.
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) Designed to be self- propelled
or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
"Special Flood Hazard Area" is the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term "area
of special flood hazard" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "special flood hazard
area". This area is usually labeled Zone A, AO, AH, AE, or Al-30 in the most current flood
insurance studies and on the maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Maps of this area are available for viewing in the municipal office or online from the FEMA
Map Service Center: msc.fema.gov Base flood elevations have not been determined in Zone
A where the flood risk has been mapped by approximate methods. Base flood elevations are
shown at selected intervals on maps of Special Flood Hazard Areas that are determined by
detailed methods. Please note, where floodways have been determined they may be shown on
separate map panels from the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
"Start of construction" for purposes of floodplain management, determines the effective map or
bylaw that regulated development in the Special Flood Hazard Area. The "start of construction"
includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A.Page 13.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations - Appendix A.
INUNDATION HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
-and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, regardless whether that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure" means, for regulatory purposes under this bylaw, a walled and roofed building, as
well as a manufactured home, and any related built systems, including gas or liquid storage tanks.
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its before-damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50 percent
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure after the date of adoption of this bylaw, the cost of which, over
three years, or over a the period of a common plan of development, cumulatively equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of
the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage",
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specification which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
or
(b) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this
bylaw. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CPR 60.3 is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations –
Appendix A. Page 14.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts
Form Based Code Regulations
This page intentionally left blank.
How to Use this Code
Why are some words shown in SMALL CAPITAL LETTERS?
The Gateway Corridors Form-Based Code includes terms with special meanings and their definitions are included in
Part 9. Definitions. Defined terms are shown throughout the document in small capital letters.
I want to know what is allowed for my property:
1. Look at the Winooski Zoning map and determine if the property in question is located within the Gateway
Corridors Form-Based Code District. If not, this Code is not applicable.
2. Look at the adopted REGULATING PLAN in Part 3. The REGULATING PLAN. Find the property in question.
Note the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE and the PARKING SETBACK LINE. Note the color of the fronting
STREET-SPACE—this determines the applicable building form standard (see the key located on the
REGULATING PLAN).
3. Find the applicable building form standard in Part 4. BUILDING FORM STANDARDS. (Note the General
Provisions in Section 402 apply to all properties in the Gateway District.) The building form standard will
tell you the parameters for development on the site in terms of height, siting, elements, and use.
4. Additional regulations regarding streets and other public spaces surrounding the property, parking
requirements, and building functions are found in the following sections: Part 5. Urban Space Standards; Part
6. Architectural Standards; Part 7. Parking and Loading Standards; and Part 8. Building Functions. See also the
City’s Municipal Plan for information regarding plans for the public right of ways.
5. See Part 2. Administration, Application Process & Appeals for information on the development review process.
I want to modify an existing building:
1. If this Code is applicable to your property, determine whether your intended changes would trigger a level
of code compliance by looking at Part 2. Administration, Section 207.
2. If yes, follow the indicated portions of steps 2-5, above.
I want to establish a new use in an existing building:
1. Find the property on the REGULATING PLAN and determine the applicable building form standard.
2. Determine whether the use is allowed by looking at the Permitted Use Table in Part 8. Building Functions. If
the use is listed with a cross-reference in the right-hand column, refer to those standards.
I have a use, building or site that is nonconforming:
1. Existing uses, buildings and site configurations that met the rules when they were constructed, but do not
comply with this development code are considered nonconforming.
2. See Part 2. Section 209 Non-Conformities for further details.
I want to change the Regulating Plan regarding my property:
See Part 2. Section 207 Amendments to the Form-Based Code.
I want to subdivide my property:
1. Property can be subdivided in accordance with the procedures in Article VI of the Winooski Unified Land
Use and Development Regulations, referred to herein as "the Regulations".
2. Any such subdivision shall also meet the standards of this Code.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC
iii
Contents
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS ...............................................................1
101. Title 1
102. Applicability 1
103. Purposes 1
104. Other Applicable Regulations 1
105. Minimum Requirements 2
106. Severability 2
107. Components of the Code 2
PART 2. ADMINISTRATION, APPLICATION PROCESS & APPEALS .........4
201. Applicability 4
202. Zoning Administrator 4
203. Certificate of Conformity 4
204. RESERVED 5
205. Effect of Certificate of Conformity Issuance 6
206. Administrative Adjustments 7
207. Amendments to the Form-Based Code 9
208. Variances 9
209. Non-Conformities 9
PART 3. THE REGULATING PLAN ............................................................11
301. Rules for Regulating Plans 11
302. Regulating Plan 14
PART 4. BUILDING FORM STANDARDS ..................................................15
401. Intent 15
402. General Provisions 15
403. Urban General Frontage 21
404. Urban Storefront Frontage 24
405. Townhouse/Small Apartment 25
406. Detached Frontage 29
PART 5. URBAN SPACE STANDARDS .....................................................33
501. Applicability 33
502. Intent 33
503. Street Type Specifications 34
504. Streetscape Standards 35
505. Squares and Civic Greens 37
506. Tree Lists 38
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC iv
PART 6. ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS ................................................. 41
601. Intent 41
602. General Principles 41
603. Building Walls 42
604. Roofs and Parapets 44
605. Street Walls and Garden Walls 46
606. Windows and Doors 48
607. Signage 50
608. Lighting & Mechanical Equipment 52
PART 7. PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS ................................... 55
701. Intent 55
702. Minimum Parking Requirements 55
704. Special Parking Standards 56
705. Surface Parking Lot Plantings for New Development 57
706. Loading Facilities 57
PART 8. BUILDING FUNCTIONS ............................................................. 59
801. General Provisions 59
802. Use Table 60
803. Use Categories 61
804. Development and Performance Standards 62
PART 9. DEFINITIONS ............................................................................. 65
901. Defined Terms 65
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC
v
This page intentionally left blank.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC vi
Part 1. General Provisions
101. Title
This Code is known as the Gateway Districts Form-Based Code.
102. Applicability
A. The Code is in effect for that part of the City of Winooski, Vermont,
designated on the Winooski Zoning Map as the Gateway Districts.
103. Purposes
A. The goal of the Winooski Public Design Workshop Vision Plan was to
reset the conversation and provide guidance for future development and
redevelopment in these gateway corridors. This Code will implement
the
purpose and goals of that Plan by providing strong implementation tools for
the City.
B. The Code shall be applied to new, infill development, and
redevelopment within the Gateway District both in order to achieve the
vision set forth and to provide a mechanism for implementing the following
specific goals, using both public and private sector investment:
1. Capitalize on public investment in existing infrastructure
2. Stabilize and strengthen mixed-use commercial areas and residential
neighborhoods
3. Create a pedestrian-friendly and multi-modal district
4. Promote, create, and expand housing options
5. Ensure a complementary relationship between the Corridors and the
surrounding neighborhoods
C. The creation of walkable, mixed-use development is dependent on
three factors: density, diversity of uses, and design. This Code places
greatest emphasis on design, or physical form, because of its importance in
defining neighborhood and corridor character. All places evolve—density
and uses can be expected to change over time as the area continues to
grow and mature.
104. Other Applicable Regulations
A. All development must comply with relevant Federal, State and City
regulations. Whenever any provision of this Code imposes a greater
requirement or a higher standard than is required in any State or Federal
statute or other City regulation, the provisions of this Code shall govern
unless preempted by State or Federal law.
B. Where apparent conflicts exist between the provisions of this Code and other
existing ordinances, regulation or permits, or by easements, covenants, or
agreements, the provisions of this Code shall govern, as is consistent with
State and Federal law.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 1
105. Minimum Requirements
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they are the minimum
requirements for development under this Code.
106. Severability
Should any provision of this Code be decided by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, that decision shall not affect the validity of the Code
other than the part decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
107. Components of the Code
This Code places a primary emphasis on physical form and placemaking, with
a secondary focus on land uses. The principal regulatory sections of this Code
are described below.
A. Administration
Part 2. Administration covers application and review process for development
plan approval.
B. Regulating Plan
A REGULATING PLAN is the application key for the Gateway District.
Defined and illustrated in Part 3, it delineates the STREET-SPACE and other
public open space and provides specific information on the development
parameters for parcels within the Gateway District. The REGULATING
PLAN shows how each lot or development project relates to the STREETSPACE
and the surrounding
neighborhood. The REGULATING PLAN may identify additional regulations and/or
special circumstances for specific locations.
C. The Building Form Standards
The primary purpose of the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS (BFS), located in
Part 4, is to shape the STREET-SPACE—its specific physical and functional
character— through placement and form standards on buildings as they
frame the street- space or public realm. Their secondary purpose is to ensure
that the buildings cooperate to form a functioning and consistent BLOCK
structure. The BFS aim for the minimum level of regulation necessary to meet
these goals. The applicable standard(s) for a development project is
determined by the STREET FRONTAGE designated on the REGULATING PLAN.
The BUILDING FORM STANDARDS establish both the boundaries within
which things may be done and specific things that shall be done.
D. The Urban-Space Standards
The purpose of Part 5. Urban-Space Standards is to ensure coherent streetspace
and to assist developers and owners with understanding the relationship
between the public realm and their own development project or building.
This part establishes rules and standards for the STREET-SPACE within the
Gateway District that are the responsibility of the developer/owner. They
will foster an environment that encourages and facilitates pedestrian activity and
“walkable” streets that are comfortable, efficient, safe, and interesting.
Applicants should consult the City’s Municipal Plan, Transportation Plan,
Public Works Standards and related regulations and policies to understand the
future/planned configurations of the vehicular part of the street, including
travel-lanes, curb geometry, and on-street parking, as well as the
placement of STREET TREEs,
Appendix B
Gateway 2 Districts FBC
sidewalks, and other amenities or furnishings (e.g., benches, signs, street lights,
etc.) within the STREET-SPACE.
E. The Architectural Standards
The purpose of Part 6. Archictectural Standards is to ensure a coherent
and high-quality building character that is complementary to the best
traditions of Winooski. The Architectural Standards govern a building’s
exterior elements for all BFS and set the parameters for allowable materials,
configurations, and techniques. Materials and products that are
‘EQUIVALENT OR BETTER’ than those specified are always encouraged and
may be submitted for approval to the Zoning Administrator, who is
authorized to approve them when they meet the intent of these standards.
F. Parking and Loading Standards
Part 7. Parking and Loading Standards provide goals and requirements to
promote a pedestrian-friendly, walkable corridor through shared parking and
encourage a “park once” environment. They establish the specific vehicular
and bicycle parking ratios required throughout the Gateway District.
G. Building Function Standards
Part 8. Building Function Standards establishes the range of uses allowed in the
Gateway District. Uses permitted on ground stories and in upper stories
are correlated with each building form standard. Because these standards
emphasize form more than use, they include fewer, broader categories than those
provided in the Winooski Zoning Regulations.
H. Definitions
Certain terms in this Code are used in very specific ways, often excluding some
of the meanings of common usage. Wherever a word is in small capitals
format, consult Part 9. Definitions for its specific and limited meaning within
this Code. Terms not defined here may be defined elsewhere in the City
of Winooski Zoning Regulations. In such case, the definition contained in
the zoning regulations shall be used. Where there is an apparent conflict or
contradiction, the definition in Part 9. Definitions shall prevail.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC
ACRONYM KEY
BFS Building Form Standard
RBL Required Building Line
psl PARKING SETBACK LINE
LBL LOT BUILDING LIMIT
prc Project Review
Committee
DRB Development Review
Board
3
Part 2. Administration, Application
Process & Appeals
201. Applicability
Development proposals within the Gateway District shall be subject to the provisions of this Code.
Subdivisions or lot line adjustments are subject to review under Article VI of the Regulations.
202. Zoning Administrator
A. Authority
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve applications for Certificates of Conformity and
Administrative Adjustments, following public notification.
B. Delegation of Authority
The Zoning Administrator may designate any member of the City Staff to represent the Zoning
Administrator in any function assigned by this Code. The Zoning Administrator, however, shall
remain responsible for any final action taken under this Section.
203. Certificate of Conformity
An application for approval of a Certificate of Conformity, demonstrating conformity with the
provisions contained in this Code and the REGULATING PLAN shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
A. Certificate of Conformity Application Requirements
The application for a Certificate of Conformity shall include:
1. A brief narrative describing the Development Proposal;
2. Five (5) sets of completed plans for the Development Proposal to scale [Site Plans at 1”= 20’
to 1”= 50’, Building Plans and Elevations (not including FACADEs) at 1”= 8’, FACADEs
drawn at 1” = 4’, and details as necessary to demonstrate form-based code (“FBC”)
conformity at 1”= 4’ to 1”=10’] prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer,
Registered Land Surveyor, Architect, or Landscape Architect, as appropriate, and including
the following information, which shall be submitted on the above listed or additional
sheets:
a. Location and dimensions of all proposed buildings and other construction;
b. A mid-block access/COMMON DRIVE plan, showing any internal roadways, streets
and/ or STREET-SPACEs, common access easements, and accessways to adjacent
properties and public roadways;
c. Location and dimensions of all parking areas,
d. Utility Strategy,
e. Architectural drawings of all proposed building FACADEs and elevations.
f. A completed Form-Based District Review Checklist, the form
of which shall be developed, maintained, and made available by the Zoning
Administrator, demonstrating conformity with the provisions of the FBC; and
3. Any other documents and/or materials required by the Zoning Administrator to determine
conformity with the FBC.
Appendix B
Gateway 4 Districts FBC
Page left intentionally blank and Section 204 reserved for the future if needed.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 5
B. Certificate of Conformity Review
1. A pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator is required prior to the submission of any
application for a Certificate of Conformity. The applicant shall provide a schematic site plan at a scale
of 1” = 20’ to 1” = 50’ and schematic drawings of all FACADEs at a scale of 1” = 8’ for consideration
by the staff. The discussions and any conclusions based thereon at such a pre-application conference
are not binding on any party thereto.
2. The Zoning Administrator may administratively provide for submission and review deadlines for
materials and studies required in support of any application for a Certificate of Conformity. The need
for technical studies shall be at the Zoning Administrator’s discretion.
3. Applicants shall be notified no later than 7 business days following the submittal deadline if additional
materials and studies will be required in order for review of their application to commence.
4. Upon submittal of a complete application, it shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator
to:
a. Provide abutting landowners with a 15-day notice of the PRC meeting.
b. Within thirty (30) business days of submittal of the application, the Zoning Administrator
shall take one of the following actions:
i. Approve the application as submitted;
ii. Approve the application with conditions; or
iii. Forward the application to the Development Review Board, to be heard at their next
meeting.
5. After the effective date of the Form-Based Code, no property which has been zoned under the Form-
Based Code may be developed or redeveloped without approval of a Certificate of Conformity from
the Zoning Administrator.
6. An applicant or other “interested person” as defined under 24 V.S.A. Section 4465 and Article VI of
the Regulations, may appeal a decision or act of the Zoning Administrator within 15 days of the date
of the decision or act by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Development Review Board,
and by filing a copy of the notice with the Zoning Administrator.
205. Effect of Certificate of Conformity Issuance
Issuance of a Certificate of Conformity by the Zoning Administrator allows an applicant to apply for other
necessary permits and approvals which include, but are not limited to, those permits and approvals
required under the City Building Code.
A. Certificate of Conformity Modification
After the Zoning Administrator has issued a Certificate of Conformity, any change in the Development
Proposal from the plans submitted to the Zoning Administrator, other than those permitted under
Section 206 below, shall be considered to be a Material Modification and shall be subject to the
following review procedure:
1. Material Modification requests shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and
approval, and shall include sufficient information to determine conformity with the FBC.
2. The Zoning Administrator may administratively provide for submission and review deadlines for
materials and studies required in support of any application for a Certificate of Conformity.
Appendix B
Gateway 6 Districts FBC
3. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if the proposal is in
compliance.
B. Certificate of Conformity Expiration
1. A Certificate of Conformity shall lapse eighteen (18) months from its
issuance if an applicant does not secure a zoning and building permit.
2. Upon written communication by the applicant submitted at least thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of the Certificate of Conformity, and
upon a showing of good cause, the Zoning Administrator may grant
one extension not to exceed six (6) months. Upon an application for
extension, the Certificate of Conformity shall be deemed extended until
the Zoning Administrator has acted upon the request for extension.
206. Administrative Adjustments
A. Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this section is to provide an administrative
mechanism for allowing minor adjustments to limited and specific
requirements of the Gateway District, with the intent of providing relief
where the application of a standard creates practical difficulties in allowing
development to proceed. These adjustments are intended to provide relief
for minor construction/survey issues; they are not intended for designed
or intentional variances from the FBC, like those governed by Section 208
below. This optional process occurs only where an applicant requests an
Administrative Adjustment to a standard specified below.
B. Administrative Adjustment Application and Review
Procedure
1. An application for approval of an Administrative Adjustment shall
include:
a. A brief narrative describing the Administrative Adjustment sought;
b. A completed Administrative Adjustment Checklist, the form of
which shall be developed, maintained, and made available by the
Zoning Administrator, demonstrating that the adjustment sought is
limited to the standards set forth below; and
c. Any other documents and/or materials required by the Zoning
Administrator to determine that the adjustment sought is limited to
the standards set forth below.
2. The Zoning Administrator may seek assistance from the
Development Review Board in making a determination under this
Section.
3. Within thirty (30) business days of receipt of a complete application,
the Zoning Administrator shall review the application in accordance
with the Administrative Adjustment Standards below, and take one of
the following actions:
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 7
a. Approve the application as submitted;
b. Approve the application with conditions; or
c. Deny the application.
C. Administrative Adjustment Standards
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve Administrative
Adjustment applications in strict conformance with the following standards
only:
1. Height
a. Minimum and maximum height – up to five percent (5%) for any
cumulative increase or decrease in building height.
b. STREET WALL/fence requirements – up to ten percent (10%).
c. Finished floor elevation – up to five percent (5%).
2. Siting
a. REQUIRED BUILDING LINE – move up to twelve (12) inches (but
not into the public ROW).
b. REQUIRED BUILDING LINE minimum percentage buildto
– reduction of up to five percent (5%) of required
length.
c. PARKING SETBACK LINE – move forward up to six (6) feet.
d. MEZZANINE floor area – up to ten percent (10%) additional area.
e. STREET WALL requirements – up to ten percent (10%) of the
height/ FENESTRATION/access gate requirements.
f. Entrances (maximum average spacing) – up to ten percent (10%)
increase in spacing.
3. Elements
a. FENESTRATION (minimum and maximum percent) – up to
five percent (5%).
b. Elements (minimum and maximum projections) – up to five
percent (5%).
4. Architectural Standards
a. Primary and Secondary materials – up to ten percent (10%).
b. Window and pane dimensions – up to ten percent (10%)
c. SHOPFRONT entry geometry – up to ten percent (10%).
5. Streets, Blocks and Common Drives
Street center lines (and the STREET-SPACE/RBLs with it) may be moved
up to 50 feet in either direction, so long as:
a. the street connectivity is maintained (no cul-de-sacs);
b. any change to adjacent properties are approved by their owners;
c. no street intersection occurs within 100 feet of another street
intersection; and
d. the BLOCK configuration meets the standards defined in
Section 301.D.2.
e. the resulting configuration is approved by the Winooski
Department of Public Works.
Appendix B
Gateway 8 Districts FBC
D. Administrative Adjustment of Unlisted Standards
Any request for relief from a required FBC standard other than those listed
above shall be made through the Variance procedures set forth in Article VI,
Part 2 of the Winooski Zoning Regulations. (See also Section 207 below.)
E. Applicability
Any Administrative Adjustment approved under this Section shall run with
the land and not be affected by a change in ownership.
207. Amendments to the Form-Based Code
A. Text Amendments
Any application for an amendment to the Code text shall be considered an
application for a zoning text amendment subject to Article I, Section 1.4 of
the Regulations and any other regulations applicable to zoning text
amendments.
B. Regulating Plan Amendments
Any application for an amendment to the Code REGULATING PLAN
shall
be considered an application for a zoning map amendment subject to Article
I, Section 1.4 of the Regulations and any other regulations applicable to
rezoning. The exception being that notification shall be made to all parties
within 400 feet of the proposed change.
In addition, any amendment to the REGULATING PLAN shall conform to
the following requirements.
1. Application, Building Form Standards (BFS)
In determining the allocation and, thereby, the form and mixed-use
character of the district, attention must be paid to both the physical context
(what goes next to what) and diversity of allowed/required uses. When
amending a REGULATING PLAN, the standards of Section 301 shall apply.
CIVIC USE BUILDINGs (those designated on the REGULATING PLAN)
are not restricted by these standards.
208. Variances
A. Any person seeking a variances from the provisions of the FBC shall follow
the variance procedures outlined in Article VI, Part 2 of the Winooski
Zoning Regulations.
209. Non-Conformities
Non-conforming structures within the Gateway District may be altered or
repaired according to the following schedule:
A. Single-family and duplex structures:
1. Repairs and remodeling and additions to a single-family or duplex
structure may be made without conformance to the Code provided
that they do not encroach into any NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS
setback.
2. Repairs, remodeling and additions resulting in additional units shall
require full code compliance, except one additional unit within
existing structures may be permitted without full code compliance.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 9
3. Intentional demolition requires conformance to the Code.
4. Single-family and duplex structures destroyed by fire, explosion, act of
God, or the public enemy may be replaced with conformance to a like
residential zoning district as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
B. Other Structures:
1. Additions of up to 20% of the SQUARE footage of a non-conforming
structure (existing as of the adoption of the Gateway District) may be
made subject to conformance with only the Architectural Standards of the
Gateway District relative to the new addition only.
2. Additions greater than 20% but equal to or less than 50% of the
square footage of a non-conforming structure may be made subject to
conformance with the Architectural Standards of the code and the site
requirements of the code relative to the new addition only.
3. Additions greater than 50% of the square footage of a non-conforming
structure shall be made in conformance with the code. Non-conforming
site improvements must also be brought into complete conformity with the
regulations applicable to the Gateway District.
4. Existing structures destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public
enemy may be replaced with a structure of comparable height and gross
floor area that otherwise meets the requirements of the code.
C. Non-conforming Uses:
1. A non-conforming use may be extended throughout any portion of a
completed building that, when the use was made non-conforming by this
Code, was manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use.
2. A non-conforming use may not be extended to additional buildings or to
land outside the original building.
D. Historic Structures
Historically-designated structures may be specified as a civic use building
by the Planning Commission and City Council if they effectively serve the
community as civic use buildings. If so designated, they may be added to the
REGULATING PLAN.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 10
Part 3. The Regulating Plan
301. Rules for Regulating Plans
A. Purpose and Intent
1. A REGULATING PLAN is the controlling document and principal tool for implementing this
Code.
2. The REGULATING PLAN makes the development standards place-specific, by designating
the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS (BFS) and delineating the public spaces. The
REGULATING PLAN identifies: the boundaries for the Gateway District; existing and new
streets; the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL); and the PARKING SETBACK LINE throughout
the Gateway District.
3. A REGULATING PLAN may identify specific characteristics assigned to a lot or site and may
identify additional regulations (and opportunities) for lots in specific locations, as well as
exceptions to the BFS or other standards.
B. Regulating Plan Key
1. The Key includes two special circumstances:
a. *1 indicates an applicants choice for the RBL on this parcel, as shown by the
two RBLs on the REGULATING PLAN.
b. *2 indicates a 5' deep NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS setback for this parcel.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 11
C. Building Form Standards (BFS) on the Regulating Plan
a. BUILDING FORM STANDARDS are designated on the REGULATING
PLAN by STREET FRONTAGE.
b. The allocation and distribution of BFS frontages—which define the
form and character of the district—was based on the Public Design
Workshop Vision Plan and determined by the physical context (what
goes next to what) and diversity of allowed/required uses.
D. Streets, Blocks & Common Drives on the Regulating Plan
1. Streets
The proposed Street Specifications for the Gateway District are part of the
Transportation Plan. Street configurations called out there and referred to in
Part 5. Urban Space Standards and/or on the REGULATING PLAN may or may
not be immediately constructed. They shall be placed into the system such
that, when reasonable for the City’s street maintenance/reconstruction plan,
they can be rationally constructed.
a. Additional streets may be added to the REGULATING PLAN to create a
smaller BLOCK pattern. No streets may be deleted without being
replaced elsewhere within the Gateway District and the resulting
configuration must meet the requirements of Part 3. The REGULATING
PLAN.
b. Where new COMMON DRIVEs or PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYs are
designated on the REGULATING PLAN, they are critical to the
working of the Gateway District and shall be considered
mandatory. While the street may not be constructed until some
point in the future, the RBL, LOT BUILDING LIMIT (LBL) or PARKING
SETBACK LINE, and other designations of the REGULATING PLAN
shall be respected at the time of redevelopment.
c. New COMMON DRIVEs or PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYs shall be public or
publically accessible.
d. All lots shall share a frontage line with a STREET-SPACE.
2. Blocks
a. Maximum Size: No BLOCK FACE shall have a length greater than 350
feet without a COMMON DRIVE or equivalent access easement, or
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY providing through-access to another streetspace,
or COMMON DRIVE. Individual lots with less than 200 feet of
STREET FRONTAGE are exempt from the requirement to interrupt the
BLOCK FACE; those with over 200 feet of STREET FRONTAGE shall
meet the requirement within their lot, unless already satisfied within
that BLOCK FACE.
b. Curb Cuts: The creation and/or retention of curb cuts in the
Gateway District shall be dependent on their providing access to, and
circulation for, COMMON DRIVEs per Section 301.D.3 and below. No
new curb cuts are permitted unless otherwise specified here:
(i) Where the REGULATING PLAN shows a NEIGHBORHOOD
MANNERS 20 ft. setback meeting an RBL, a curb cut is permitted.
301.C Illustrative intent
Appendix B
Gateway 12 Districts FBC
302.E. Illustrative intent,
NEIGHBORHOOD
MANNERS.
(ii) For lots with COMMON DRIVE access, existing or in their
redevelopment plan, existing curb cuts other than those necessary
for COMMON DRIVE circulation, shall be eliminated/vacated at
the time of redevelopment.
(iii) For lots without COMMON DRIVE access, existing curb cuts may
be maintained or relocated, subject to the restrictions below.
(1) No new curb cut may be within 100 feet of another curb
cut except where the new curb cut provides needed
access for existing or planned COMMON DRIVE
circulation, subject to Zoning Administer approval. New
curb cuts for shared COMMON DRIVEs have priority.
(2) Where a parking structure (or surface lot with more than
20 spaces) is being provided with at least 30% of its
spaces available to the general public, existing curb cuts
that provide access to the public parking may be retained
or relocated (even if the lot has COMMON DRIVE access.)
3. Common Drives
COMMON DRIVEs provide internal BLOCK circulation and shared access to rear
parking and service areas. They may also serve as fire lanes.
a. COMMON DRIVEs must provide access to the interior or rear of all
Urban General, Urban Storefront, and Townhouse/Small Apartment
frontage lots that front Main Street, East Allen Street, or Malletts Bay
Avenue, except:
(i) where a lot has streets on three sides and the absence of a COMMON
DRIVE would not deprive an adjacent neighbor of rear lot access;
(ii) or where the rear lot area provides no connection/access possibility
to an existing or reserved COMMON DRIVE area;
(iii) or where the lot is less than 80 foot in depth.
b. For COMMON DRIVEs, public access, public utility, and drainage shall
be dedicated via an easement.
c. COMMON DRIVEs may be located within the NEIGHBORHOOD
MANNERS Setback Area.
d. COMMON DRIVEs may be incorporated into (rear) parking lots
as standard drive aisles. Access to all adjacent properties shall be
maintained or established if not already connected.
e. Where a COMMON DRIVE does not exist and is not feasible to
construct at the time of redevelopment of any property, the applicant
is required to dedicate the COMMON DRIVE right-of-way or
easement to the City (for future construction) and maintain the area
by, at a minimum:
(i) Providing routine landscape maintenance to the area.
(ii) Keeping the area clear of debris, stored materials, and stored
vehicles.
Any amendment or change to the REGULATING PLAN, beyond those specified above,
will be a zoning map amendment of this code. See Part 2. 207. Amendments to
the Form-Based Code.
Appendix B
Gateway Districts FBC 13
E. Neighborhood Manners on the Regulating Plan
1. Intent
NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS provide for a complementary relationship between residential zoning districts immediately
behind new and larger scale development. (See Section 402.D NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS for specific rules.)
2. Location
The REGULATING PLAN specifies placement of the NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 20-foot Setback Area and the
NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 50-foot Setback Area.
3. Adjustment
The application of the NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 20-foot Setback Area shall move in concert with any frontage
change per 402. A Frontage Transitions. The NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 50-foot Setback Area shall only be
adjusted in concert with an amendment to the REGULATING PLAN. (see Part 2. 207. Amendments to the Form-
Based Code).
302. Regulating Plan
(facsimilie only)
This image of the Gateway District REGULATING PLAN is shown for illustrative purposes only; refer to the City for specific
REGULATING PLAN information.
Appendix B Gateway
14 Districts FBC
Part 4. Building Form Standards
401. Intent
A. The goal of the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS (BFS) is the creation of a vital, and
coherent public realm through the creation of good STREET-SPACE. The intent of
these form standards is to shape the STREET-SPACE—the specific physical and
functional character—of the Gateway District. The form and function controls on
building frontages work together to frame the STREET-SPACE while allowing the
buildings greater latitude behind their FACADEs. The BUILDING FORM
STANDARDS aim for the minimum level of control necessary to meet this goal.
B. The BFS set the basic parameters governing building construction,
including the building envelope (in three dimensions) and certain required or
permitted functional elements, such as FENESTRATION (windows and
doors), STOOPs, balconies, FRONT PORCHes, and street walls.
C. The BFS establish the rules for development and redevelopment on private
lots, unless otherwise indicated on the REGULATING PLAN.
D. The REGULATING PLAN identifies the building form standard within
the Gateway District, establishing the rules for development and
redevelopment on all lots, unless otherwise indicated on the REGULATING
PLAN.
402. General Provisions
The following apply to all BFS, unless expressly stated otherwise within
an individual BFS or otherwise designated on the REGULATING PLAN.
A. Frontage Transitions
When the BFS designation shown on the REGULATING PLAN changes
along a property’s REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL), the property owner has
the option, for that property’s STREET FRONTAGE only, of applying either
BFS for a maximum additional distance of 50 feet, from the transition point
shown on the REGULATING PLAN, in either direction along said RBL. This shall
be limited by and within the parcel lines as they exist on the REGULATING PLAN
and shall not be affected through lot line adjustments, lot mergers, or
subdivisions—except through a formal rezoning process. (See 205.B
REGULATING PLAN Amendments).
B. FACADE Composition
1. “FACADE composition” is the arrangement and proportion of
FACADE materials and elements (windows, doors, columns,
pilasters, bays). “Complete and discrete” distinguishes one part of
the FACADE from another to give the appearance of distinct
FACADEs.
2. For each BLOCK FACE, FACADEs along the RBL shall present a
complete and discrete vertical FACADE composition to maintain
and/or create the pedestrian-scale for the STREET-SPACE, at no greater
than the following average STREET FRONTAGE lengths:
a. 60 feet for Urban Storefront frontage sites;
b. 75 feet for all other BFS frontages.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 15
20ft
setback
402.B.5.b. Illustrative intent
402.B.5.c. Illustrative intent
402.D.3.a.
402.D.3.b and c.
c. A longer FACADE may be presented, as long as smaller
FACADE compositions appear within the same BLOCK FACE
in order to achieve the above-stated average.
3. Each FACADE composition shall include a functioning street entry door.
4. Individual infill projects on lots with STREET FRONTAGE of less than
100 feet on a BLOCK FACE are exempted from the overall FACADE
composition requirement for that BLOCK FACE, but shall still include
a functioning street entry. This requirement may be satisfied by liner
shops (small/ shallow shops that sit in front of a larger footprint use
such as grocery stores).
5. To achieve a complete and discrete vertical FACADE composition
(Item 2 above) within a STREET FRONTAGE requires, at a
minimum, Item a. below, and at least two additional items b-e that
differ from one FACADE composition to the next:
a. Clearly different GROUND STORY FACADE composition (both
framing materials and FENESTRATION proportions).
b. Different FENESTRATION proportions of at least 20 percent in
height or width or height: width ratio. (See illustration 402.B.5.b.)
c. Different FACADE configurations with a clearly different ‘bay’
rhythm (e.g. ‘ABA’ – ‘ABB’ – ‘BACB’ – ‘ABC’). (See illustration
402.B.5.c.)
d. Change in wall material (color changes are insufficient).
e. Change in total FENESTRATION percentage (minimum difference
12 percent; ground floor FACADEs are not included).
C. Building Size
The maximum footprint for a building is 20,000 gross square feet. This shall not
limit publically accessible parking structures built according to the standards of
this Code.
D. Neighborhood Manners
For the Urban General and Urban Storefront BFS frontages sharing a common lot
line with a Detached Frontage or with a residential zoning district outside the
Gateway District the following rules apply (see 402.E. Illustrative intent).
1. The NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS setback areas are specified in the
REGULATING PLAN.
2. A GARDEN WALL, 4 to 8 feet in height, shall be constructed within one
(1) foot of the common lot line. Trees from the STREET TREE List
shall
be planted, on maximum 30-foot centers, between 5 and 10 feet from this
wall. At planting, trees shall be at least 2.5 inches in diameter at
designated breast height (DBH) and at least ten feet in overall height.
3. Within 80ft of the RBL:
a. There shall be a 20 foot setback from the common lot line.
COMMON DRIVEs, trees, and surface parking are permitted within
this setback, but there shall be no structures within this area. (See
diagram 402.D.3.a.)
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
RBL
COMMON
LOT LINE
20ft
setback
RBL
NE
Single-
Family
Detached
Parcel
w/in
50ft
NO Structures
COMMON LOT LI
16
w/in
80ft
b. Between 20 and 50 feet of the common lot line, any structure shall
have a maximum height of 30 feet. This requirement supersedes any
BFS STORY height requirement. (See diagram 402.D.3.b.)
c. The NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 20-foot Setback Area shall be
adjusted with any frontage change per 402.A Frontage Transitions.
d. This area is specified in the REGULATING PLAN.
4. Farther than 80 feet from any RBL:
a. There shall be a 50-foot setback from the common lot line. No
structures with a height greater than the required GARDEN
WALL maximum (per D.2 above) shall be permitted within this
setback, excepting automobile-parking shelter-roofs, that are 10 feet
or less in height. Parking, at grade and below, and COMMON DRIVEs
are allowed in this area. (See diagram 402.D.1.c.)
b. The NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS 50-foot Setback Area shall move only
in concert with a rezoning per Part 2. Administration 207
Amendments to the Form-Based Code.
c. The location of this area is specified in the REGULATING PLAN.
E. Height
1. The height of all buildings is measured in stories, with an
ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT in feet, measured from the average
fronting sidewalk elevation to the top of the wall plate, unless
otherwise designated herein.
2. The minimum FACADE height that is required at the RBL is shown on
the individual BFS.
3. The ceiling of an ENGLISH BASEMENT shall be at least 3 feet above
the average fronting sidewalk grade with windows above grade.
ENGLISH BASEMENT units do not count against the maximum STORY
limit but do count against the ultimate height measurement.
4. An ATTIC STORY is not included in the ULTIMATE BUILDING
HEIGHT or STORY height measurement.
5. Any portion of a parking structure within 30 feet of a building
constructed under this Code shall not exceed that building’s primary
ridge or parapet height.
6. MEZZANINEs that have a floor area greater than 1/3rd of the floor area
of the STORY in which they are located shall count as an additional full
STORY in the building height measurement.
7. MEZZANINEs shall be set back from the RBL at least 25 feet.
8. The prescribed minimum STORY CLEAR HEIGHT shall be met by at
least 80 percent of the specified STORY area.
9. The GROUND STORY finished floor elevation requirements
shall be measured:
a. from the average exterior sidewalk elevation at the RBL, and
b. within 30 feet of any RBL.
402.D. Illustrative intent, showing the
limits to BUILDABLE per 402 D.
401.E.1. Height Reference
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
CLEAR SIDEWALK elevation
Measured to top of wallplate
for pitched roofs
Large frontages on steep slopes
may need to step their FACADE
17
402.F.1. Affordable Housing
Details:
The uppermost FULL STORY will
be allowed so long as a Gross
Floor Area equal to 50% of that
additional STORY is provided in
the same building as Affordable
Housing, as defined as 80% to
120% of Area Median Household
Income.
See Affordable Housing
Development and Performance
Standards in Section 804 for
further requirements.
402.G.2
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
10. For Urban General and Urban Storefront frontages the maximum
GROUND STORY height shall be measured from the average fronting
sidewalk elevation to the second STORY floor.
F. Bonus Story
1. Where an Urban General or Urban Storefront property has been approved by
the City as eligible for a BONUS STORY, it is eligible for the maximum
STORY limit and ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT identified in the BFS in
exchange for the provision of affordable housing (see text box for details)
or for the following energy efficient construction standards: Vermont
Commercial Building Energy Standards (VBES) Stretch Standards.
Or current (relevant ) equivalent to be determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. The BONUS STORY shall only be constructed within 80 feet of the RBL.
G. Siting
1. Building FACADEs shall be built to the RBL as prescribed in the BFS.
2. The building FACADE shall be built to the RBL within 30 feet of a
BLOCK CORNER, unless otherwise specified in the BFS. (See diagram
402.G.2.)
3. The RBL, for all BFS frontages except Detached, designated on the
REGULATING PLAN as an absolute line, incorporates an offset area (or
depth) of 24 inches behind that line (into the BUILDABLE) allowing for
jogs, FACADE articulation, etc. unless otherwise designated herein.
Therefore, where the FACADE is placed within that 24-inch zone, it is
considered to be “built to” the RBL.
4. For Detached frontages the RBL incorporates an offset area (or depth) of 10
feet behind that line (into the BUILDABLE) allowing for jogs, FACADE
articulation, etc. unless otherwise designated herein. Therefore, where the
FACADE is placed within that 10 foot zone, it is considered to be “built to”
the RBL.
5. Where a STREET WALL is required, it shall be located along any RBL
frontage that is not otherwise occupied by a building, within the 24-inch
RBL zone.
6. Buildings may only occupy that portion of the lot specified as the
BUILDABLE; within any LOT BUILDING LIMIT and outside of any
NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS setback.
7. No part of any building may be located outside of the BUILDABLE except
overhanging eaves, awnings, SHOPFRONTs, BAY WINDOWs, STOOPs,
steps, handicapped ramps approved by the Zoning Administrator, or
balconies. STOOPs, steps, and ramps shall not be located within the
CLEAR SIDEWALK area. For appropriate COMMERCE and retail uses,
temporary displays or cafe seating may be placed in the DOORYARD.
8. There is no required setback from COMMON DRIVEs except as
otherwise indicated in the BFS.
9. There are no side lot setbacks, except as specified in Section E.
NEIGHBORHOOD MANNERS (above) or in the individual BFS.
10. The PARKING SETBACK LINE is generally 30 feet behind the RBL and
extends, vertically, from the FIRST FLOOR level, as a plane unless otherwise
indicated on the REGULATING PLAN or in the BFS. Vehicle parking shall be
located behind
18
STREET
STREET
the PARKING SETBACK LINE, except where parking is provided below grade,
on-street, or otherwise indicated on the REGULATING PLAN.
11. All lots, including CORNER LOTs and through lots, shall satisfy the
build- to requirements for any and all of their RBL frontages, and the
DOORYARD and/or FRONT YARD requirements for each
designated BFS, unless otherwise specified in this Code.
H. Private Open Area
1. Any ground level required PRIVATE OPEN AREA shall have at least 1 tree
per 800 square feet, of at least 2.5 inches in diameter at designated breast
height (DBH) and at least 10 feet in overall height. Where new trees are
planted to meet this requirement, they shall be no closer than four feet on
center to any common lot line. Urban Storefront lots, and lots that are
reusing existing structures where there is no existing ground level PRIVATE
OPEN AREA are exempt from this requirement.
2. Species listed on the Vermont Invasive Plant Council list are prohibited
from PRIVATE OPEN AREAs.
I. Garage and Parking
Curb cuts or driveways shall be located at least 75 feet away from any
BLOCK CORNER or parking structure entry on the same BLOCK FACE.
This does not apply to driveways accessed off COMMON DRIVEs.
J. Elements
1. FENESTRATION is regulated as a percentage of the FACADE between
floor levels. FENESTRATION is measured as glass area (including
MULLIONs, MUNTINs, and similar window frame elements with a
dimension less than one inch) and/or OPEN AREA.
2. FENESTRATION shall be distributed such that no 30-foot section of
a FACADE violates the BFS percentage parameters.
3. Windows shall not direct views into an adjacent private lot where the
common lot line is within 20 feet. Specifically: the window opening
and it’s window panes shall be at an angle of greater than 90 degrees to/
with the common lot line, unless:
a. that view is contained within the lot (e.g. by a PRIVACY FENCE or
GARDEN WALL), or
b. the window’s sill is at least 6 feet above its finished floor level, or
c. otherwise specified in the individual BFS.
4. No part of any building may project forward of the RBL except
overhanging eaves, awnings, SHOPFRONTs, BAY WINDOWs,
STOOPs, steps, balconies, or handicapped ramps approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
5. GROUND STORY awnings shall shall have a minimum of ten-foot
CLEAR HEIGHT above the sidewalk and a minimum five-foot depth,
measured from the FACADE. The maximum depth is to back-ofcurb
or the TREE LAWN edge, whichever is less.
6. Balconies shall not project within 5 feet of a common lot line or
encroach within the public right-of-way.
402.J.3 Plan View Diagrams
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 19
7. Where an individual BFS includes balconies as a method for achieving the required
PRIVATE OPEN AREA, the BALCONY:
a. shall be enclosed by balustrades, railings, or other means that BLOCK at least 55 percent of the
view through them;
b. shall not otherwise be enclosed above a height of 42 inches, except with insect screening and/or
columns/posts supporting a roof or connecting with another BALCONY above; and
c. shall be roofed.
8. BAY WINDOWs shall have an interior clear width of between four and eight feet at the main wall. BAY
WINDOWs shall project no more than 42 inches beyond the RBL and walls and windows of the bay shall
be between 90 degrees (perpendicular) and 0 degrees (parallel) relative to the primary building wall from
which they project.
9. Attic stories are permitted for all BFS frontages.
a. On the RBL/FACADE side of the roof pitch (BLOCK interior elevations are not restricted) ATTIC
STORY windows may only be located in DORMERS and/or gable-ends.
b. ATTIC STORY DORMERS are permitted so long as they do not break the primary eave line, are
indivdually less than 15 feet wide, and their collective width is not more than 60 percent of the RBL
FACADE length.
c. Attic stories do not count against the ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT or maximum STORY
height as long as they meet the above standards.
10. For Urban General and Urban Storefront frontages, as an alternate to the ATTIC STORY, a HALF
STORY is allowed above the maximum full STORY, provided that:
a. its footprint is no more than 50% of any of the stories below it,
b. it is set back from the FACADE below no less than 15 feet, and
c. not less than 1/3rd of the building’s total roof area is constructed as a green roof.
d. Half stories do not count against the ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT or maximum STORY
height as long as they meet the above standards.
11. At least one functioning entry door shall be provided along each GROUND STORY FACADE. No
GROUND STORY FACADE may include a section of greater than 75 feet without a functioning entry
door, unless otherwise specified in the BFS.
12. All required FRONT PORCHes shall be completely covered by a roof. FRONT PORCHes may be
screened (insect screening) when all architectural elements (columns, railings, etc.) occur on the
outside of the screen on the side facing the STREET-SPACE. The finished FRONT PORCH floor
height shall be no more than 8 inches below the first interior finished floor level of the building to
which it is attached. FRONT PORCHes shall not extend past the DOORYARD into the clear walkway.
13. The finished STOOP floor height shall be no more than 8 inches below the first interior finished
floor level of the building to which it is attached. STOOPs shall not extend past the DOORYARD into
the clear walkway.
14. PRIVACY FENCEs may be constructed along and within 6 inches of COMMON LOT LINES, except
those forward of the RBL, and along COMMON DRIVEs. PRIVACY FENCEs shall have a maximum
height of 8 feet.
K. Building Functions
Allowable uses for ground stories and upper stories are identified in each BFS. Additional use standards are
provided in Part. 8 Building Functions.
L. Civic Buildings
When civic buildings are designated on the REGULATING PLAN, they are exempt from Part 4,
except Neighborhood Manners.
Appendix B Gateway
20 Districts FBC
403. Urban General Frontage
ILLUSTRATIONS AND INTENT
Note: These are provided as illustrations of intent. The illustrations and statements on
this page are advisory only and do not have the power of law. Refer to the standards
on the following pages for the specific prescriptions and restrictions of this Building
Form Standard. Where these photos or statements may be inconsistent with the
regulations, the regulations prevail.
Urban General is the basic urban STREET FRONTAGE, once common in towns
and cities across the United States. The purpose of this frontage is to develop
multi- STORY buildings placed directly at the sidewalk with one or more
entrances and windows across the FACADE. The uses range from commercial
to residential, municipal to retail and restaurants—and combinations of all of
the above. There could be several buildings lined up shoulder to shoulder,
filling out a BLOCK, or on smaller BLOCKs, a single building might fill the
BLOCK FACE. This frontage is designated in the more intense areas of the
Gateway Corridors District and it is anticipated that there will be significant
pedestrian traffic along these frontages.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 21
15% Min
PRIVATE
OPEN AREA
Urban General
PARKING SETBACK LINE
No Parking
forward of this line. Property Lines
COMMON DRIVE
or Rear
Property Line
Building FACADE
along Min 75%
of RBL
20ft Min
setback from
Rear Lot Line.
No setback
from COMMON
DRIVE
RBL
Property Lines
Setback or
LOT BUILDING LIMIT
HEIGHT SITING
Building Height
The building shall be at least 2 stories in height at the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE, but no greater than 41/2
stories and 58 feet in height, except where designated 51/2
on the REGULATING PLAN (south of the rail line). There
the ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT is 65 feet.
* In all cases, the uppermost full STORY shall only be permitted
as a BONUS STORY. (See also 402. General Provision, F. BONUS
STORY on page 19.)
Ground Story Height
1. COMMERCE, retail and civic uses
(See also Urban Storefront Frontage on page 24.)
a. The GROUND STORY finished floor elevation shall be:
i. no lower than the average fronting exterior sidewalk
elevation;
ii. no higher than 18 inches above the average fronting
sidewalk elevation.
c. The GROUND STORY shall have a CLEAR
HEIGHT of at least 12 feet contiguous to the RBL
frontage for a minimum depth of 30 feet.
2. Residential Units
a. The finished floor elevation shall be no less than 3 feet
above the average fronting sidewalk elevation.
b. The GROUND STORY shall have a CLEAR
HEIGHT of at least 8.8 feet.
Upper Story Height
The minimum CLEAR HEIGHT for upper stories is 8.8
feet.
Street Wall Height
A STREET WALL not less than 5 feet in height or greater than
12 feet in height shall be required along any RBL frontage that is
not otherwise occupied by a building on the lot.
FACADE
1. On each lot the building FACADE shall be built to the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE for at least 75% of the RBL length.
2. Within 8 feet of the BLOCK CORNER, the GROUND STORY
FACADE may be chamfered to form a corner entry.
Buildable Area
1. The BUILDABLE is delineated in the diagram above.
2. A PRIVATE OPEN AREA equal to at least 15% of the total
BUILDABLE shall be preserved on every lot. Up to 33% of
the required PRIVATE OPEN AREA may be satisfied through
the balconies of individual units. At least 67% of the
PRIVATE OPEN AREA shall comprise no more than two
separate contiguous areas, as follows:
a. Where located at grade, such PRIVATE OPEN AREA
may be located anywhere behind the PARKING
SETBACK LINE, including within the NEIGHBORHOOD
MANNERS Setback Area, but not in or beyond any
COMMON DRIVE.
b. Where provided above the second STORY but below a
building’s highest roof level, the PRIVATE OPEN AREA
may be located forward of the PARKING SETBACK LINE
(such as in a raised courtyard configuration) and shall
open onto no more than one STREET-SPACE and shall be
set back at least 30 feet from any BLOCK CORNER or
BUILDING CORNER.
c. Where located on the building’s highest roof level, the
PRIVATE OPEN AREA may be located anywhere on the
roof.
Garage and Parking
Openings in any RBL for parking garage entries shall have a
maximum CLEAR HEIGHT no greater than 16 feet and a
clear width no greater than 22 feet.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Min 8.8ft Clear
Min 8.8ft Clear
Min 8.8ft Clear
18in Max 3ft Min above
sidewalk
with DORMER
to FACADE
MAX 4*
or MAX 5*
(per Reg Plan)
Parking Setback Line
MIN 2 STORIES
at RBL
Max 22ft
sidewalk
to floor
Street Walls req’d
on unbuilt RBLs
5-12ft in Height
Commerce Residential
RBL
22
Urban General
ELEMENTS USE
Fenestration
1. Blank lengths of wall exceeding 20 linear feet are prohibited on
all REQUIRED BUILDING LINEs (RBL).
2. GROUND STORY FENESTRATION shall comprise between
33% and 70% of the GROUND STORY FACADE.
3. Upper STORY FENESTRATION shall comprise between 20%
and 70% of the FACADE area per STORY.
Building Projections
1. Awnings shall project a minimum of 5 feet from the FACADE.
2. * These BALCONY depth parameters are necessary to
achieve any required PRIVATE OPEN AREA credits.
Street Walls
One access gate no wider than 22 feet and one pedestrian entry
gate no wider than 5 feet shall be permitted within any required
street wall.
Ground Story
The GROUND STORY may only house COMMERCE or
residential uses. See height specifications above for specific
requirements unique to each use.
Upper Stories
1. The upper stories may only house residential or
COMMERCE uses. *No restaurant or RETAIL SALES uses shall
be allowed in upper stories unless they are second STORY
extensions equal to or less than the area of the GROUND
STORY use.
2. No COMMERCE use is permitted above a residential use.
3. Additional habitable space is permitted within the roof where it
is configured as an ATTIC STORY.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
if present.
Parking Setback Line
Permitted
*Max 8ft Min 5ft
Deep
FENESTRATION
Max 70% Min 20%
per STORY
Ground Floor FACADE
FENESTRATION
Max 70% Min 33%
Parking and
Servicing shall be to
the Rear, off
COMMON DRIVE
RBL
Parking Setback Line
Residential or
Commerce,
No Retail*
Residential
or
Commerce*
RBL
23
404. Urban Storefront Frontage
These photos are provided as illustrations of intent. The are advisory only and do not have the power of law. Refer to the standards
below and on the previous pages for the specific prescriptions and restrictions of this Building Form Standard. Where these photos
or statements may be inconsistent with the regulations, the regulations prevail.
Where Urban Storefront is designated on the REGULATING PLAN, the Urban General BFS standards (previous pages) shall apply,
except that the GROUND STORY configuration shall be that of a SHOPFRONT with uses, forward of the PARKING SETBACK
LINE, limited to COMMERCE.
a. The GROUND STORY shall have a CLEAR HEIGHT of at least 12 feet contiguous to the RBL frontage forward of the
PARKING SETBACK LINE.
b. GROUND STORY FENESTRATION shall comprise between 50% and 90% of the GROUND STORY FACADE.
c. Single panes of glass shall not be permitted larger than 10 feet in height by 5 feet in width.
d. GROUND STORY windows may not be made opaque by window treatments (excepting operable sunscreen devices within
the conditioned space). A minimum of 80% of the window surface shall allow a view into the building interior for a depth
of at least 12 feet.
e. SHOPFRONTs may extend up to 24 inches beyond the FACADE or RBL into the DOORYARD, but shall not project into the
clear walkway.
Appendix B Gateway
24 Districts FBC
405. Townhouse/Small Apartment
ILLUSTRATIONS AND INTENT
Note: These photos and statements are provided as illustrations of intent and are
advisory only. They do not have the power of law. Refer to the standards on the
following pages for the specific prescriptions and restrictions of the
Townhouse/SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING Form Standard. Where these photos or
statements may be inconsistent with the regulations, the regulations prevail.
The Townhouse/Small Apartment frontage is of moderate intensity, often
created by a series of smaller attached structures—configured as single-family
residential or stacked flats. This building form standard has regular
street- space entrances, as frequently as 18 feet. The character and
intensity of this frontage varies depending on the STREET-SPACE and the
location of the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE—the buildings may be placed up to
the sidewalk with STOOPs, or further back with small DOORYARD gardens
and/or FRONT PORCHes.
Similar in scale to the townhouse and row house, a small apartment is of
limited size and can also be used to transition from the more intense areas of the
Gateway District to adjacent, and less intense, neighborhoods. It is anticipated
that the pedestrian activity along these frontages will vary considerably based on
the time of day and week.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 25
of
AREA
PARKI
LINE
ATTIC STORY
with DORMER
to FACADE
Max 3
STORIES
Parking Setback Line
ATTIC STORY
SIDEWING or
BUILDABLE AREA
within 60ft
FACADE
BUILDABLE AREA
within 60ft of
8ft
PARKING SETBACK LINE
No parking forward
of this line.
COMMON DRIVE
or Rear
Lot Line
BUILDABLE
AREA Depth
25ft
Min 2 STORIES
at RBL
FRONT PORCH or
STOOP
Req’d
3 ft Min
Min 8.8ft Clear
ancillary building
15ft Max Height
PRIVACY FENCE
8ft Max Height
RBL
Building FACADE
along Min 65%
of RBL
15% Min
PRIVATE
OPEN AREA
BUILDABLE AREA
one side only
within 14 ft
2ft Min setback
from
COMMON DRIVE
Stoop/FPorch
RBL
8 ft Max above sidewalk
RBL
NG SETBACK
Property Lines
HEIGHT SITING
Building Height
1. Each building shall be at least 2 stories high at the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL), but no more than 3
stories with an ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT of 40 feet,
unless otherwise designated on the REGULATING PLAN.
2. A side wing or ancillary structure shall be no higher than 15
feet in height.
Ground Story Height
1. The finished floor elevation shall be no less than 3 feet and no
more than 8 feet above the average exterior sidewalk elevation
at the RBL.
2. At least 80% of the GROUND STORY shall have an interior
CLEAR HEIGHT of at least 8.8 feet.
3. Main entrances may be at grade, with transitions to meet the
minimum finished floor elevation within the building interior.
Upper Story Height
1. At least 80% of each upper STORY shall have an interior
CLEAR HEIGHT of at least 8.8 feet.
English Basements
The finished floor level of the ENGLISH BASEMENT shall
be no greater than 4 feet below the average elevation of the
fronting sidewalk.
Street Wall Height
A STREET WALL not less than 4 feet in height or greater
than 8 feet in height shall be required along any RBL frontage
that is not otherwise occupied by a FACADE.
FACADE
On each BFS frontage, the FACADE shall be built to:
1. the RBL for at least 65% of the RBL length, or
2. a line an additional 8 feet behind the RBL (only permitted to
accommodate a FRONT PORCH—see Elements on the next
page for FRONT PORCH requirements) with a width not
less than 65% of the RBL.
Buildable Area
1. The BUILDABLE is as defined in the diagram above.
2. A PRIVATE OPEN AREA equal to at least 15% of the
total BUILDABLE shall be preserved on every lot (for each
unit where done as a townhouse). The required PRIVATE
OPEN AREA shall be located at grade anywhere behind the
PARKING SETBACK LINE and shall not include any side or
rear setback areas.
a. For lots deeper than 50 feet, up to 33% of the required
PRIVATE OPEN AREA may be satisfied through the
balconies and/or raised decks of individual units.
b. For all other lots, 100% of the required PRIVATE
OPEN AREA may be above grade, via balconies or
decks.
Garage and Parking
1. Garage doors/entries are not permitted on any RBL/FACADE.
2. At-grade parking may be forward of the PARKING
SETBACK LINE only when it is within a garage on a
CORNER LOT, within 40 feet of a rear lot line, and the
parking area’s RBL frontage is less than 25 feet.
Frontage Widths
1. The minimum width for new townhouses is 18 feet.
2. Although there are no individual BFS side setbacks, no
individual SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING or
contiguous set of townhouses may exceed 100 feet of
STREET-SPACE frontage. A gap of at least 15 feet is
required between buildings.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Townhouse/Small Apartment
26
CLEAR SIDEWALK
(see Street Spec.)
DOORYARD
Parking Setback
Line
Townhouse/Small Apartment
STOOP
Max 6ft Width
FRONT PORCH Spec
Min 65% of FACADE WIDTH.
FACADE
FENESTRATION
Max 70% Min 25%
per STORY
BALCONIES
Permitted
Max 7ft
Max 4ft
Depth
Min 7ft
Max 9ft
Depth
Deep Servicing shall be
to the rear, off the
COMMON DRIVE
FRONT PORCH
or STOOP
Req’d
PRIVACY FENCE
Height 8ft Max
RBL
ELEMENTS USE
Fenestration
1. Blank lengths of wall exceeding 15 linear feet are prohibited on
all FACADEs.
2. FENESTRATION shall comprise between 25% and 70% of
the
FACADE.
3. Each townhouse and/or SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING
shall include a functioning STREET-SPACE entry.
Building Projections
1. Each townhouse or SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING
shall include either:
a. a STOOP of not more than 4 feet deep and 6 feet wide
(not including steps), or
b. a FRONT PORCH, between 7 and 9 feet deep,
• that projects no more than 1 foot forward of the
RBL, and
• with a width not less than 65% of the FACADE
Street Walls
One access gate no wider than 15 feet and one pedestrian entry
gate no wider than 5 feet shall be permitted within any required
street wall.
All Stories
1. Only residential uses are permitted. This includes Home
Occupation uses.
2. Individual townhouses shall have no more than two
residential units, including the ACCESSORY UNIT.
3. Buildings configured as small apartments have no set limit
to the number of units. The maximum number of units in a
SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING is set by limits on the
building’s size.
4. ENGLISH BASEMENT ACCESSORY UNITs are only permitted
in
townhouses.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Parking Setback Line
Servicing shall be
to the rear, off the
COMMON DRIVE.
ATTIC STORY
Residential
Accessory Unit
Parking
Residential
RBL
27
This page intentionally left blank.
Appendix B Gateway
28 Districts FBC
406. Detached Frontage
ILLUSTRATIONS AND INTENT
Note: These photos and statements are provided as illustrations of intent and are
advisory only. They do not have the power of law. Refer to the standards on the
following pages for the specific prescriptions and restrictions of the Detached Building
form standard. Where these photos or statements may be inconsistent with the
regulations, the regulations prevail.
The detached frontage is represented by the traditional single family house
with small front, side, and rear yards along a tree-lined street. Structures are 1
to 2 stories in height with pitched roofs and FRONT PORCHes. Its purpose is to
reinforce the character of existing single family neighborhoods.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 29
Detached
PARKING SETBACK LINE
No Parking
forward of this line.
Property Line
COMMON DRIVE
or Rear Lot
Line
BUILDABLE
AREA within
5ft Minimum Side Setback
BUILDABLE
65ft of RBL
BUILDABLE
AREA
25% Min
Depth
30ft
AREA
Building FACADE
along Min 60%
Contiguous
PRIVATE
of RBL
OPEN AREA
Max width 14ft
5ft Minimum Side Setback
13ft Min
setback from
Rear Lot Line.
2ft Min setback
from COMMON
DRIVE
RBL* Property Lines
HEIGHT SITING
Building Height
1. Each building shall be at least 15 feet at the REQUIRED
BUILDING LINE (RBL), but no greater than 2 stories with
an ULTIMATE BUILDING HEIGHT of 27 feet.
2. A SIDEWING or ancillary structure shall be no higher than 15
feet.
Ground Story Height
1. The finished floor elevation shall be no less than 3 feet and no
more than 8 feet above the average exterior sidewalk elevation
at the RBL.
2. At least 80% of the first STORY shall have an interior
CLEAR HEIGHT of at least 8.8 feet.
Upper Story Height
1. At least 80% of each upper STORY shall have an interior
CLEAR HEIGHT of at least 8.8 feet.
Front Yard Fence
Any FRONT YARD fence has a minimum height of 30
inches and a maximum height of 40 inches.
FACADE
1. *For Detached frontages the REQUIRED BUILDING
LINE (RBL) shall be ten (10) feet deep/wide, extending into
the lot (see 402.G.4).
2. On each lot the FACADE shall be built parallel to the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL) for at least 60% of the
building width. The FRONT PORCH shall be built to the
RBL.
3. For CORNER LOTs the minimum 60% build-to shall
include the frontage within 20 feet of the BLOCK
CORNER.
Buildable Area
1. The BUILDABLE is as defined in the diagram above.
2. A contiguous PRIVATE OPEN AREA equal to at least 25% of
the total BUILDABLE shall be preserved on every lot. Such
contiguous area shall be located at grade, anywhere behind
the PARKING SETBACK LINE and not include any side or
rear setbacks.
Lot Size and Setbacks
1. All lots of record are buildable under this code.
2. Newly subdivided lots shall have a minimum width at the RBL
of 32 feet, a maximum width of 55 feet, and a minimum depth
of 85 feet.
3. The minimum side lot setbacks are 5 feet or as otherwise
designated on the REGULATING PLAN.
Front Yard
1. The FRONT YARD/DOORYARD shall not be paved
excepting walkways.
2. Where through lots or CORNER LOTs exist, any FRONT YARD
standards shall be applied on both STREET-SPACE frontages.
Garages, Parking and Common drives
1. Garage doors shall not be located on the RBL/FACADE.
2. There is a 2 foot required setback from COMMON DRIVEs.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Min 8.8ft Clear
PRIVACY FENCE
ATTIC STORY
STORY
Min 8.8ft Clear
FRONT YARD
30
Detached
ELEMENTS USE
Fenestration
1. Blank lengths of wall exceeding 15 linear feet are prohibited on
all FACADEs.
2. FENESTRATION shall comprise at least 25%, but not more
than 70%, of all FACADEs.
3. No window may face or direct views toward a common lot
line within 10 feet unless:
a. that view is contained within the lot (e.g. by a
PRIVACY FENCE/GARDEN WALL), or
b. the window sill is at least 6 feet above the finished floor
level.
Building Projections
1. Each building FACADE shall include a FRONT PORCH at
the RBL, between 8 feet and 12 feet deep with a width not less
than 1/2 of the FACADE width.
2. No building element except the FRONT PORCH eaves and
steps
may encroach beyond the RBL into the DOORYARD.
Doors/Entries
At least one functioning entry door shall be provided along the
GROUND STORY FACADE of each building FACADE.
Street Walls and Fences
1. There is no STREET WALL requirement.
2. Any FRONT YARD fence shall be within one foot of the
clear walkway/DOORYARD line parallel to the RBL
and along COMMON LOT LINES to a point at least 10 feet
behind the RBL.
3. A PRIVACY FENCE may be constructed along a common
lot line behind the FACADE.
All Stories
1. Only residential uses are permitted. This includes Home
Occupation uses.
2. Individual detached lots may have up to two residential
units, plus one ACCESSORY UNIT, provided one unit is
owner occupied.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
SETBACK
BALCONIES
FRONT YARD
RBL
Gateway District Perimeter Frontages
Where a Detached frontage at the perimeter of the
Gateway District is under common ownership with an
Urban General frontage: the FRONT PORCH and side
setback requirements are waived. The building may
then be attached and a part of the adjacent Urban
General building. The FACADE shall then be built to the
RBL instead of the FRONT PORCH.
31
This page intentionally left blank.
Appendix B Gateway
32 Districts FBC
Part 5. Urban Space Standards
501. Applicability
A. These elements shall be implemented as makes sense within appropriately
scaled private sector developments, public-private partnerships, the
municipal budget, and special available funds.
B. All work within the STREET-SPACE shall be coordinated with
the Department of Public Works.
502. Intent
A. Although commonly thought of as just parks or greens, urban space (or the
public realm) is much more; it includes the complete STREET-SPACE—
the public domain between the building FACADEs; the travel lanes
between the curbs as well as the sidewalks; urban SQUAREs as well as
CIVIC GREENs.
B. The goals for the Urban Space are:
1. To establish an environment that encourages and facilitates pedestrian
activity. “Walkable” streets are comfortable, efficient, safe, and interesting.
2. To ensure the coherence of the STREET-SPACE, serving to assist
residents, building owners, and managers with understanding the
relationship between the STREET-SPACE and their own properties.
3. To contribute to ultimate sustainability. Native (and non-native
adapted) trees and plants contribute to privacy, the reduction of
noise and air pollution, shade, maintenance of the natural habitat,
conservation of water, and storm-water management.
C. Property frontages and building FACADEs are part of the public realm,
literally forming the walls of the public STREET-SPACE and are
therefore subject to more regulation than the other portions of the
private property.
D. The private, interior portions of the lots (toward the COMMON DRIVE or
rear lot lines) are much less regulated to allow commercial operators to
utilize these spaces as efficient working environments unseen by the public
and to allow residents to have private (a semi-private common area for
apartment and condominium dwellers) gardens and courtyards.
The STREET-SPACE
The STREET-SPACE is a human
and sustainable environment
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
33
503. Street Type
For specific information regarding standards for improvements within the streetspace
refer to the City Public Works Specifications and the Winooski
Transportation Plan.
A. Intent and Principles
1. General Intent
a. Streets are a community’s first and foremost public spaces and should
be just as carefully designed and planned as any park or public
building. The character of the STREET-SPACE—both its scale and
its details—determines the pedestrian quality of a given location.
b. Streets must balance the needs of all forms of traffic—auto, transit, bicycle
and pedestrian—to maximize mobility and convenience for all
residents and users. Their character will vary depending on their
location: some streets will carry a large volume of traffic and provide a
more active and intense urban pedestrian experience while others will
provide a less active and more intimately scaled STREET-SPACE.
c. These are complete streets and must be developed as such to create
people-oriented places balancing all transportation modes. These streets
are designed to balance walkability and pedestrian comfort with
automobile movement.
Street Trees and the tree lawn reduce
storm-water impacts
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 34
504. Streetscape Standards
A. General Provisions
1. All work within the STREET-SPACE shall be coordinated with
the Department of Public Works.
2. STREET TREEs shall be required along any street, and along any existing
public street. In the event that the City has adopted a STREET TREE plan
for a district or road segment, the City may require tree plantings and
installation of STREETLIGHTs that are consistent with the plan, or
payment in lieu of trees to ensure plantings are done consistently with
City parking, utility and other street-scape improvement projects.
3. STREET TREEs and lighting shall be planted to City of Winooski Public
Works Specifications.
4. In addition to the lot, the owner must maintain the following areas:
a. The portion of the STREET-SPACE between their RBL and the back of
the curb.
b. The portion of the COMMON DRIVE on either side of the
COMMON DRIVE pavement.
5. Mechanical and electrical equipment including, but not limited to, air
compressors, pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, private garbage
cans (not including public sidewalk waste bins), and storage tanks may not
be stored or located within any STREET-SPACE. Water pumps for public
fountains or irrigation not visible are not included in this prohibition.
Temporary placement of private garbage cans within the STREET-SPACE
may be allowed to accommodate scheduled pick-up.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
35
505. Squares and Civic Greens
A. Intent
1. These standards apply to those spaces that are either publicly owned or publicly accessible, as designated on the
regulating plan.
2. SQUAREs, and CIVIC GREENs should be situated at prominent locations. The plants and trees of SQUAREs
and CIVIC GREENs provide a landscape and civic architecture that complement the surrounding private
building architecture.
3. SQUAREs are active pedestrian centers. CIVIC GREENs are spaces intended for less intensive foot traffic.
4. Pervious paving materials (to allow oxygen for tree roots and absorb stormwater run-off) are encouraged in both
SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs, and the percentage of impervious paving material is limited. (see C. Materials
and Configurations below.)
B. Standards
SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs, established after the date of adoption, must be designed, planted and
maintained according to the following requirements:
1. SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs shall have at least 60 percent of their perimeter fronting public rights-of-way.
Both shall be surrounded by STREET TREEs. Their dimensions shall be no narrower than a 1:5 ratio and no
SQUARE or CIVIC GREEN width or breadth dimension shall be less than 25 feet.
2. Appropriate to their high (pedestrian) traffic level SQUAREs must be designed with a higher percentage of
paved surface area.
3. A clear view through the SQUARE or CIVIC GREEN (from two to seven feet in height) is required, both for
safety and urban design purposes.
4. SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs shall not include active recreation structures such as ball fields and courts.
5. SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs are for public use and access shall not be constrained. Not less than 60 percent of
their tract area shall be usable space, available to the public as walkable/occupiable, picnic-able open
space, unimpeded by structures, art installations, sculptures, or landscape design elements (excluding plant
material).
C. Materials and Configurations
1. General
a. The maximum slope across any SQUARE or CIVIC GREEN shall not exceed ten percent.
b. Except for tree trunks, STREETLIGHTs, civic use buildings, public art or monuments, there shall be a
clear view between two and seven feet above grade. The foliage of newly planted trees may intrude
into this area until the tree has sufficient growth to allow such a clear trunk height.
c. Trees within a SQUARE or CIVIC GREEN may also be selected from the Tree List (see Sec. 506 ).
d. Asphalt is prohibited within a SQUARE or CIVIC GREEN tract.
2. Pedestrian Pathways
The area within a PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY shall be a public access easement or public right of way. Th e
easement width for these pathways must not be less than 20 feet with a paved walkway not less than 10
feet wide providing an unobstructed view straight through its entire length, except where otherwise
specified on the REGULATING PLAN.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
36
506. Tree Lists
A. General
1. All trees in private space in the Gateway Districts shall be suited to USDA Zone 4 and the particular site. Trees
recommended by Vermont Urban and Community Forestry are preferred.
2. All trees for use in the Gateway District STREET-SPACE shall meet the City of Winooski Public Works
Standards and Specifications.
3. The use of native species is recommended and may be required as necessary to avoid the introduction and
spread of nuisance or exotic species.
502. Intent Illustration, A Tradition of STREET TREEs in Winooski.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 37
Part 6. Architectural Standards
601. Intent
A. These architectural standards establish basic parameters regarding
functional building element configurations and palettes for building
materials.
B. The architectural standards serve to establish a coherent character and
encourage a high caliber, lasting quality of development. Buildings shall
be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to verify that they meet the
architectural standards (as well as the balance of this Code). The
Zoning Administrator may also work with the developer or designer to
show them how to work within these requirements.
C. In order to establish and maintain a sense of place, these standards specify an
architectural aesthetic of load-bearing walls and regional materials. Buildings
should reflect and complement the traditional materials and techniques of
Vermont. The standards also specify details, such as window proportions,
roof or cornice configurations, SHOPFRONTs, and overhangs.
602. General Principles
A. All building materials to be used shall express their fundamental properties.
For example, stronger and heavier materials (masonry) support lighter
materials (wood).
B. EQUIVALENT OR BETTER.
1. While only materials, techniques, and product types prescribed here
are allowed, EQUIVALENT OR BETTER practices and products are
encouraged. They may be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for
review. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve alternative
materials and methods if they maintain the intent of these standards.
2. Additional products may be added to the list through a text amendment
to this Code or may be allowed on a case by case basis through
a Administrative Adjustment approved in accordance with Part 2,
Administration.
C. Where CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.
1. Many of these standards apply only in conditions where
CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE. Note that the
definition of street- space includes parks, SQUAREs, and CIVIC
GREENs but not COMMON DRIVEs.
2. These controls therefore concentrate on the public space/views
from the public space and minimize interference in the private
realm. For example, an architectural element that is visible only
through an opening in a STREET WALL is not clearly visible
from the street- space. A building element that is more than 30
feet behind the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE does not meet the
definition of where CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREETSPACE.
Traditional brick house with simple architectural
detailing
Cast iron SHOPFRONT with brick second STORY
FRONT PORCH with stone pier and wooden column
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 38
603. Building Walls
A. Applicability
Exterior building walls, FACADEs and elevations.
B. Intent
Building walls should define the public realm—the STREET-SPACE. All walls
should express the construction techniques and structural constraints of
traditional, long-lasting, building materials. Simple configurations and solid
craftsmanship are favored over complexity and ostentation in building form and
the articulation of details.
The illustrations and statements of subsection B. Intent, are advisory only. Refer to
the Code standards on the following page for the specific prescriptions of this section.
Material change between brick and clapboard
made at appropriate structural location.
Winooski building with brick FACADE and ornate window
surrounds
Wooden clapboards on ground floor and
wooden shingles above
Woolen mill with brick walls and segmental arched
lintels over windows and doors
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Newly constructed brick townhouses with rich
architectural detailing
Mixed-use building FACADE with stone GROUND
STORY and wood siding above.
39
C. Primary FACADE Materials.
Primary building materials shall be used on a minimum of 75% of the FACADE.
1. Brick
a. Ground-floor brick shall be clay brick with a nominal depth of at least 3”.
b. Brick above the ground floor may have variable thickness.
c. Tile
2. Wood (or approved fiber cement siding)
3. Natural Stone (or Integrally-colored synthetic, EQUIVALENT OR BETTER.
4. Stucco (cement plaster)
5. Metal (where used as a primary material, only copper, stainless steel (18-8 or better), and titanium are
permitted.)
D. Secondary Materials
Secondary materials are permitted on a maximum of 25% of the FACADE surface area and on all side and
rear elevations.
1. All materials allowed in 603.C.
2. Metal
3. Ground- or Split-faced BLOCK (integrally colored)
4. Glass BLOCK
5. Decorative tile
6. Pre-cast masonry
7. Synthetic materials (above the second STORY) as approved by the Zoning Administrator
8. For side and rear elevations only (no FACADEs); vinyl siding, grade approved by the Zoning Administrator.
E. Configurations and Techniques
The following configurations and techniques are permitted.
1. Walls
a. Wall openings (FENESTRATION): the horizontal dimension of the opening shall not exceed the
vertical dimension except where otherwise prescribed in this Code (no more squat than square).
b. Wall openings (FENESTRATION) shall not span vertically more than one STORY .
c. Wall openings (FENESTRATION) shall correspond to the interior space and shall not span across
building structure such as floor or wall structural thicknesses.
d. Material changes shall be made with appropriate construction details for each abutting material—as where
an addition (of a different material) is built onto the original building.
2. Wood Siding and Wood Simulation Materials
a. Horizontal siding shall be configured with a maximum board exposure of 8”.
b. Board and batten siding shall have a maximum board width of 12”.
c. Siding and shingles shall be smooth or rough-sawn finish.
3. Brick, Block and Stone
All masonry shall be in an apparent load-bearing configuration.
4. Stucco (cementitious finish)
a. Finish coat shall be smooth or sand only, no roughly textured finish.
b. Stucco shall not come in contact with the ground surface.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 40
604. Roofs and Parapets
A. Applicability
where CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.
B. Intent
Roofs and parapets should demonstrate common-sense recognition of the
climate by utilizing appropriate pitch, drainage, and materials in order to provide
visual coherence to the district. Roof forms are not interchangeable. The roof
type is integral to the design of the building and its architectural character.
The slope of a pitched roof is determined by local climatic conditions (such as
the ability to shed snow loads) and physical properties of the roofing material.
Parapets are low guarding walls at the edge of roofs (usually flat) and are formed
by extensions of the building FACADEs.
Cornices are crowning (trim) projections on a parapet wall. While the code
contains parameters for the horizontal projection, these elements should be
designed to be appropriate for the building and proportionate for the dimensions
of the FACADE.
The illustrations and statements of subsection B. Intent, are advisory only. Refer to
the Code standards on the following page for the specific prescriptions of this section.
Roof with multiple pitch configurations
Pitched roof with enclosed eaves
Parapet wall with projecting cornice Pitched roof gable end with brackets Parapet wall with coping
Projecting cornice Overhanging eave Pitched roof with large overhang, brackets, and
exposed rafter tails
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
1
41
C. Materials
1. Only the following roofing materials are permitted:
a. Clay or concrete (faux clay).
b. Tile (beavertail or flat roman).
c. Slate (and equivalent synthetic or better).
d. Metal (standing seam, EQUIVALENT OR BETTER).
e. Dimensional Architectural Grade composition shingles.
f. Wood Shingles
2. Additional permitted roof features:
a. Skylights and Solar Panels.
b. Cornices and soffits may be a combination of wood, vinyl, synthetic materials (above the second STORY)
as approved by the Zoning Administrator, and/or metal.
c. Gutters and downspouts may be vinyl, and/or metal in accordance with industry standards.
D. Configurations and Techniques
The following configurations and techniques are permitted.
1. Flat Roofs with Parapet Walls
Allowed for General Urban, General Storefront, and Townhouse/Small Apartment frontage sites where the roof
material is not visible from any adjacent STREET-SPACE.
2. Pitched Roofs
Pitch (exclusive of roofs behind parapet walls):
a. Simple hip and gable roofs shall be pitched between 5:12 and 12:12.
b. Shed roofs, attached to the main structure, shall be pitched between 3:12 and 8:12.
3. Overhang Requirements
a. Eaves shall overhang 8 to 30 inches on the primary structure.
b. Eaves on accessory buildings, DORMERS, and other smaller structures shall overhang at least six inches.
c. Timber eaves and BALCONY brackets shall be a minimum of three four inches by three inches in dimension.
d. Buildings may satisfy the overhang requirement with a cornice or similar form projecting from near the top
of the building wall horizontally between 6 and 24 inches beyond the building wall.
4. Other Features
Roof vents are permitted only on the roof plane opposite the STREET-SPACE (or REQUIRED BUILDING LINE)
or when shielded from STREET-SPACE view by the building’s parapet wall.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 42
605. Street Walls and Garden Walls
A. Applicability
Where CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.
B. Intent
Property lines are physically defined by buildings, walls, or fences. Land should
be clearly public or private—in public view or private and protected.
STREET WALLs and GARDEN WALLs establish a clear edge to the STREETSPACE
where the buildings do not. These requirements include masonry walls
that define outdoor spaces and separate the STREET-SPACE from the private
realm (e.g. parking lots, trash cans, gardens, and equipment). All STREET
WALL and GARDEN WALL faces shall be as carefully designed as the building
FACADE, with the finished side out (i.e. the “better” side facing the STREETSPACE).
A STREET WALL is a masonry wall set back not more than eight inches from
the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE or adjacent
building FACADE and built to the
height specified in the BUILDING
FORM STANDARDS.
The illustrations and statements of
subsection B. Intent, are advisory
only. Refer to the Code standards
on the following page for the specific
prescriptions of this section.
STREET WALL with gate between FACADES
GARDEN WALL defining private yard
STREET WALL with gate between FACADES
STREET WALL with pedestrian and automobile gates shielding service area from public realm Brick STREET WALL between Townhouses
Appendix B Gateway
43 Districts FBC
C. Materials
Only the following materials are permitted:
1. Walls
a. Native/regional stone and EQUIVALENT OR BETTER imitation stone.
b. Brick.
c. Stucco on concrete BLOCK or poured concrete (only when a brick or stone coping is provided).
d. A combination of materials (e.g. stone piers with brick infill panels).
e. Wood (where configured to be effectively opaque).
2. Gates
a. Metal (wrought iron, welded steel and/or electro-statically plated black aluminum) - may be used for gates
and FENESTRATION.
b. Wood.
D. Configurations and Techniques
The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
1. STREET WALLs along any unbuilt REQUIRED BUILDING LINE shall be built to the height and length specified
in the building form standard.
2. STREET WALLs and GARDEN WALLs taller than 4 feet shall be subject to the FENESTRATION requirements
of their BFS frontage.
3. Coping, or similar finish cap, shall project between one inch and four inches from the face of the STREET WALL.
4. Metal work may additionally be treated to imitate a copper patina.
Brick STREET WALL with coping fronting a parking area.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 44
7
606. Windows and Doors
A. Applicability
Where CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.
B. Intent
The placement, type, and size of windows and doors on the FACADE
largely establishes the scale and vitality of the STREET-SPACE. For commercial
buildings, they allow interplay between the shop interiors and the STREETSPACE.
Commercial uses (especially restaurants and retail establishments) benefit from
exposure to the passers-by and the STREET-SPACE benefits from the visual
activity. For residences, they foster the “eyes on the street” surveillance which
provides for the security and safety for the area.
Windows should be divided by multiple panes of glass to preserve a smaller scale
for the pedestrian. This will also help the window hold the surface of the
FACADE, rather than appearing like a “hole” in the wall (an effect produced by
an over- large single sheet of glass).
The illustrations and statements of subsection B. Intent, are advisory only. Refer to
the Code standards on the following page for the specific prescriptions of this section.
SHOPFRONT window in Winooski
Door with transom and sidelight
windows
Grouped windows
Multi-paned SHOPFRONT windows and glass doors (large panes)
SHOPFRONT interior space intermingling with public realm
SHOPFRONT window
Grouped windows
Appendix B Gateway
45 Districts FBC
C. Materials
Only the following materials are permitted:
1. Window frame sashes shall be of anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel.
2. Window glass shall be clear, with light transmission at the GROUND STORY at least 90 percent and for the
upper stories at least 75 percent (modification as necessary to meet any applicable building and energy code
requirements). Specialty windows (two per FACADE maximum) may utilize stained or opalescent glass, or
glass BLOCK.
3. Window screens shall be black or gray.
4. Doors shall be of wood, clad wood, glass, or steel and may include glass panes.
5. Shutter materials shall be wood or clad wood.
D. Configurations and Techniques
The following configurations and techniques are permitted:
1. All Windows:
a. The horizontal dimension of the opening may not exceed the vertical dimension (no more squat than
square) except for SHOPFRONT and other entry door transoms and where otherwise prescribed in this
Code.
b. Windows may be grouped horizontally if each grouping (maximum five per group) is separated by a
MULLION, column, pier or wall section that is at least seven inches wide.
c. Windows (not doors) may be no closer than 30 inches to BUILDING CORNERs (excluding BAY WINDOWs
and SHOPFRONTs).
d. Exterior shutters, if applied, shall be sized and mounted appropriately for the window (one-half the width),
even if inoperable.
e. The maximum dimensions for glass panes are 60” vertical by 36” horizontal.
f. Window panes shall be recessed behind their FACADE surface a minimum of three inches, except for
BAY WINDOWs and SHOPFRONTs.
g. Snap-in MULLIONs and MUNTINs are permitted but not considered in any proportion
calculation/ measurement.
2. Upper-Story Windows:
a. Windows may be double-hung, single-hung, hopper, awning, or casement windows.
b. Fixed windows are permitted only for office use buildings.
c. Egress windows may be installed as required by the applicable building code.
3. Doors:
a. Double-height entryways (those that span more than one STORY) shall not be permitted.
b. Urban General and Urban Storefront FACADE doors shall not be recessed more than three feet
behind their FACADE/SHOPFRONT and, in any case, shall have a clear view and path to a 45-degree
angle past the perpendicular from each side of the door into the STREET-SPACE.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 46
607. Signage
A. Applicability
Where clearly visible from the STREET-SPACE.
B. Intent
Signs along commercial frontages should be clear, informative to the public and
durable. Signs should be scaled and detailed for this mixed-use, pedestrianoriented
area and not for high speed automobile traffic. Signage that is glaring or too
large creates distraction, intrudes into or lessens the urban experience, and creates
visual clutter. The substitution clause in Section 4.15.C of the Regulations
applies to the Gateway Districts as well.
The illustrations and statements of subsection B. Intent, are advisory only. Refer to
the Code standards on the following page for the specific prescriptions of this section.
Neon sign, within the building envelope
Window, blade, and awning signs
Parapet sign
Wall sign
Blade sign
Wall sign
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
4
47
C. General Design and Materials
1. Wall signs are permitted within the area between the second STORY floor line and the FIRST FLOOR ceiling,
within a horizontal band not to exceed three feet in height. In no case may this band be higher than 24 feet or
lower than 12 feet above the adjacent sidewalk.
2. Letters may not exceed 24 inches in height or width and 2 inches in relief. Signs may not come closer than two
feet to an adjacent common lot line.
3. Company logos may be placed within the horizontal sign band or placed or painted within GROUND STORY
and SHOPFRONT windows.
4. A single masonry or bronze plaque bearing an owner’s or building’s name may be placed in the building’s cornice/
parapet wall or under the eaves, and above the upper STORY windows. Any such plaque shall be no larger than a
rectangle of 18 square feet in size. Company logos or names in this position shall not be larger than a rectangle of
eight square feet in size.
5. Blade signs and marquee signs are permitted. (Not more than two feet by three feet, vertical or horizontal
with a minimum nine feet CLEAR HEIGHT above the sidewalk) may be hung within the permitted wall sign
area, perpendicular to the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE or from a GROUND STORY overhang or awning.
6. Prohibited Signs: Billboards, free-standing pole signs, monument signs, any kind of animation, and roof signs are
prohibited. No internally lit, flashing, traveling, animated, or intermittent lighting may be mounted on the
exterior of any building whether such lighting is of temporary or long-term duration (they are allowed within the
building behind the window glass, in the Urban General and Urban Storefront.) Portable or wheeled signs and
advertising devices located outside any building shall not be permitted, pursuant to City regulations (excepting as
provided in this Code for the DOORYARD area). Signs painted on FACADEs are prohibited (excepting those
existing prior to February 2015) but are permitted, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator, on
the other exterior walls (side, rear, and courtyard elevations).
7. Temporary Sandwich Boards - shall not exceed 12 square feet on each face. Signs may occupy the DOORYARD
area only and shall not occupy the CLEAR SIDEWALK line, and must be removed when the business they
advertise is closed.
D. Awnings Overhangs
1. Awning overhangs shall have a minimum of ten feet CLEAR HEIGHT above the sidewalk and be minimum of five
feet deep, measured from the FACADE. The maximum depth is to back-of-curb or the TREE LAWN edge,
whichever is less.
2. Only the following materials are permitted: canvas or equivalent (no shiny or reflective materials), metal or glass.
3. Internal illumination through the awning or overhang is not permitted.
4. Lettering on awnings shall be limited to 6 inches in height on the outside edge/vertical face of the awning.
5. One-quarter cylinder configurations are not permitted.
The illustrations below are advisory only.
Wall sign Blade sign Awning sign Awning and wall signs
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 48
608. Lighting & Mechanical Equipment
A. Applicability
District wide.
B. Intent
Appropriate lighting is desirable for night-time visibility, crime deterrence, and
decoration. However, lighting that is too bright or intense creates glare, hinders
night vision, and creates light pollution. Every attempt should be made to
preserve the ambiance of the night by applying the appropriate fixtures in the
correct locations – pedestrian-scaled STREETLIGHTs should occur along all streets
as per the City Street-lighting Regulation. “Cobra-head” highway-type
fixtures should only occur at intersections when absolutely necessary. All
materials and equipment chosen for lighting fixtures should be durable to age
well without demanding maintenance requirements.
Mechanical equipment is generally any heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
(HVAC) or electrical machinery but also includes air compressors, hoods,
mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and telephone
company transformers, meters or boxes, garbage cans, storage tanks, and similar
elements. These elements should not be located in any public areas, be visible
from the street, or detract/interfere with the pedestrian space.
The illustrations and statements of subsection B. Intent, are advisory only. Refer to
the Code standards on the following page for the specific prescriptions of this section.
The illustrations below are examples of
mechanical equipment arrangements
that are only acceptable away from
and/or not visible from a STREET-SPACE
(e.g. within an COMMON DRIVE or
Not permitted, visible from the STREET-SPACE
Not permitted within the STREET-SPACE
Street light with banner Pedestrian-oriented street lights
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
Not permitted within the STREET-SPACE
49
C. Lighting
1. STREETLIGHTs and STREET TREE placement should be coordinated by the Department of Public
Works. STREETLIGHTs should be located between 9 feet and 16 feet above grade with a maximum average
spacing (per BLOCK FACE) of 70 feet on center on General Urban and General Storefront frontages, and 85 feet
on Townhouse/ Small Apartment and Detached frontages along the STREET TREE alignment line on each side
of the
STREET-SPACE (unless otherwise indicated on the REGULATING PLAN). STREETLIGHT and STREET TREE
placement should be coordinated and should sit no closer than 10 feet.
2. At the building FACADE, exterior lights (maximum 100-watt incandescent or equivalent lumens) shall be
mounted between 8 feet and 12 feet above the adjacent sidewalk. These fixtures shall illuminate the
DOORYARD and CLEAR SIDEWALK area, and shall be shielded or aimed in such a way that they do not direct
light upward, or out of the Gateway District.
3. All lots with COMMON DRIVEs shall have lighting fixtures within five feet of the COMMON DRIVE. These fixtures
shall illuminate the COMMON DRIVE, be between 9 and 16 feet in height, and not cause glare in adjacent lots.
4. Lighting elements shall be specified to proscribe those that cast a clearly/perceptively unnatural spectrum of
light (such as low pressure sodium). LED, metal halide, or halogen elements with a spectrum of light more
perceptively “natural” are preferred. HID or fluorescent lights (excepting compact fluorescent bulbs that screw into
standard sockets) shall not be used on the exterior of buildings. These standards may be updated by the Zoning
Administrator as technologies advance and produce additional EQUIVALENT OR BETTER lighting elements.
5. Floodlights or directional lights (maximum 100-watt incandescent or equivalent) may be used to illuminate
COMMON DRIVEs, parking garages and working (maintenance) areas, but shall be shielded or aimed in such a
way that they do not shine into other lots, the STREET-SPACE, or direct light out of the Gateway District.
6. Flood or uplighting may not be used to illuminate private building walls. Accent lighting may be permitted on
civic use buildings or monuments, to highlight architectural features (such as church steeples or courthouse
domes).
7. Site lighting shall be of a design, height and location so as to illuminate only the lot. An exterior lighting plan shall
be approved as consistent with these standards by the Zoning Administrator.
8. Flashing, traveling, animated, or intermittent lighting shall not be mounted on the exterior of any building whether
such lighting is of temporary or long-term duration.
9. Lighting for parking garages shall consider general Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
intent.
10. Temporary (per City regulations) Holiday Lighting is exempt from these regulations.
D. Mechanical Equipment
1. The following shall be placed behind and away from any REQUIRED BUILDING LINE, may not be stored or
located within any STREET-SPACE, and shall be screened from view from the STREET-SPACE: air compressors,
mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and telephone company transformers,
meters or boxes, garbage cans, storage tanks, and similar equipment.
2. The following shall be screened from pedestrian-level view from the STREET-SPACE: air compressors,
mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, garbage cans, storage tanks, and similar equipment.
3. Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any REQUIRED BUILDING LINE and be
screened from view from the STREET-SPACE.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 50
this page intentionally blank
Appendix B Gateway
51 Districts FBC
Part 7. Parking and Loading Standards
701. Intent
These Gateway District standards are intended to:
A. Enable people to conveniently park and access a variety of commercial,
residential, and civic enterprises in pedestrian friendly environments by
encouraging shared parking.
B. Reduce fragmented, uncoordinated, inefficient, reserved single-purpose parking.
C. Avoid adverse parking impacts on neighborhoods adjacent to redevelopment
areas.
D. Maximize on-street parking.
E. Provide flexibility for redevelopment of small sites and for the preservation
of historic buildings.
F. Increase visibility and accessibility of public parking.
702. Minimum Parking Requirements
A. See Section 4.12.C in the Regulations for minimum parking requirements.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 52
703. Special Parking Standards
A. Joint Parking
Sites abutting one another shall physically connect their surface parking areas at
the lot line to create connecting drive aisles. This may be accomplished using
COMMON DRIVES. Where such surface parking areas lie within 50 feet of one
another, a mutual access easement acceptable to the Zoning Administrator shall be
executed. Parking lot configurations in place prior to adoption of this Code are
exempt from this requirement.
B. Tandem Parking
1. Tandem parking is only allowed for:
a. Single-family residential projects; and
b. Multifamily projects and the residential component of mixed-use
projects.
2. Two parking spaces in tandem shall have a combined minimum dimension
of 9 feet in width by 34 feet in length.
3. Up to 75 percent of the total required off-street parking spaces provided may
incorporate tandem parking.
4. Tandem spaces shall be assigned to the same dwelling unit. Tandem parking
shall not be used to provide guest parking.
704. Surface Parking Lot Plantings for New Development
A. The edge of any surface parking lot adjacent to a STREET-SPACE shall be
planted with canopy shade trees suited to USDA Zone 4, placed at an average
distance not to exceed 30 feet on center and aligned parallel three to seven
feet behind the RBL/STREET WALL.
B. The edge of any surface parking lot adjacent to residential (detached) lots
shall comply with Part 4, BUILDING FORM STANDARDS, D. Neighborhood
Manners.
705. Loading Facilities
A. No loading facilities are required.
B. Where loading facilities are provided, they shall be located to the
COMMON DRIVE side of buildings.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 53
this page intentionally blank
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
54
Part 8. Building Functions
801. General Provisions
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses by building form standard frontage are shown in Section 802.
The categories in the use table are listed in Section 803. In addition the uses
under the COMMERCE category are listed in Table 2.4 of the Regulations.
B. Use Determination
1. Administrator Responsibility: The Zoning Administrator is responsible
for categorizing all uses. If a proposed use is not listed in a use category,
but can be said to be reasonably similar in impact on the Gateway
District to a listed use, the Zoning Administrator shall treat the
proposed use as a permitted use under that category. If a proposed use is
not listed in a use category, and is fundamentally different from any other
listed use, the use shall be prohibited.
2. Uses Not Specifically Listed: When determining whether a proposed use
is similar to a use listed in Section 803, the Zoning Administrator shall
consider the following criteria:
a. The actual or projected characteristics of the proposed activity in
relationship to the stated characteristics of each use.
b. Types of vehicles used and their parking and or loading
requirements.
c. The likely impact on surrounding properties.
d. The intent of the Gateway District.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 55
BUILDING FORM STANDARD (BFS)
Urban
General
Urban
Storefront
Townhouse/
Small Apt
Detached
USE CATEGORY
Ground Story
Upper Story
Ground Story
Upper Story
Ground Story
Upper Story
All Stories
Additional
Regulations
RESIDENTIAL Household Living ? ¦ ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sec. 804.B.1-2
Group Living ? ? ? ? ?
COMMERCE See Table 2.4 in the Regulations Sec. 804
CIVIC See Part 9. Definitions ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sec. 804.C.
Key: ¦= Permitted ?= Additional Regulations Apply Blank Cell = Not Permitted
802. Use Table
This table identifies the uses allowed in the respective BFS (building form standard) frontages.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 56
803. Use Categories
A. Residential Use Categories
1. Household Living
One-, two-, and three-family dwellings
Multi-family dwellings
Home Occupation
Accessory Dwelling (subject to Section 5.1 of the Regulations)
Detached Cottage (in an existing structure only as of date of adoption
of this Code)
2. Group Living
Assisted Living & Residential Care Homes
Family Care Home
Group Home
B. Commerce Use Categories
1. These include RETAIL SALES and Service as referenced throughout
the Code.
2. Refer to Table 2.4 in the Regulations.
C. Civic Use Category
1. See Part 9. Definitions: Civic Use
2. College, community college, university
3. Museum, library, auditorium, arena
4. Places of worship including church, mosque, synagogue, temple
5. Police, fire, EMS station, substation
6. Public or private (K-12) school
7. Neighborhood arts center, Community Center or similar community
facility (public)
8. Farmers Market
9. Transit Center
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 57
804. Development and Performance Standards
A. General
1. All permitted uses shall meet the Section 402. General Provisions and
those standards specified in the applicable individual building form
standard pages.
2. No civic, or COMMERCE use is permitted above a residential use.
3. Businesses providing drive-up services shall not have a drive-through
lane or service window that abuts or faces a STREET-SPACE.
4. No smoke, radiation, vibration or concussion, heat or glare shall be
produced that is perceptible outside a building, and no dust, fly ash or
gas that is toxic, caustic or obviously injurious to humans or property
shall be produced.
5. Communication antennas may be installed between 45 and 80 feet of
the RBL on UG and US buildings that are at least 3 stories, provided
that the antenna increases the structure height by no more than 20 feet,
subject to receiving a Certificate of Conformity. Associated equipment
may be permitted on the roof so long as it is screened from view in
accordance with Part 6. Architectural Standards. Ground mounted
equipment is subject to the performance standards outlined in Part 6.
Architectural Standards.
B. Residential
1. See the Urban General BFS for configuration requirements for
GROUND STORY residential uses.
2. A lobby serving an upper STORY residential use is permitted on
the GROUND STORY of an Urban Storefront site.
3. Residential uses are not permitted within the required minimum depth
for the SHOPFRONT space in an Urban Storefront site.
C. Civic
Buildings that house civic uses located on civic sites specifically designated on
the REGULATING PLAN are not subject to Part 4. BUILDING FORM
STANDARDS, or Part 6. Architectural Standards.
D. Office
Office uses are permitted within the required minimum depth for the
SHOPFRONT space in an Urban Storefront site.
E. Lodging Establishment
1. GROUND STORY guest rooms shall meet the configuration standards
for GROUND STORY residential uses as specified in the Urban
General BFS.
2. A lobby serving an upper STORY lodging establishment is permitted
on the GROUND STORY of any Urban Storefront site.
3. For detached frontages, only Bed & Breakfast types are permitted.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 58
F. Restaurant/Bar, Retail Sales
1. Outdoor eating areas for eating/drinking establishments shall be allowed on the
public sidewalk in Urban General and/or Urban Storefront frontages, subject to:
a. the provision of a minimum clear width of five (5) feet within the clear
walkway area; and
b. a joint use of R.O.W. agreement with the City.
2. An eating/drinking establishment or retail use is permitted in the second STORY of
a Urban Storefront or Urban General site provided it is an extension equal to or less
than the area of the same GROUND STORY use.
3. The sale and consumption of cereal malt beverages and alcoholic liquor shall be
subject to City and State liquor licensing requirements.
4. Clubs and drinking establishments are required to obtain a Conditional Use
approval if the walls of the facility are within 100 feet of a residential zoned property
which is not included in the Gateway District.
5. No merchandise (including motorcycles, scooters, and automotives) may be left
within the streetspace when the business is not open.
G. Gas Station/Vehicle Repair
A gas station may be permitted, subject to the following:
1. The subject property shall be located at least 200 feet from any lot on which a
school, outdoor playground, library, or hospital is located;
2. The use shall not include the display and rental of cargo trailers, trucks, or similar
uses;
3. The storage or junking of wrecked motor vehicles (whether capable of movement or
not) is prohibited;
4. Repair service shall be completed within one week after the vehicle is left for service.
Discarded parts resulting from any work shall be removed promptly from the
premises. Automotive replacement parts and accessories shall be stored inside the
main structure;
5. Upon the abandonment of a gas station, the use shall terminate and all structures
exclusively used in the business (including underground storage tanks), except
buildings, shall be removed by the owner of the property.
H. Affordable Housing for Bonus Provision (see 402.F.1)
1. The units must remain affordable for at least 20 years.
2. Applicants must demonstrate that the housing costs will be affordable to occupants
whose gross annual household income falls within 80 to 120% of the Area Median
Household Income.
a. Applicants must provide the total annual cost of the housing as rent or expected
mortgage payment with condominium association fees, and utilities.
b. Applicants must demonstrate that the housing costs will be no greater than 30%
of 80 to 120% of the Area Median Household Income.
3. These affordability provisions shall be evidenced by deed restriction and recorded in
the City Land Records. Draft documents must be submitted to the City with the
Application for review.
4. An audit must be submitted to the City on a two year basis verifying that the units
are being maintained in accordance with these provisions.
5. The Certificate of Occupancy will be contingent upon perpetual affordability as
defined herein. The Zoning Administrator has the authority to revoke the
Certificate of Occupancy for the affordable units if these affordability requirements
are not adhered to.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 59
This page intentionally left blank.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 60
Part 9. Definitions
901. Defined Terms
The following terms are defined for the purpose of this Code. Terms not
defined here may be defined elsewhere in the City of Winooski Zoning
Ordinance.
In such case, the definition contained in the Zoning Ordinance shall be used.
Certain terms in this Code are used in very specific ways, often excluding some
of the meanings of common usage. Where there is an apparent conflict or
contradiction, the definition herein shall prevail.
Accessory Unit. A building or addition for living purposes that is not the primary structure
or principal dwelling unit on a lot, that can be used as additional residential or home
occupation space.
Attic Story. Habitable space situated within the structure of a pitched roof and above the
uppermost STORY. They are permitted for all BFS sites and do not count against
the maximum STORY height or ultimate height limits of their BFS.
Balcony. An exterior platform attached to the upper floors of the building FACADE
(forward of the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE).
Bay Window. Generally, a U-shaped enclosure extending the interior space of the building
outward of the FACADE/REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (along its STREET-SPACE
side).
Block. An increment of land comprised of lots, COMMON DRIVEs and tracts
circumscribed and not traversed by streets (PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYs excepted).
BLOCKs shall be measured at the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE (RBL).
Block Corner. The outside corner of a BLOCK at the intersection of any two STREETSPACEs
(the RBLs). Inside corners, where the resulting angle formed by the BLOCK
FACE is less than 180 degrees (concave) are not considered BLOCK CORNERs for the
purposes of this Code.
Block Face. The outside/public side of the BLOCK, coincident with the RBL, between
2
BLOCK CORNERs.
Bonus Story. The full STORY permitted in exchange for the provision of a specifically
defined public benefit, such as affordable housing. where an Urban General or Urban
Storefront frontage property has been approved by the City as eligible.
Buildable Area. The area of the lot that building(s) may occupy, which includes the area
of the lot behind the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE as designated by the building
form standard and the REGULATING PLAN. The BUILDABLE sets the limits
of the building footprint now and in the future—any additions shall be within the
specified BUILDABLE.
Building Corner. The outside corner of a building where the primary building mass is
within an angle less than 180 degrees. Inside corners, where the exterior space of the
building mass forms an angle of more than 180 degrees are not considered
BUILDING CORNERs for the purposes of this Code.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 61
Building Form Standards (BFS). The part of this Code that establishes basic parameters
regulating building form, including the envelope (in three dimensions), placement and
certain permitted/required building elements, such as SHOPFRONTs, balconies,
and STREET WALLs. The BUILDING FORM STANDARDS establish both the
boundaries within which things may be done and specific things that must be done.
Building Face. See FACADE.
Chamfered Corner. A cut corner (beveled edge), generally at an even 45 degree angle. For
purposes of the Gateway District, this refers to an allowance in the Building Form
Standard for Urban General frontages to have such a ‘cut corner’ extending as far as 8ft
away from a BLOCK CORNER.
Civic Green or Square. A public open space designated on the REGULATING PLAN.
The term SQUARE is generally used to describe spaces that have more paved surface
area. The term CIVIC GREEN is generally used to describe a formally configured small
public lawn or park that is primarily unpaved. CIVIC GREENs and SQUAREs do not
include active
recreation structures such as ballfields and courts. See Part 5. Urban Space Standards for
the specific controls on SQUAREs and CIVIC GREENs.
Civic Use Building. Those buildings that house strictly civic uses or historically and
urbanistically significant structures designated on the REGULATING PLAN. Civic use
buildings and publicly-owned public art are not subject to the building form
standard prescriptions of this Code. See also Use, Civic.
Clear Height. Within a structure, the distance between the floor and ceiling. For entrances
and other external building features, the unobstructed distance from the ground to the
bottom of the lowest element above.
Clear Sidewalk. The portion of the sidewalk within a STREET-SPACE that shall remain
clear of obstructions and allow public passage. The CLEAR SIDEWALK width is
specified in the Street Type Specifications.
Clearly Visible from the Street-Space. Many requirements of this Code apply only where
the subject is “CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.” (Note that the
definition of STREET-SPACE includes SQUAREs, CIVIC GREENs, PEDESTRIAN
PATHWAYs, parks, and all public space except COMMON DRIVEs and
COMMON DRIVEs.) A building element more than 40 feet from a REQUIRED
BUILDING LINE or STREET-SPACE is by definition not CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM
THE STREET-SPACE (such as elements facing a common lot line). Also, common
or party walls are by definition not CLEARLY VISIBLE FROM THE STREET-SPACE.
This does not exempt vehicle parking lots or parking structures from any
building form standard requirements.
Commerce. See Use, COMMERCE.
Common Drive. The public right-of-way or easement for vehicles and pedestrians within a
BLOCK that provides access to the rear or side of properties, vehicle parking (e.g.,
spaces and/or garages), utility meters, recycling containers, and garbage bins.
Common Lot Lines. Lot lines shared by adjacent private lots.
Comparative Pedestrian Crossing. The measured distance, shown on the Street Type
Specifications, that a pedestrian would be within an automobile travel lane (or turning
movement) while crossing a street. A crossing time is calculated based on a pedestrian
speed of 3.7 feet per second (a generally accepted urban average). This distance/time
is calculated to provide a relative gauge of pedestrian comfort level in crossing the
street.
Appendix B Gateway
62 Districts FBC
Complete and Discrete Facade Composition. The FACADE articulation that breaks
down the apparent scale of a large building into smaller perceived pieces. The
intent of such a FACADE composition is to provide ‘human scale’ for the
STREET-SPACE. The objective requirements of the COMPLETE AND DISCRETE
FACADE COMPOSITION section of the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS regulate
and ensure such scalar break- down.
Corner Lot. A lot in which one side lot line is adjacent to a street or STREET-SPACE.
Special building placement, fencing and landscape requirements may apply.
Covered Sidewalk. A roofed or built structure attached to the FACADE and extending
beyond the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE and over the sidewalk or SQUARE, open
to the STREET-SPACE except for supporting columns, piers, or arches. (See
BUILDING FORM STANDARDS for complete specifications.)
Detached Frontage Building. Building form and functions resulting from/as determined by
the Detached building form standard as indicated on the REGULATING PLAN.
Dooryard. The area within the STREET-SPACE between the FACADE of the building
(generally the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE) and the clear walkway area of the
sidewalk. The DOORYARD area is designated in the Street Type Specifications.
Dormers. Roofed ancillary structures with windows providing light and air to an
ATTIC STORY.
Eave Height. EAVE HEIGHT shall be measured at the bottom of the top layer of
roofing material at its outermost point from the building wall.
English Basement. A unit in a habitable floor level below the FIRST FLOOR in a
townhouse configuration, that is partially above and below grade, with direct
STREET-SPACE access. An ENGLISH BASEMENT unit is considered an ACCESSORY
UNIT.
Equivalent or Better. A building material or construction technique that has been
determined, by the Zoning Administrator, to be at least equal to, in appearance,
durability, etc., or surpassing those expressly permitted herein.
Facade (Building Face). The building elevation facing the STREET-SPACE or
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE. Building walls facing private interior courts,
COMMON LOT LINES, and COMMON DRIVEs are not FACADEs.
Facade Composition. The arrangement and proportion of materials and building
elements (windows, doors, columns, pilasters, bays, etc.) on a given FACADE.
Fenestration. Openings in the building wall, including windows and doors, allowing light
and views between interior (private realm) and exterior (public realm) and/or streetspace.
First Floor. See GROUND STORY.
Front Porch. The ground floor platform attached to the FACADE or REQUIRED
BUILDING LINE side of the main building.
Front Yard. An open (unpaved) space required by certain BUILDING FORM
STANDARDS extending across the entire width of the lot between the
FACADE and the clear walkway. This area is contiguous with the STREETSPACE,
and includes any FRONT PORCH.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 63
Front Yard Fence. The wood (picket), wrought iron fence, or masonry wall located along
and surrounding the FRONT YARD. (For placement, height and gate specifications, see
the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS.)
Garage Entry. An opening (with curb cut) in the building FACADE and/or STREET WALL where
vehicles may enter into a parking structure in the BLOCK interior for general parking
and business servicing.
Garden Wall. A wall defining a property line or delineating a private area. (For placement,
height and gate specifications, see the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS.) A GARDEN
WALL may serve as a FRONT YARD fence.
Ground Story. The first habitable level of a building at or above grade. The next STORY
above the GROUND STORY is the second floor or STORY.
Half Story. Habitable space, with a limited footprint, that is situated above the uppermost full
STORY.
Lot Building Limit (LBL). A line or plane indicated on the REGULATING PLAN that extends
vertically beyond which no building shall be placed (unless otherwise specified in this
code).
Mezzanine. An intermediate level between the GROUND STORY and the second STORY. It
may be in the form of a platform, podium, or wide BALCONY, with uses limited to a
continuation of the GROUND STORY uses.
Mullion. A vertical or horizontal element that forms a division between units of a window, or
door. When dividing adjacent window units, its purpose is as a rigid support to the glazing
(glass panes) of the window.
Muntin. A strip of wood, metal, or synthetic material separating and holding panes of glass in a
window.
Neighborhood Manners. A set of rules in this Code designed to ensure a positive and
complementary relationship between the new and more intense redevelopment under this
Code and existing residential zoning districts abutting the Urban Storefront and/or Urban
General frontages.
Open Area. See PRIVATE OPEN AREA.
Parking Setback Line. A line or plane indicated on the REGULATING PLAN which extends
vertically up from the GROUND STORY floor level (unless otherwise noted on the
REGULATING PLAN or BFS) and is generally parallel to the REQUIRED BUILDING
LINE. The PARKING SETBACK LINE is a permissive minimum distance from the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE and parking may be placed anywhere within the lot
behind this line, except where otherwise specified in this Code.
Pedestrian Pathway. An interconnecting paved way providing pedestrian and bicycle
passage through BLOCKs running from a STREET-SPACE to another STREETSPACE,
an COMMON DRIVE or an interior BLOCK parking area. The area within a
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY shall be a public access easement or public right-of-way.
Plaza. See CIVIC GREEN.
Privacy Fence. An opaque fence made of wood or masonry (not chain link or any other type of
rolled fence) along COMMON DRIVEs, COMMON DRIVEs, PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYs,
and COMMON LOT LINES (where behind the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE). See
the BUILDING FORM STANDARDS for height and placement specifications.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 64
Private Open Area. An occupiable area within the BUILDABLE and generally behind the
PARKING SETBACK LINE, accessible only to occupants of the particular building or
site, and (primarily) open to the sky. Additional specifications for the PRIVATE OPEN
AREA may be included in each building form standard. PRIVATE OPEN AREA
shall not be built-upon, used to satisfy minimum stormwater Best Management
Practice area (if thereby excluding active tenant use), parked or driven upon (except for
emergency access).
Regulating Plan. The implementing site plan for the development of the Gateway District
under this Code. REGULATING PLANs allocate the BUILDING FORM
STANDARDS and street types and provide specific information for the disposition of
each building site. The REGULATING PLAN also shows how each site relates to
adjacent STREET-SPACEs, the overall district, and the surrounding neighborhoods.
Required Building Line (RBL). A line or plane indicated on the REGULATING
PLAN, defining the STREET FRONTAGE which extends vertically and generally
parallel to the street, at which the building FACADE shall be placed. This is a
requirement, not a
permissive minimum. The minimum length and height of FACADE that is required at the
RBL is shown on the appropriate building form standard.
Shown on the REGULATING PLAN as an absolute line, it incorporates an area (or depth)
of 24 inches offset into the BUILDABLE for all BFS frontages except Detached. This is to
allow for jogs, FACADE articulation, etc. For Detached frontages the RBL incorporates
an offset area (or depth) of 10 feet.
Sidewing. The portion of a building extending along a common lot line toward the
COMMON DRIVE or rear of the lot.
Small Apartment Building. See TOWNHOUSE/SMALL APARTMENT
FRONTAGE BUILDING.
Square. See CIVIC GREEN.
Stoop. An entry platform on the FACADE of a building. (See the BUILDING
FORM STANDARDS for specifications.)
Shopfront. That portion of the GROUND STORY FACADE intended for marketing
or merchandising of COMMERCE uses and allowing visibility between the sidewalk
and the interior space.
Story (Story Height). That space within a building and above grade that is situated
between one floor level and the floor level next above, or if there is no floor above, the
ceiling above. STORY height parameters are as specified by the appropriate
building form standard.
Street Frontage. That portion of the lot or building that is coincident with the
REQUIRED BUILDING LINE as required by this Code.
Streetlight. A luminaire installed on both sides of the STREET-SPACE, along the
STREET TREE alignment line or median centerline, unless otherwise
designated in this code, with the design criteria in the Gateway District giving equal
weight to the lighting of the pedestrian areas and the automobile areas.
Street-Space. All space between fronting REQUIRED BUILDING LINEs (streets,
SQUAREs, PLAZAs, PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYs, CIVIC GREENs, sidewalks,
parks)—including any transit service operator passenger platform—but not
garage entries or COMMON DRIVEs.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 65
Street Tree. A tree located in the STREET-SPACE (and required per this code) and listed in
the STREET TREE List located in Part 5. Urban Space Standards that is of a proven hardy
and drought tolerant species and large enough to form a canopy with sufficient clear
trunk to allow traffic to pass under unimpeded.
Street Tree Alignment Line. A line along which STREET TREEs shall be planted
and STREETLIGHTs and other such infrastructure are to be placed. It is generally
parallel with the STREET-SPACE and mid-way between the back-of-curb and the
CLEAR SIDEWALK.
Street Wall. A masonry wall set on the REQUIRED BUILDING LINE which assists in
the definition of the STREET-SPACE in the absence of a building. See the
BUILDING FORM STANDARDS for height and gate specifications.
Townhouse/Small Apartment Frontage Building. Building form and functions resulting
from/as determined by the Townhouse/SMALL APARTMENT BUILDING form
standard indicated on the REGULATING PLAN.
Tree Lawn (Tree Trench). A continuous strip of soil area—typically covered with grass,
other vegetation, bridging pavement, or sometimes porous pavers—located between the
back of curb and the CLEAR SIDEWALK area, and used for planting STREET
TREEs and configured to foster healthy STREET TREE root systems. TREE LAWN
dimensions are specified in the Street Type Specifications and in Part 5. Urban Space
Standards.
Ultimate Building Height. A height limit for structures in the Gateway District, measured
from the average fronting sidewalk elevation to the top of the FACADE wall plate.
Urban General Frontage Building. Building form and functions resulting from/as determined
by the Urban General building form standard as indicated on the REGULATING
PLAN.
Urban Storefront Frontage Building. Building form and functions resulting from/as
determined by the Urban Storefront building form standard as indicated on the
REGULATING PLAN.
Use, Civic. For the purpose of this Code, civic uses include: meeting halls; libraries; schools;
police and fire stations; post offices (retail operations only, no primary distribution
facilities); places of worship; museums; auditorium; arena; transit centers; community
center; farmers market; government functions open for the public; and, other similar
community uses. Public ownership alone does not constitute civic use.
Use, Commerce. For the purpose of this Code, COMMERCE uses shall be considered to
encompass all of the permitted and conditional uses included under the "commercial
uses" category in Table 2.4 of the Regulations, and all of the civic uses defined
above, except transit centers.
Use, Residential. Residential uses shall be considered to encompass all of the uses listed
in Section 803.A of this Code.
Use, Retail. Includes the following:
Retail Service. Establishments providing services, as opposed to products, to the general
public, including restaurants, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and insurance, travel
agencies, health and educational services, and galleries; as well as personal services as
defined in the Regulations.
Retail Sales. Establishments wherein the primary use is the sale of merchandise for use or
consumption by the immediate purchaser.
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC
66
this page intentionally blank
Appendix B Gateway
Districts FBC 67
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations
Appendix C – Downtown Core Regulations
The regulations for the Downtown Core are included exactly as they existed prior to the adoption of the
Unified Land Use & Development Regulations, therefore the text includes references to sections of the
Zoning Ordinance, that are now relocated in the Unified Land Use & Development Regulations. This list
of references is intended to establish the correct references within the Unified Land Use & Development
Regulations. All references to interim regulations predating the current final Unified Land Use &
Development Regulations are historic.
1. Page 1 – “Article II: Definitions” is now “Article IX Definitions”
2. Page 2 – “Article III: Establishment of Districts…” is now “Article II Zoning Districts”
3. Page 2 – “Article V, Commercial, 5.300” is now “Article II, Section 2.11”
4. Page 2 – 5 – All sections 5.300 to 5.701 exist in this Appendix only and stand on their own.
5. Page 5 – “Article VII, Overlay Districts” – all overlay districts have been eliminated so this is a
moot point.
6. Page 5 – “Article VIII, Section 8.200” is now “Article VI, Section 6.5”
7. Page 5 – “Article VIII, Section 8.400: Non-Conforming Uses and Structures” is now “Article IV,
Section 4.9”
8. Page 6 – Article VIII, Section 8.100: Sign Regulations” is now “Article IV, Section 4.14”
9. Page 6 – “Article IX, Performance Standards, Parking”
a. 9.301 is “Off-Street Parking Allocation” is now Article IV, Section 4.12.C.1
b. 9.303.b, f and g is under “Other Off-Street Parking Requirements” – frontyard setback
(now Article IV, Section 4.12.E.1), location (now Article IV, Section 4.12.C.2.c) and shared
use (now Article IV, Section 4.12.C.2.a)
10. Page 7 – “Article IX, Performance Standards, Off-Street Loading Requirements” is now “Article
IV, Section 4.12.F”
11. Page 7 - “Article IX, Performance Standards, Section 9.1600 Buffer Areas” is now “Article IV,
Section 4.7.C.2”
12. Page 7 & 8 – “Article X, Admin & Enforcement, Section 11.201” is now “Article VI, Section 6.9”
Winooski Unified Land Use & Development Regulations – Appendix C: Downtown Core District
















