HEALTH ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF WILLISTON
RELATING TO INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
SECTION I PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted under V.S.A. Title 18 Section 613, and amended under
V.S.A. Title 24, Chapter 102 (On-site Sewage Systems). The purpose of this
ordinance is to:
1. prevent the creation of health hazards;
2. prevent surfacing sewage; the contamination of drinking water, ground
water, and surface water;
3. insure adequate drainage related to the proper functioning of sewage
disposal; and
4. insure that facilities are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in a
manner which will promote sanitary and healthful conditions.
SECTION 11. APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE
1. No individual, group or community on-site disposal system shall be built,
altered or used except in accordance with this ordinance, and only after a
permit has been issued by the Health Officer or his agent.
Exceptions:
a. When a minor modification to an existing system is proposed, the
legislative body or its agent may waive the permit requirement on a
case by case basis.
b. The legislative body or its agent shall approve proposed
modifications to systems determined to be a health hazard or
nuisance when satisfied that the modifications will meet the
performance standards in Section I.
2. No single family dwelling served by a sewage disposal system shall be
altered in any way so as to increase the residential capacity of the structure
unless the legislative body or its agent determines that the existing sewage
disposal system has an adequate capacity or a Sewage Disposal Construction
Permit has been issued to increase the capacity of such system.
3. If public sewer becomes available, an existing or proposed public or private
building within two hundred (200) feet of the sewer line shall be required to
discontinue present system of sewage disposal (if an existing building) and
connect to such line in the manner prescribed by the Town of Williston
Sewer Ordinance.
4. In case of any other applicable regulation, bylaw, ordinance or statute which
differs from this ordinance, the more strict shall apply.
SECTION III. APPLICAION PRODEDURE
1. Disposal System Construction permit
Any person who intends to build, replace or alter a sewage disposal system shall
submit an application for a Disposal System Construction Permit to the legislative
body or its agent. The application shall contain soil and site information as required
by Vermont Health Regulations (see Definitions) and a sewage disposal system
design in accord with the design specifications in the Vermont Health Regulations.
Technical information for the application shall be prepared by an On-Site Sanitary
Specialist of the Vermont Association of Conservation Districts, Inc; a qualified
professional Civil or Sanitary Engineer or a State certified site technician subject to
approval of the town Health Officer.
Prior to submitting an application for a public building, group or community on-site
disposal system permit, the individual should contact the legislative body or its
agent so that they may present during the site evaluation.
The legislative body may require that application for public buildings be reviewed
by a Consulting Engineer engaged by the town. If such a review is deemed
necessary, the cost shall be paid by the applicant.
The Construction Permit shall be granted or denied by the legislative body or its
agent. The permit shall become void if the disposal system is not completed within
two (2) years of date of issue. In cases where the proposed project requires a Zoning
Permit under provisions of the Town Zoning Bylaws, the Zoning Permit shall serve
as the Disposal System Construction Permit and may be issued only after the
legislative body or its agent has determined the sewage disposal design to be in
compliance with this ordinance.
2. Disposal System Use Permit
Any person who intends to build, replace or alter a sewage disposal system shall
submit an application for a Disposal System Construction Permit to the legislative
body or its agent. The application shall contain soil and site information as required
by Vermont Health Regulations (see Definitions) and a sewage disposal system
design in accord with the design specifications in the Vermont Health Regulations.
Technical information for the application shall be prepared by an On-Site Sanitary
Specialist of the Vermont Association of Conservation Districts, Inc; a qualified
professional Civil or Sanitary Engineer or a State certified technician subject to
approval of the town Health Officer.
Prior to submitting an application for a public building, group or community on-site
disposal system permit, the individual should contact the legislative body or its
agent so that they may be present during the site evaluation.
The Construction Permit shall be granted or denied by the legislative body and its
agent. The permit shall become void if the disposal system is not completed within
two(2) years of date of issue. In cases where the proposed project requires a Zoning
Permit under provisions of the Town Zoning Bylaws, the Zoning Permit shall serve
as the Disposal System Construction Permit and may be issued only after the
legislative body or its agent has determined the sewage disposal system design to be
in compliance with this ordinance.
2. Disposal System Use Permit
The On-Site Sewage Program shall submit a final inspection report on all approved
systems designed by the Program. All other approved systems shall receive a final
inspection by the legislative body or its agent. The inspection report shall certify
whether the disposal system has been installed as approved and, if not, what
deviations existed. Any variations from the approved design shall be noted in the
report. The legislative body or its agent may also inspect the system before it is
covered with soil. The legislative body or its agent shall issue a Disposal System
Use Permit when satisfied that the installed sewage system is in compliance with
this ordinance. In the case of projects requiring a Zoning Permit under provisions of
the Town Zoning Bylaws, the Zoning Occupancy Permit shall serve as the Disposal
System Use Permit.
SECTION IV. ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM & PERMITTED DEVIATIONS
1. Chemical toilets, privys, composing toilets and incineration toilets may be
approved on a case by case basis by the legislative body or its agent. If one of the
above toilets is used and soil conditions allow, the absorption of the associated
subsurface sewage disposal system may be reduced if sufficient area is available to
add to the leachfield in the event that conventional toilets are used to replace the
waterless toilets.
Full replacement area for a subsurface disposal field is also required. In allowing a
reduction of a subsurface disposal field, the local legislative body shall insure that
subsequent owners of the property are aware of the limitations of the reduced
disposal field and that the disposal area is increased to normal size prior to
installation of water-type toilets.
Reduction in the size of any mound system will not be permitted.
2. If a person wishes to use a sewage disposal system not in accord with this
ordinance, a proposed alternative system may be submitted to the local legislative
body for approval subject to review by the Town's professional engineer.
3. At the discretion of the local legislative body, and authorized in writing,
deviations from the design specifications in Sections 5-905 and 5-907 of the
Vermont Health Regulations may be allowed. Such deviations will only be allowed
if the minimum soil and site requirements and the performance standards of the
Vermont Health Regulations will be met.
SECTION V. APPEALS
Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the legislative body or its agent may
appeal that decision in writing to the local legislative body within thirty (30) days of
such decision. The local legislative body shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days
of such appeal and shall render a decision within fifteen (15) days after the close of
such hearing. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the local legislative body may
appeal that decision to Superior Court.
SECTION VI. ENFORCEMENT
Written Orders
1. If the legislative body or its authorized agent finds a person failing to
comply with this ordinance he may, in writing, order the person to comply with a
specific period of time.
2. A person who neglects or refuses to comply with a written order of the local
legislative body or its agent, may be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
Each week that a violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense (24
V.S.A., Section 1974)
3. Upon any neglect or refusal, the local legislative body shall prevent, remove
or destroy any unhealthful conditions or causes of sickness. Expenses incurred by
such action shall be recovered from the person whose legal duty it was to comply
with such order (18 V.S.A>, Section 609 (a).
Hindrance
Any person who attempts to hinder the work of the local legislative body or its
agent, shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense.
SECTION VII. SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected.
SECTION VIII. DEFINITIONS
Applicant: the person who owns the premises on which a sewage disposal
system will be constructed or altered.
Family: one or more persons living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the same
premises as a single housekeeping unit.
Local legislative Body: The Board of Selectmen
On-Site Sewage Disposal System: system for disposal of waste using soil as a
disposal medium, including a tank for collection of solids and a leach area for
liquids.
Permit: a written permit issued by the Legislative Body or other authorized
person.
Person: any institution, public or private corporation, individual, partnership,
or other entity.
Single Family Dwelling: a building used as living quarters for one family.
Vermont Health Regulations: Vermont Health Regulations Chapter 5, Sanitary
Engineering; Subchapter 10, Wastewater Treatment and Disposal - Individual On-
Site System: effective June 7, 1983, promulgated by the Vermont Department of
Health. There Regulations are incorporated into this ordinance by reference.
Public Building: All buildings except single family houses as defined in
Subchapter 4.02 of the State of Vermont Environmental Protection Rules.
APPROVED MAY 24, 1984
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE FOR HEALTH REGULATIONS
RELATING TO SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
Adopted May 24, 1984
This procedure is adopted by the authority granted in 18 V.S.A., 613 with approval
of the State Board of Health, and in accordance with Section 5-938 of the Vermont
Health Regulations, Chapter 5, Subchapter 10.
Technical Information
Technical information required in the application for Construction and Occupancy
Permits shall be prepared by a Sanitary Site Technician of the Vermont Association
of Conservation Districts, a qualified professional Civil or Sanitary Engineer or a
State certified Site Technician.
Permit Granting Authority
Technical information shall be reviewed and Construction and Occupancy Permits
shall be granted or denied by the Town Health Officer or his duly appointed agent.
Appeals
Applicants may appeal decisions of the Permit Granting Authority to the town
Board of Health.
Adopted 10/25/2004
Noise Control Ordinance
1. Authority: This ordinance is adopted under authority of 24 V.S.A. § 2291 and 24
V.S.A. chapters 59.
2. Purpose: This ordinance is intended to protect, preserve and promote the health,
safety, welfare, and peace and quiet for the citizens of the Town of Williston
through the reduction, control and prevention of noise. This ordinance establishes
controls that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary noises, which are physically
harmful or otherwise detrimental to the enjoyment of life, property and
maintenance of business.
3. Definitions
3.1. “Average sound level” – A sound level during a given period of time (e.g.
one hour) found by the general rule of combination of sound levels. Also
called equivalent sound level.
3.2. “Decibel” – Unit of measurement of the sound pressure level as prescribed
by the American National Standards Institute.
3.3. “Emergency” Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
3.4. “Emergency Work” Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
3.5. " Instantaneous maximum sound" means either a single pressure peak or a
single burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has duration of less than one
second.
3.6. “Plainly audible" means any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the
title of a song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The
detection of the rhythmic base component of the music is sufficient to
constitute a plainly audible sound.
3.7. "Property line" means either (a) the imaginary line including its vertical
extension that separates one parcel of property from another; (b) the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multidwelling
unit building; or (c) on a multi-use property, the interface
between the two portions of the property on which different categories of
activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 1
Adopted 10/25/2004
which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the property
line would be the interface between the residential area and the
commercial area).
3.8. “Receiving Property” – The location that is receiving the sound in
question.
3.9. “Residential Property” - Property used for human habitation or sleeping
3.10. “Sound level” – In decibels measured by a calibrated ANSI type I or type
II sound level meter, using “A” frequency weighting (expressed in dBA)
3.11. “Sound measurement standards” – Sound shall be measured in accordance
with standards specified by the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI)
3.12. “Unoccupied Lands” – Lands without permanent structures used for
human habitation or business.
3.13. “Unreasonable Noise” Any excessive or unusually loud sound which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensibilities within the
Town of Williston. Elements to be considered in determining whether
noise is excessive in a given situation include, but are not limited to, the
following: intensity of the noise, whether the noise is usual or unusual,
whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural, the intensity of the
ambient noise, the proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities, the zoning
district within which the noise emanates, the time of the day or night the
noise occurs, the duration of the noise, whether the noise is continuous or
intermittent, and/OR whether alternate methods are available to achieve
the objectives of the sound producing activity.
4. General Prohibitions
No person or persons shall make, cause to be made, assist in making or continue any
excessive, unnecessary, unreasonably loud noise or disturbance, which disturbs, destroys,
or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of others within the immediate vicinity
of the noise or disturbance. Without limitations, the commission of one or more of the
following acts, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be considered as a
noise disturbance and public nuisance, provided that the instrument, devices, vehicles or
other noise source is plainly audible from the receiving property Boundary line.
4.1. Defect in vehicle or operation of vehicle: The operation of any
automobile, truck, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or boat in
such a manner as to create squealing, or squealing of tires, or loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, exploding-type, rattling, or other noises.
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 2
Adopted 10/25/2004
4.2. Dogs, cats, birds and other animals. The keeping of any dog, cat, bird or
other animal, which shall become a nuisance to another person in the
vicinity where such dog, cat or other animal is kept, by frequent or
continued barking, howling, yelping, screaming or other animal noise and
vocalizations.
4.3. Vocal disturbances. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing or making any
other loud vocal or noise disturbance, including parties and other social
events so as to disturb, destroy, or endanger the peace of persons in the
immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance. It shall be unlawful for any
person in charge of a party or other social event to allow that party or
event to produce unreasonable noise. A person shall be deemed to be in
charge of a party or social event when that event occurs on private
property and the person is present at the event and resides on the premises
involved or is a person who lives in or on the premises involved and who
has authorized the use of the premises for such event.
4.4. Construction related activities: Noises emanating from the road
construction or from the excavation, demolition, alteration, construction,
or repair of buildings, structures, property between the hours of 9:00 PM
and 6:00 AM.
4.5. Loud speakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising, attracting the attention
of the public, or communicating to employees.
4.6. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal on any
automobile, motorcycle, boat or other vehicle except as a danger warning;
the creation, by means of any other signaling device, of any unreasonable
loud or harsh sound; and. the sounding of any such device for unnecessary
and/or unreasonable periods of time.
4.7. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated of any radio or television receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for producing or
reproducing of sounds in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or any time with louder volume
than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are
in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such a machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 3
Adopted 10/25/2004
4.8. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
4.9. Trash Removal. The removal of household and commercial trash by
authorized commercial trash haulers utilizing mechanized conveyances
within 500 feet from a residential property between the hours of 9:00 PM.
and 6:00 A.M.
4.10. Mobile. Portable or Outdoor Electronic Sound-producing Devices. The
playing or use of a mobile, portable or outdoor electronic sound-producing
device in such manner or with such volume at any time and place as to
disturb, destroy or endanger the comfort, repose or peace of persons.
5. Prohibitions for Non-Residential Uses
5.1. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for anyone to create or allow the
creation of noise not otherwise specified under General Prohibitions, in
excess of the following stated limits during the stated time periods for
noise generated on properties being used for other than residential
purposes.
5.2. Noise measurements shall be made at the property line.
5.3. This standard shall not apply to unoccupied receiving properties.
5.4. Sound level measurements shall be taken with a sound level meter
meeting the minimum American Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements
for Type I or Type II accuracy, and shall use the fast response setting.
5.5. Nothing in this Ordinance shall limit the Board from imposing additional
noise control measures beyond that needed to reach the limits set below.
Time Period Receiving
Property
One hour Average
dBA
Instantaneous
Maximum dBA
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Industrial A 75 90
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Residential 55 to 65 80
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Industrial A 60 70
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Residential 45 60
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Other 65 50
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Other 60 70
6. Exemptions and Exclusions
Sounds from the following sources shall be exempt from the prohibitions
specified in this ordinance:
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 4
Adopted 10/25/2004
6.1. Any person or organization that has obtained a noise waiver from the
Town of Williston. (i.e. parade, block party, fire works display, etc.)
6.2. Any vehicle and equipment owned by and operated by any governmental
unit or a utility in the performance of its duties.
6.3. Noise associated with routine snow removal activities where customary
practices and equipment are used and where the snow removal OR SNOW
grooming equipment is operated within the manufacturer's specifications
and in proper operating condition.
6.4. Any construction activity that has obtained approval of the Town of
Williston to occur between the hours of 9:00 PM and 6:00 AM and that is
deemed to be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
6.5. All safety signals and warning devices or any other device used to alert
persons to any emergency or used during the conduct of emergency work
including but not limited to police, fire and medical/rescue vehicle sirens,
and backup alarms required by OSHA, VOSHA or other federal or state
agency.
6.6. Noise associated with a bona fide response to an emergency situation that
poses a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
6.7. Musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by and on the site of a
school or educational facility or municipal facility or is sponsored by the
municipal, state or federal government.
6.8. Equipment for maintenance of lawns and grounds during the hours of 6:00
A.M. to 9:00 P.M. (including but not limited to lawn mowers, hedge
trimmers, weed trimmers, chain saws, snow blowers and leaf-blowers)
assuming they are properly muffled.
6.9. Vehicles or aircraft that meet state and federal standards operating on the
public right-of-way or air space and operated in a manner consistent with
state and federal law.
6.10. Noise associated with standard agricultural operations.
6.11. Sound created by bells, carillons, or chimes associated with specific
religious observances or the Town Clock.
6.12. Natural phenomena including wind, rain, flowing water, and wildlife.
6.13. The use of firearms when used for hunting in accordance with state Fish
and Wildlife laws or when used for sport shooting consistent with any
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 5
Adopted 10/25/2004
permitting conditions placed on such use. For sport shooting uses
permitted prior to January 1, 2005, the hours of operation will be
determined through a written agreement with the Town.
6.14. Vocal disturbances, whether or not it is electronically amplified, by
spectators or participants in a political protest or rally, an athletic event or
assembly sponsored by a public or private school, or recognized organized
recreational activities.
7. Variance
7.1. Residential Sources - Any person may apply to the Selectboard for a
variance from the requirements of this Ordinance prior to doing acts
prohibited by this ordinance. The applicant shall provide a list of property
owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the site(s) where the activity
is to occur. Ten (10) days advance written notice of the Selectboard
meeting shall be provided to the property owners and residents appearing
on the list. For good cause shown, the Selectboard may, in it sole
discretion, either grant or deny the variance. If the variance is granted, the
Selectboard may impose reasonable conditions to it. For noise events
lasting less than a 12-hour period, the Board may waive or reduce the tenday
advance written notice of the Selectboard meeting.
7.2. Non-Residential Sources – An application for variance from the
provisions of this Ordinance may be submitted to the Selectboard.
Information the Selectboard may require includes:
Information on the nature and location of the facility or process for
which such application is made;
♦
♦
♦
♦
♦
♦
The reason for which the variance is required;
A description of the interim noise control measures to be taken by
the applicant to minimize the impact caused by the noise;
A statement of the length of time a variance will be required; and
Any other relevant information requested by the Selectboard to
make a determination regarding the application.
Information on ambient sound levels.
7.3. Delegation of Authority – The Selectboard may delegate its authority to
grant variance requests for events lasting less than a 12-hour period, if it
so chooses, by a majority vote of the Board.
8. Enforcement
8.1. Enforcement - Any certified Vermont Law Enforcement officer shall be
the designated enforcement officer. Such Officer may issue complaints
and may be the appearing officer at any hearing.
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 6
Adopted 10/25/2004
8.2. An Enforcement officer may issue a Vermont Civil Violation Complaint
to the individual responsible for any sound in violation of this ordinance
including the driver of a motor vehicle, or the first registered owner of the
vehicle, the owner of record or a resident of a single family home, or
apartment, the proprietor of a business or the person who is in physical
control of the sound emitting device or animal responsible for the
unreasonable or excessive noise.
8.3. Violations - A violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced
in accordance with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 1974a and § 1977 et seq.
Anyone convicted of a violation or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this Ordinance, including the failure to make a required
report or to pay any fee, may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than
$500 in addition to the waiver fees outlined in Sections 9.1 and 9.2 below.
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
8.4. Initial Administrative Appeal – Anyone in found in violation of this
ordinance shall have the right to appeal any waiver fee to the Police Chief.
An appeal must be filed within 14 days of receipt of the fee or violation
notice. The decision of the Police Chief may be appealed to the Williston
Selectboard within 10 days of receipt of the Chief’s decision. In the event
such appeal is not satisfactorily resolved before the Selectboard, the Town
pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974(a) may bring civil enforcement proceedings.
9. Penalties
9.1. First offense - A first offense of any provision of this ordinance by a
person shall be deemed a civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The waiver fine shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
9.2. Second and subsequent offenses - A second offense during a twelvemonth
period from the date of the first offense, shall be deemed to be a
civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). The waiver fine shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Each subsequent offense shall be deemed a civil violation and shall be
punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The waiver fine
shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00).
9.3. Payment Deadline - All fees must be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt
of notice. If fees are paid after thirty days, an additional fee of $10.00 will
be charged.
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 7
Adopted 10/25/2004
f:\worddocs\neword\noise ordinance.doc 8
9.4. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues after receiving a
violation complaint shall be considered a separate violation of this
Ordinance.
10. Severability:
If any section, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance shall for any reason be held
invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not affect or impair the validity of any
other section or remaining portion of this Ordinance.
11. Effective Date:
This Ordinance was adopted October 25, 2004 and shall take effect on January 1,
2005.
TOWN OF WILLISTON
PUBLIC INDECENCY ORDINANCE
The Selectboard of the Town of Williston hereby ordains:
Section 1. Authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted the Town to promote the public
health, safety, welfare, and convenience contained in 24 V.S.A. 2291. This ordinance shall be a civil
ordinance within the meaning of 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59.
Section 2. Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate public indecency, including public nudity,
which is deemed to be a public nuisance.
Section 3. Definitions
"Nudity" shall mean the showing of the human or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks
with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any portion of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state. The inadvertent showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any portion of the nipple by a women engaged in the feeding of an infant child shall not
constitute nudity within the meaning of this definition.
Section 4. Public Indecency
a. No person shall knowingly or intentionally in a public place:
1. engage in sexual intercourse
2. appear in a state of nudity
3. fondle his/her genitals; or
4. fondle the genitals of another person.
b. No person who owns, leases or controls property shall knowingly allow any person
to engage in the conduct described in subparagraph a. above at any time such property is open to the
public.
Section 5. Enforcement
Any person who violated a provision of this civil ordinance shall be subject to a civil
penalty of up to $500 per day for each day that such violation continues. Police Officers of the Town
of Williston shall be authorized to act as Issuing Municipal Officials to issue and pursue before the
Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau a municipal complaint.
Section 6. Waiver Fee
An Issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover a waiver fee, in lieu of a civil
penalty, in the following amount, for any person who declines to contest a municipal complaint and
pays the waiver fee:
First offense - $50
Second offense - $125
Third offense - $200
Fourth offense - $275
Fifth and
subsequent offenses - $350
Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.
Section 7. Civil Penalties
An Issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover civil penalties in the following
amounts for each violation:
First offense - $100
Second offense - $200
Third offense - $300
Fourth offense - $400
Fifth and
subsequent offenses - $500
Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.
Section 8 Other Relief
In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance
Bureau, the Town Manager is authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunction and other
appropriate relief, or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law.
Adopted June 13, 1996

ORDINANCE FOR THE
REGUALTION OF PUBLIC FESTIVALS
I. INTENT
A. It is the purpose of the Selectmen of the Town of Williston to regulate the assemblage of
large numbers of people, in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary, fire,
police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the Town of Williston, in
order that the health, safety and welfare of all persons in this municipality, residents and
visitors alike, may be protected.
B. It is the intent of this governing body that all sections and provisions of this legislation
have an independent existence and, should any section or provision be declared invalid and
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intent of his governing body
that any section or provision so declared shall be severable from and shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of the legislation.
II. LICENSE REQUIRED
A. No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as entrepreneur,
undertake, organize, manage, or sell or give tickets to an actual or reasonably anticipated
assembly of 16 or more people which continues or can reasonably be expected to continue
for 18 or more consecutive hours, whether on public or private property, unless a license to
hold the assembly has first been issued by a Selectmen, application for which must be
made at least 30 days in advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly issued to
one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in connection with the
holding of the licensed assembly.
B. As used in this legislation:
1. person means any individual natural human being, partnership, corporation, firm,
company, association, society or group;
2. assembly means a company of persons gathered together at any location at any single
time for any purpose.
C. A separate license shall be required for each day and each location in which 16 or more
people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble; the fee for each license shall
be $1.00 per person up to 200 in number, and $2.00 per person over 200 in number.
D. A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of people stated in the
license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to no permit to assemble at the licensed location
more than the maximum permissible number of people set forth in the license.
E. The license shall not permit the sound of the assembly to carry unreasonably beyond the
enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly.
F. This legislation shall not apply to any regularly established, permanent place of worship,
stadium, athletic field, established campsite, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or other similar
permanently established place of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more
than 250 people the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the assembly is held.
G. This legislation shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on regularly established
fairground no to assemblies required to be licensed by other laws, ordinances, and
regulations of this municipality.
III. CONDITIONS FOR ISSUING LICENSE
Before he may be issued a license the applicant shall first:
A. Determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or admitted to the
location of the assembly, provided that the maximum shall not exceed the maximum
number which can reasonable assemble at the location of the assembly in consideration of
the nature of the assembly and provided that, where the assembly is to continue overnight,
the maximum number shall not be more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries of
the location of the assembly by the zoning or health ordinances or the municipality.
B. Provide proof that he will furnish at his own expense before the assembly commences:
1. a fence completely enclosing the proposed location, of significant height and strength
to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible number for gaining access to
the assemble grounds, which shall have at least four gates, at least one at or near four
opposite points of the compass;
2. portable water, meeting all federal and sate requirements for purity, sufficient to
provide drinking water for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the
rate of at least one gallon per person per day and water for bathing at the rate of at
least 10 gallons per person pr day;
3. separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state and local
specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds, sufficient to provide
facilities for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least
one toilet for every 200 females and at least on toilet for every 300 males together
with an efficient, sanitary means of disposing of waste matter deposited, which is in
compliance with all state and local laws and regulations; a lavatory with running
water under pressure and a continuous supple of soap and paper towels shall be
provided with each toilet;
4. a sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with state and local laws
and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least 2.5 lbs. of solid waste per
person per day, together with a plan for holding and a plan for collecting all such
waste at lease once each day of the assembly and sufficient trash cans with tight
fitting lids and personnel to perform the task;
5. physicians and nurses licensed to practice in Vermont sufficient to provide the
average medical care enjoyed by residents of Vermont for the maximum number of
people to be assembled at the rate of at least one physician for every 1,000 people and
at least one nurse for every 1,500 people, together with an enclosed covered structure
where treatment may be rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms for
each physician, and at least one emergency ambulance available for use at all times;
6. if the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness, illumination sufficient to light
the entire area of the assembly at the rate of at least five foot candles, but not to shine
unreasonably beyond the boundaries of the enclosed location of the assembly;
7. a free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to provide parking space
for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one parking
space for every four persons;
8. telephone connected to outside limes sufficient to provide service for the maximum
number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one separate line and receiver
for each 1,000 persons;
9. if the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in compliance with all
state and local requirements as set forth in the Vermont Statutes Annotated and Rules
and Regulations promulgated thereunder and ordinances of this municipality
sufficient to provide camping accommodations for the maximum number of people to
be assembled;
10. security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn, off-duty Vermont peace
officers or private guards, licensed in Vermont, sufficient to provide adequate
security for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one
security guard for every 750 people;
11. fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and fire lanes and escapes,
sufficient to meet all state and local standards for the location of the assembly as set
forth in the Vermont Statutes Annotated and Rules and Regulations promulgated
thereunder and ordinances of this municipality, and sufficient emergency personnel to
efficiently operate the required equipment;
12. all reasonably necessary precautions to insure that the sound of the assembly will not
carry unreasonably beyond the enclosed boundaries of the location of the assembly;
13. a bond, filed with the clerk of the Town of Williston, either in cash or underwritten
by a surety company licensed to do business in Vermont at the rate of $1.00 per
person for the maximum number of people permitted to assemble, which shall
indemnify and hold harmless this municipality or any of its agents, officers, servants
and employees from any liability or cause of action which might arise by reason of
granting this license, and from any cost incurred in cleaning up any waste material
produced or left by the assembly.
IV. APPLICATION
A. Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated assembly of 16 or more persons
shall be made in writing to the governing body of this municipality at least 60 days in
advance of such assembly.
B. The application shall contain a statement made up oath or affirmation that the statements
contained therein are true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant and shall be
signed and sworn to or affirmed by the individual making application in the case of an
individual, natural, human being, by all officers in the case of a corporation, by all partners
in the case of a partnership or by all officers of an unincorporated association, society or
group or, if there be no officers, by all members of such association, society or group.
C. The application shall contained and disclose:
1. the name, age , residence and mailing address of all persons required to sign the
application by IV B and, in the case of a corporation, a certified copy of the articles
of incorporation together with the name, age, residence and mailing address of each
person holding 10% or more of the stock of said corporation;
2. the address and legal description of all property upon which the assembly is to be
held together with the name, residence and mailing address of the record owner (s) of
all such property;
3. proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to be held or a
statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owners (s) of all such property
that the applicant has permission to use such property for an assembly of 15 or more
persons;
4. the nature or purpose of the assembly;
5. the total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly is to last;
6. the maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit to assemble at any
time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonable assemble at the
location of the assembly, in consideration of the nature of the assembly, or the
maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the location
of the assembly by the zoning ordinances of the municipality if the assembly is to
continue overnight;
7. the maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any,
8. the plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people permitted to
assemble;
9. the plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gated contained in such
fence;
10. the plans for supplying potable water including the source, amount available and
location of outlets;
11. the plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities including the source, number and
location, type, and the means of disposing of waste deposited;
12. the plans for holding, collection, and disposing of solid waste material;
13. the plans to provide for medical facilities including the location and construction of a
medical structure, the names and addresses and hours of availability of physicians and
nurses, and provisions for emergency ambulance service;
14. the plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly including the source and
amount of power and the location of lamps;
15. the plans for parking vehicles including size and location of lots points of highway
access and interior roads including routes between highway access and parking lots;
16. the plans for telephone service including the source, number and location of
telephones;
17. the plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities available and their
location;
18. the plans for security including the number of guards, their deployment, and their
names, addresses, credentials and hours of availability;
19. the plans for fire protection including the number, type and location of all protective
devices including alarms and extinguishers, and the number of emergency fir
personnel available to operate the equipment;
20. the plans for sound control and sound amplification, if any, including number,
location and power or amplifiers and speakers;
21. the plans for food concessions and concessionaires who will be allowed to operate on
the grounds including the names and addresses of all concessionaires and their license
or permit numbers.
D. The application shall include the bond required in III B 13, and the license fee.
V. ISSUANCE
The application for a license shall be processed within 30 days of receipt and shall be issued if
all conditions are complied with.
VI. REVOCATION
The license may be revoked by the governing body of this municipality at any time if any of
the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in the license are not complied with,
or if any condition previously met ceases to be complied with.
VII. ENFORCEMENT
A. The provisions of this legislation may be enforced by injunction in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. The holding of an assembly in violation of any provision or condition contained in this
legislation shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such.
C. Any person who violates II A or who violates any condition upon which he is granted a
license may be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or imprisoned not more
than 30 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
May 20, 1971

1
TOWN OF WILLISTON
ORDINANCE
Regulation of the Placement of Utility Lines
Within Public Road Rights of Way and Public Property
Pursuant to the provisions of 19 V.S.A. §1111, 24 V.S.A. §2291, and Chapter 59 of Title
24 of the Vermont Statutes Annotated, the Williston Selectboard hereby ordains as follows:
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE
1.1 The purposes of this Ordinance are:
(a) to compensate the Town for the additional costs of maintaining, repairing
and replacing public highways which are encumbered by public utilities and utility lines within
the Town’s highway right of way and to otherwise protect the public investment in the existing
highway infrastructure;
(b) to reimburse the Town for its costs in reviewing plans for placing utility
lines/apparatus in a public highway and to ensure compliance with permits issued therefor;
(c) to improve visual quality along major traveled ways and other areas in the
Town and diminish the visual blight and clutter created by above ground utility lines;
(d) to minimize the disruption of overhead utility services as the result of
inclement weather and other factors;
(e) to implement the objectives of the Williston Town Plan with regard to the
burial of utility lines where feasible to advance the community’s goals for enhancement of visual
and historic resources.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
ordinance shall be as follows:
2.1 “Town” shall mean the Town of Williston.
2.2 “Installed Underground” shall mean the placement, including by directional
boring, of utility lines (including individual service lines, transmission lines and distribution
lines) below the finished grade of the right of way and the removal (if appropriate) of all poles,
guy wires and related structures used to support overhead utility service. “Utility Apparatus” as
defined in this Ordinance may be mounted on pads at ground level within the right of way, if
such will not interfere with the convenience of the public.
2
2.3 “Overhead Utility Service” shall mean the location of utility lines, typically for
electrical, telephone and cable television service, or for traffic signals, above ground, supported
by utility poles and related structures.
2.4 “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
2.5 “Public Improvement Project” shall mean any project undertaken by a local, state
or federal body for the benefit of the general public, such as, but not limited to, road or bridge
construction or the development of a park.
2.6 “Public road”, “public road right of way”, “town street” and “town highway”
shall have the meaning set forth in 23 V.S.A. §4 (13).
2.7 “Public Works Director” shall mean the Public Works Director for the Town of
Williston.
2.8 “Utility Lines” shall include any wire, cable, conduit or other material for the
transmission or distribution of electrical, telecommunication, audio/visual or other signals,
impulses or energy and any pipes or lines for the transmission or distribution of water,
wastewater and gas.
2.9 “Utility Apparatus” shall include equipment used in connection with a utility
service such as transformers, switches, amplifiers and other similar equipment. “Utility
Apparatus” shall not include utility lines or poles or related structures to be used to support lines
or apparatus above ground.
2.10 “Town Manager” shall also mean his or her authorized representative.
ARTICLE III. UTILITY SERVICE INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
3.1 Unless otherwise approved by the Williston Development Review Board, all
utility lines hereinafter constructed shall be installed underground in the right of way of any road
or highway hereafter constructed which is to be dedicated to the Town as a public road or in a
separate utility right of way adjacent to any such public road.
3.2 Any individual utility service line which originates in a public road right of way
and extends to any building or structure hereafter constructed (including residential, commercial
or industrial) shall be installed underground.
3.3 On all other town streets, utility lines shall be placed underground during major
public improvement projects. (Without limiting the foregoing, all new streets or portions
thereof which are proposed to become town highways shall be deemed to be a major public
improvement.) The Williston Selectboard may waive this requirement for specific projects
upon a determination, after a public hearing, that placing utility lines underground is not
economically feasible.
3
3.4 Street lighting, if proposed for any project regulated under this Ordinance, shall
be installed to meet minimum IES (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America)
standards and shall be served by underground electrical service.
3.5 No work shall be performed within a town highway right of way without securing
a permit from the Williston Public Works Department. (The requirement to secure a permit
shall also apply to Town departments, fire districts and stormwater utilities.) All work
performed pursuant to a permit issued hereunder shall be in accordance with the Public Works
Specifications for the Town of Williston.
ARTICLE IV. FEES/PERMITS.
4.1 Except as otherwise provided herein, prior to the issuance of any permits to
perform work in a town highway, the applicant shall pay such fees as established from time to
time by the Williston Selectboard. All fees shall be paid to the Williston Public Works Director
and shall be non-refundable.
4.2 The following alternative methods of payments may be utilized with the approval
of the Public Works Director:
(a) monthly, with payments due and owing within fifteen (15) days of Town’s
invoice;
(b) an annual payment may be made in the amount determined by the Public
Works Director providing that:
(1) the annual payment is made on or before the first day of May in
each year;
(2) an accounting of the fees actually due and owing by the applicant
for work performed in the previous twelve (12) month period is made on or before the 30th day
of April of each year. If the accounting reveals additional sums are due from the applicant,
payment of such sum shall be made within fifteen (15) days of Town’s invoice. Should the
applicant have overpaid the actual fee, the amount of the overpayment shall be credited to
applicant’s annual fee for the next fiscal period.
4.3 Should Town determine that work has been performed beyond that which was
approved in a permit (the “approved work”), the applicant shall immediately cease all work until
all required fees have been paid. In the event work has been completed beyond the approved
work, all unpaid fees shall be paid within seven (7) business days of Town’s written notice to
applicant.
4.4 Except as otherwise provided herein, no work shall be performed in, upon or
under a town highway without a permit having been issued by the Williston Public Works
Director.
4
4.5 In the event of an emergency when it is not reasonably possible to secure in
advance a permit from the Williston Public Works Director, work may be performed on a town
highway on the conditions that:
(a) on the next business day following such work application is made to the
Williston Public Works Director; and
(b) all required fees are paid at the time of application.
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
5.1 Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof.
5.2 The Town may commence appropriate enforcement proceedings against any
person who fails to cease all violations within the time prescribed in Section 4.2 and may seek to
recover fines in an amount not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each violation per
week, with each week the violation continues considered a separate offense. The Town may
also seek injunctive or other appropriate relief.
ARTICLE VI. ENACTMENT
This Ordinance is a civil ordinance which shall take effect sixty (60) days after the date
of its adoption by the Town Selectboard.
Adopted by the Williston Selectboard
December 7, 2009
Effective February 8, 2010
Town of Williston
Peddler Ordinance
August 27, 1992
Page 1
8/27/92
TOWN OF WILLISTON
PEDDLER ORDINANCE
LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
peddler, as defined in section of this chapter, within the town
without first obtaining a license therefore as herein provided.
DEFINITIONS.
The word "peddler" as used herein shall include any person,
whether a resident of the town or not, who travels by foot or
utilizes a wagon, motorized vehicle, pushcart, or similar type of
conveyance, along the streets, sidewalks, and other public or
private places within the town of Williston, or who, on a temporary
basis, hires, leases, or occupies a building, (or a portion
thereof), structure, or land within the town of Williston, and
thereon or therefrom, offers, displays, or exposes for sale goods,
wares, merchandise, food, or similar products. One who solicits
orders as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers
shall not be deemed a peddler hereunder unless such activity is
carried out as a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter, in which case such person shall be deemed a peddler
subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler"
shall also include the words "hawker", "street vendor" and
"huckster", but shall not include a farmer who is selling the
produce of his/her own farm, or the sale of personally owned items at
the residence of the owner of those items.
APPLICATION:
Applications for a peddlers license shall include the following:
a) A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be
sold and in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether
produced or crown by the applicant;
b) if employed, name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
c) The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;
d) if a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together
with the license number or other means of identification;
Page 2
8/27/92
e) Two (2) photographs of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which
pictures shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner;
f) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor; •
g) A statement as to the dimension, construction and appearance
of applicant's stand or cart, and a photograph of such;
h) Proof that applicant maintains public liability insurance for
personal injury and property damage. Proof shall be in the form of a
certificate from and insurance company authorized to do business in
the state, with the provision that such insurance shall be
noncancellable except after ten (10) days' notice to the town
zoning administrator. Such public liability insurance shall
provide coverage of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for personal injury to or death of any one or more persons in any
one accident, and for damage to property in the amount of at
least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) resulting from
any one accident.
i) The hours of business to be maintained by the peddler.
PROPERTY TAXES DELINQUENT.
No license shall be issued to:
a. any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of any
property taxes, water, sewer, or sewer benefit assessments, or
related fees, costs or penalties, applicable by law and due the
Town of Williston as of the date of the application;
b. any applicant whose principal, general partner, president,
treasurer or Board of Directors includes a principal, general
partner, president, treasurer or director of any business delinquent
in payment of any property taxes, water, sewer, or sewer benefit
assessments, or related fees, costs, or penalties applicable by law
and due the Town of Williston as of the date of the application.
LICENSEE'S DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS.
All licensees shall be subject to the conditions that the
licensee shall be liable to any person who shall receive actionable
Yearly Licenses: The license year for licenses granted pursuant to
this chapter shall commence on April first and terminate at
Pace 3
8/27/92
injury through the exercise thereof, and shall also be liable to
indemnify and save harmless the Town of Williston in all things
related to the exercise of such license, and such conditions shall be
obligatory upon licensees without other notice than that to be
implied from this section. All licenses shall be further subject
to the condition that the licensee shall keep his/her place of
business safe at all times for the use of the public invited
thereon, and such condition shall be obligatory upon licensees
without other notice than implied in this section.
Liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be required
for noncommercial functions or endeavors, provided that the
applicant agrees in writing to hold and save the town harmless for
any and all liability arising out of such functions or endeavor.
INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of such application, a copy thereof shall be
referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of
the applicant's business and moral character to be made as
he/she deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The
chief of police shall make a report of such investigation and
return same to the town zoning administrator. Such report shall be
considered by the zoning administrator in determining whether a
license shall be issued or the applicant certified as qualified for
the issuance of a peddler's license.
GRANTING OF LICENSE.
Applications for peddlers' licenses will be granted or denied by
the zoning administrator. Application will be granted when it is
found that use of license will not adversely affect:
a) Traffic;
b) Permanent local business;
c) Character of area.
LICENSE ISSUANCE, DURATION AND FEES.
a) Issuance: There shall be one peddler's license available for
issuance under this chapter for all areas of Williston.
b) Duration:
Page 4
8/27/92
midnight March thirty-first of the subsequent year. All license
applications submitted by March first shall be processed and
granted or denied prior to April first of such year.
Quarterly Licenses: Peddlers may apply for and be granted quarterly
licenses (three months in duration) under the same terms and
conditions as yearly licenses. The quarterly licenses will be
issued for the following time periods: April 1 through June 30;
July 1 through September 30, October 1 through December 30; January 1
through March 31. Applicants may purchase licenses for consecutive
quarters not to exceed one year. Quarterly license applications
must be submitted one month before date of intended issuance.
Special Event License: Peddlers may apply and be granted licenses
for special events and/or short-term (less than three months)
peddling under the same terms and conditions as yearly licenses.
The zoning administrator shall use his/her discretion in granting
these licenses, and shall charge a per-day rate for these licenses.
c) Fees: All license fees shall be payable in full upon
application, to be immediately refunded if application is denied.
d) Renewal: Renewals shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator and
chief of police, and shall be granted or denied at their discretion.
Renewals will be granted for up to a year but shall not be granted
past March 31.
TRANSFER AND DISPLAY; EMPLOYEES.
a) Display: No license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one
to whom it was issued. A licensee shall display his/her license
at all times when peddling. Failure to do so shall be
considered cause for revocation of such license.
b) Employees: A licensed peddler may utilize the services of one
employee. Any applicant for a peddler's license who anticipates
the use of an employee shall list upon such application such
proposed employee's name and address. The employee shall be
investigated in the same fashion as the applicant and the zoning
administrator shall certify whether a license shall be granted to
such employee. Licensed peddlers may hire an employee at any point of
the duration of the license, providing the employee has met the
above conditions prior to starting work. Upon issuance, the
employee may peddle only as an employee of the applicant. A
licensed peddler and his/her employee shall not simultaneously
peddle at different locations.
Page 5
8/27/92
No licensed peddler shall be entitled to any exclusive
location nor shall he/she peddle his/her within one hundred (100)
feet of the entryway to any business which sells or offers the sale of
goods, wares, merchandise, food etc. , of the same type and
nature as offered by the peddler. The zoning administrator shall
determine in appropriate cases whether such similar goods are being
offered for sale.
LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
No peddler, nor any person on his/her behalf, shall shout, cry
out, blow a horn, or use any sound device, including any loud
speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks, or other public places of the town or upon any
private premises in said town if sufficient volume is produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
alleys, parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee
proposes to sell.
SIGNS.
All signs used by the peddler must be approved at the time of
application. Peddlers shall be limited to the use of only one sign
promoting his/her activities which sign cannot be in excess of ten
square feet in surface display area nor stand more than four feet
above ground level. For the purpose of this ordinance banners,
pennants, flags, and other similar items shall be considered signs. No
sign shall be affixed to public or private property without
obtaining prior approval therefor from the owner of said property.
No sign,
-,n shall be placed in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere
with traffic. The use of string lighting is prohibited without the
prior written approval of the zoning administrator.
PROHIBITED AND REGULATED LOCATIONS.
Peddling is prohibited in zoning areas designated as
residential, or agricultural/rural. Peddling within the Village
Historic District must be reviewed by the Historic Preservation
Committee which shall recommend to the zoning administrator
approval or denial of the application.
Peddling within the town traveled highway is prohibited.
NONEXCLUSIVE LOCATION; DISTANCE FROM COMPETITORS.
Page 6
8/27/92
B. Severability: Any part or provision of this ordinance shall
be considered severable and the invalidity of any part or section
shall not be held to invalidate any other part or provision of this
ordinance.
PEDDLING BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS, ETC.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the selectboard from
issuing permits for peddling by representatives of the public,
pious or charitable organizations for such periods of time as the
selectboard shall authorize without payment of a licensing fee.
Requests for peddling fee waivers shall be made only for
licensees who have successfully obtained permission through the
licensing process; subsequent to which the selectboard shall act
upon the licensees request for a fee waiver.
ENFORCEMENT
A. Penalty: Each violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a
$50.00 fine; each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. License Revocation: A peddler's license may be revoked or
suspended by the zoning administrator without reimbursement of any
fee for:
1) Misrepresentations on the application;
%) Williston Police Department or zoning administrator's
determination that peddler's conduct demonstrates a
lack of suitable business or moral character;
3) Conviction of a federal or state law violation;
4) Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or other
Town of Williston regulations.
C. Enforcement: Any violation of this ordinance may be
enforceable by injunction or other action available at law.
D. Appeals Process: Applicants whom are denied licenses by the
zoning administrator may appeal that decision to the
selectboard, whose decision will remain final.
APPLICABILITY AND SEVERABILITY
A. Applicability: This ordinance controls only those activities
treated and does not supersede any state or federal law or consistent
local regulation.
FEE SCHEDULE.
$75
$25/qr±r.
Page 7
8/27/92
Full Year (April 1 through March 31)
Quarterly (April 1 through June 30, July 1 through
September 30, October 1 through December 31, January 1
through March 1)
$10/event Length of event not to exceed seven days
Adopted by the Town of Williston. Selectboard on:
August 27, 1992
4 .
Town of Williston
CONFLICT OF INTEREST ORDINANCE
1. AUTHORITY
This civil ordinance is adopted pursuant to 24 V.S.A.§ 2291 (20) and Chapter 59.
2. POLICY STATEMENT
Accepting a position as a public official carries with it the acceptance of trust that the official
will work to further the public interest. Maintaining that public trust is critical to the continued
operation of good government. In addition, public decision-making should be open and
accessible to the public at large. To preserve this public trust, there are five principles to which
public officials should adhere:
2.1. A public official should represent and work towards the public interest and not
towards private/personal interests.
2.2. A public official should accept and maintain the public trust (i.e. must preserve
and enhance the public's confidence in their public officials).
2.3. A public official should exercise leadership, particularly in the form of
consistently demonstrating behavior that reflects the public trust.
2.4. A public official should recognize the proper role of all government bodies and
the relationships between the various government bodies.
2.5. A public official should always demonstrate respect for others and for other
positions.
3. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
No elected or appointed official of the Town, whether or not s/he is compensated for his/her
service by the Town, shall directly or indirectly (ie. by others on his/her behalf or at his/her
request or suggestion):
3.1. engage in any private business, transaction or employment, or have any
significant financial interest therein, which is incompatible or in conflict with the
proper and impartial discharge of his/her duties on behalf of the Town. A
“significant financial interest” is any direct or indirect benefit to the decisionmaker
other than the interest that would accrue to him or her as a taxpayer or
resident;
3.2. represent any private party before the public body on which the official sits or
over which the official has appointment or budgetary powers;
Williston Ethics Policy Page 2 of 5
Z:\SELECT\ethics ordinance.doc
3.3. disclose without authorization or use to further a personal interest, confidential
information acquired in the course of official duties.
3.4. grant or influence the granting of any special consideration, advantage or favor, to
any person, group, firm or corporation, beyond that which is the general practice
to grant or make available to the public at large;
3.5. with the exception of occasional, non-pecuniary gifts, accept anything of
economic value such as money, service, gift, loan, gratuity, favor or promise
thereof for the purpose and intent of which is to influence any such official of the
Town in the exercise of his/her official judgment, power or authority;
3.6. make personal use of staff, vehicles, equipment, materials or property of the
Town except in the course of his/her official duties or as duly authorized by the
proper Town Officer, Board or Commission;
3.7. participate in the appointment, vote for appointment, or discussion of any
appointment of an immediate family member or business associate, or use his/her
position, directly or indirectly, to effect the employment status of an immediate
family member or business associate to any Town office or position, paid or
unpaid; or
3.8. receive or have any financial interest in any sale to the Town of any real estate
when such financial interest was received under circumstances which would lead
a reasonable person to expect that the Town intended to purchase, condemn or
lease said real estate.
4. EX-PARTE COMMUNICATIONS: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
In any quasi-judicial matter (e.g. personnel hearings, road layouts and discontinuance’s
condemnation proceedings, hearings held under interim zoning rules, and matters involving the
issuance of a permit or approval), or the award of a contract, before a Town Board, Commission
or Committee, a public official sitting on such Board, Commission or Committee, shall not,
outside of that Board, Commission or Committee, communicate with or accept a communication
from a person for which there are reasonable grounds for believing to be a party to the matter
being considered, if such communication is designed to influence the official's action on that
matter. If such communication should occur, the public official shall disclose it at an open
meeting of the Board, Commission or Committee prior to its consideration of the matter.
5. DISCLOSURE AND RECUSAL PROCEDURES
Whenever a matter comes before a Board, Commission or Committee, as to which any conflict
of interest standard, as described in Section 2 of this Ordinance, applies to one of its members,
the following provisions shall apply:
5.1. The public official involved shall disclose to the relevant Board, Commission or
Committee, in an open public meeting, the nature of the conflict of interest, prior
Williston Ethics Policy Page 3 of 5
Z:\SELECT\ethics ordinance.doc
to any consideration of the matter by said Board, Commission or Committee.
5.2. Following such disclosure, such public official shall not participate in any
consideration, discussion or vote on the matter before the Board, Commission or
Committee. If the official wishes to address the issue at an open public meeting,
the official may participate as a member of the public. During deliberation and
vote on the matter, the official shall not be present. The official may attend an
executive session to discuss the matter at the invitation of the Board, Commission
or Committee, if such attendance complies with the statutory requirements of the
Open Meeting Law.
5.3. The public official shall not, during any part of the Board, Commission, or
Committee meeting pertaining to the matter requiring the disclosure, represent,
advocate on behalf of, or otherwise act as the agent of the person or business
entity in or with which the official has such an interest or relationship.
5.4. The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting the official from testifying as
to factual matters at a hearing of the Selectboard, Planning Commission,
Development Review Board, or any other Committee.
6. HOW TO SUBMIT A COMPLAINT OF ETHICS VIOLATION
6.1. A person, who believes that an appointed public official of the Town has violated
any portion of this Ordinance, may send or deliver a signed, written complaint,
signed under penalty of false statement to the Clerk of the Board of Civil
Authority. The complaint shall include the name of the person alleged to have
committed the violation and the specifics of the act(s) which constitute the
violation. The Clerk shall forward the complaint to the person alleged to have
committed the violation, the Chair of the Board of Civil Authority, and the Chair
of the Board with appointing authority over the position held by that person.
6.2. A person, who believes that an elected public official of the Town has violated
any portion of this Ordinance, may send or deliver a signed, written complaint to
the Chair of the Board upon which the elected official sits. The complaint shall
include the name of the person alleged to have committed the violation and the
specifics of the act(s) which constitute the violation. The Board Chair shall
forward the complaint to the person alleged to have committed the violation.
7. INVESTIGATING COMPLAINTS
7.1. Upon receipt of a formal complaint, the Board of Civil Authority (BCA) shall
appoint a five-person Committee from among its members, which shall conduct a
preliminary investigation to determine if the complaint alleges sufficient acts to
constitute a violation.
7.2. If the Board of Civil Authority Committee makes a finding of no violation, the
Williston Ethics Policy Page 4 of 5
Z:\SELECT\ethics ordinance.doc
complaint and the record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except
upon the request of the respondent. No BCA Committee member or staff member
shall disclose to any third party any information learned from the investigation,
including knowledge of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party
would not otherwise have known. The BCA shall inform the complainant and the
respondent of its finding by registered or certified mail not later than three
business days after termination of the hearing or investigation.
7.3. If the BCA Committee determines the complaint alleges sufficient acts, then
within thirty (30) days after so determining, the BCA Committee shall fix a date
for the commencement of the hearing on the allegations. The hearing date
regarding the complaint shall not be more than sixty (60) days after the filing of
the complaint.
7.4. In the conduct of its investigation of an alleged violation of this ordinance, the
BCA Committee shall have the power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine
witnesses, receive oral and documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses, and
require the production for examination by the BCA Committee of any books and
papers which the BCA Committee deems relevant in any matter under
investigation or in question. In the exercise of such powers, the BCA Committee
may use the services of the municipal police, who shall provide the same upon the
BCA Committee’s request.
7.5. The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented by legal
counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
7.6. The BCA Committee shall make no finding that there is a violation of any
provision of the Ordinance except upon the concurring vote of at least four of its
members.
7.7. Any hearing conducted by the BCA Committee shall be governed by the
administrative rules of evidence.
8. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
After a finding of violation, The BCA Committee may take one or more actions in
response to a violation of this Ordinance:
8.1. Reconsideration - Ask any appointed board or commission or appointed official to
reconsider a matter that the BCA Committee believes involved a violation of this
Ordinance by any member of the board or commission or appointed official, if the
law otherwise allows such reconsideration.
8.2. Recusal – request an appointed official to recuse himself or herself in proceedings
having a direct connection to the ethic complaint.
Williston Ethics Policy Page 5 of 5
Z:\SELECT\ethics ordinance.doc
8.3. Admonishment – A reminder or warning that a particular type of behavior may be
or is in violation of law or this Ordinance and that if it occurs or is found to have
occurred, could make an appointed official subject to a more severe penalty.
8.4. Censure - Censure is a formal statement by the BCA Committee officially
reprimanding an appointed official. It is a punitive action, which serves as a
penalty imposed for wrongdoing, but it carries no fine or suspension of the rights
of the member as a public official.
8.5. Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the violation committed.
8.6. Removal or Suspension – remove or suspend any appointed member of any board
or commission from their position, the BCA Committee shall not impose censure
on any public official for the exercise of his or her First Amendment rights, no
matter how distasteful the expression was to the BCA Committee and the Town.
However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the BCA Committee
members from individually condemning and expressing their strong dislike of
such remarks.
9. SEVERABILITY
If any section of this ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such finding shall not invalidate any other part of this ordinance.
10. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the Williston
Selectboard. If a petition is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, that statute shall govern the
effective date of this ordinance.
Adopted by the Selectboard, Town of Williston, on September 18, 2006
____________________________ ____________________________
Terry Macaig Andy Mikell
____________________________ ____________________________
Jeff Fehrs Ted Kenney
____________________________
Judy Sassorossi
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE USE OF ALARM SYSTEMS
Article 1.
Section 1.01 Purpose:
The Town Fire and Police Departments are responding to an inordinate
number of false alarms. In many instances there are repeated false alarms
from the same source. Not only is responding to false alarms costly for the
Town, but it hinders the availability of the Departments to respond to real
alarms. Therefore, false alarms are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
This civil ordinance is adopted pursuant to 24 V.S.A.§ 2291 (14), (15) and
in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the Town of
Williston.
Section 1.02 Definitions
(a) False Alarm
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the term "false alarm" shall mean the
activation of a police or fire alarm by other than what is determined to be
a legitimate emergency. Examples include but are not limited to: alarms
activated through: inadvertence, negligence, accident, testing without
prior notification, faulty installation, improper equipment or maintenance,
or alarms intentionally activated for purposes other than for a legitimate
emergency.
(b) Alarm System
Any assembly or equipment, mechanism or device that is used in a
building or on premises for the detection of burglary, unauthorized entry,
or any other criminal activity, or fire, which is designed to transmit to any
receiving station a signal, message or warning or other indication of an
occurrence requiring a police, and/or fire department response.
Section 1.03 Alarm Registration
Within one year from the date this Ordinance becomes effective, Any alarm
system user who operates or maintains an alarm system within the Town of
Williston, shall provide the Town, with a contact card, on a form prescribed
by the Town, containing the location of the premises, type of alarm, name,
address and telephone number of the alarm company and the name and
telephone number of at least three persons who can be notified to secure the
premises during any hour of the day or night and any other pertinent
information.
Town of Williston Page 2 of 4
False Alarm Ordinance
g:\worddocs\neword\firealr1.doc
The alarm system user shall notify the Town, in writing, of any changes to
their alarm registration information, within five days from the date the
change becomes effective.
Section 1.04 Prohibited Alarms
It shall be unlawful to install, operate, or maintain an alarm system that
transmits via telephone line directly to the police or fire station, a prerecorded
message requesting a response by either of those departments. The
owner or lessee of any such alarm system or device shall disconnect or have
disconnected such system or device on or before ninety days from the
effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 1.05 Waiver Fees
For a Fire or Police Department response to any false alarms (as defined in
Section 1.02 above) the Town may charge and collect from the person
having or maintaining such fire alarm on premises owned or occupied by
him/her, waiver fees as follows:
(a) False Alarms
(i) First Response
For a response to premises at which no other false alarm (as defined
in Section 1.02 above) has occurred within the preceding twelve (12)
month period, hereinafter referred to as a “first response”, no fee
shall be charged, but the Fire or Police Department will inspect the
alarm system and ascertain the cause of the false alarm and notify the
person having or maintaining such alarm system of any corrective
action which must be taken. Within three (3) days after such notice,
the person having or maintaining the alarm system shall make a
written report to the chief of the appropriate department certifying
that the corrective action has been taken.
(ii) Subsequent Response(s) - Fire Department
For a second response to a false alarm to premises within twelve (12)
months after the first response, a waiver fee of $100.00 may be
charged and for each succeeding response thereafter within twelve
(12) months of the first response, a waiver fee of $200.00 may be
charged.
(iii) Subsequent Response(s) - Police Department
For a second response to a false alarm to premises within twelve (12)
months after the first response, a waiver fee of $50.00 may be
charged and for each succeeding response thereafter within twelve
Town of Williston Page 3 of 4
False Alarm Ordinance
g:\worddocs\neword\firealr1.doc
(12) months of the first response, a waiver fee of $100.00 may be
charged.
(b) Failure to Report
A waiver fee of $25.00 will be charged if the required corrective action
report is made after the allowed time period in accordance with Section
1.05(a)(i) above
(c) Failure to Register
A waiver fee of $25 will be assessed for each alarm, whether or not it is
false or an actual emergency, if the alarm is not registered in accordance
with Section 1.03 above, or if the information on the required registration
form is out of date.
(d) Payment Deadline
All fees must be paid within ten (10) days of receipt of notice. If fees are
paid after the ten days an additional fee of $10.00 will be charged.
(e) Use of Prohibited Alarm
If the Police or Fire Department is called to respond through the use of a
prohibited alarm as defined in Section 1.04 above, a waiver fee of $50
will be charged in addition to the fees provided for in Section 1.05(a)
above, regardless of whether or not the call was false.
Section 1.06 Violations or Failures to Comply
A violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance
with the provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 1974a and § 1977 et seq. Anyone
convicted of a violation or failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, including the failure to make a required report or to pay any
fee, may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500 in addition to the
waiver fees outlined in Section 1.05 above. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1.07 Appeals of Fees
(a) Initial Administrative Appeal
An Alarm System User shall have the right to appeal any waiver fee to
the Police Chief, if the alarm called for response by the Police
Department, or to the Fire Chief, if the Alarm called for response by the
Town of Williston Page 4 of 4
False Alarm Ordinance
g:\worddocs\neword\firealr1.doc
Fire Department. An appeal must be filed within 14 days of receipt of the
fee or violation notice. The decision of the Police Chief or Fire Chief may
be appealed to the Williston Selectboard within 10 days of receipt of the
Chief’s decision. In the event such appeal is not satisfactorily resolved
before the Selectboard, civil enforcement proceedings may be brought by
the Town pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974(a).
(b) Enforcement Before the Judicial Bureau
In the event an Alarm System User violates this Ordinance and fails to
either pay the waiver fee or to take an appeal as hereinabove described,
civil enforcement proceedings may be brought pursuant to 24 V.S.A. §
1974(a).
Section 1.08 Liability Limit
The Town’s regulation of alarm systems shall not constitute acceptance by
the Town for any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms or to
take any action in connection therewith.
Section 1.09 Severance Clause
If any section, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance shall for any reason be
held invalid or unconstitutional by a decree or decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision shall not Affect or impair the
validity of any other section or remaining portion of this Ordinance.
Section 1.10 Adoption
This Ordinance supercedes the Ordinance adopted September 27, 1990 as
amended May 14, 1992. This Ordinance shall take effect sixty (60) days
from its adoption.
APPROVED: September 27, 1990
AMENDED: May 14, 1992
AMENDED: January 10, 2002
ALCOHOL - PUBLIC PLACES ORDINANCE
It is hereby ordained by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Williston as
follows:
1. Definitions
As used in this ordinance the following terms shall be defined as follows:
a. Open beverage container - a container, bottle, can or vessel containing
malt or vinous beverages or spirituous liquors which is open.
b. Public Place - a public place shall mean any playground, park or school
property or other place open temporarily or permanently to the public for
general circulation of vehicles or pedestrians within the Town of Williston.
2. Prohibition
Except as authorized in subsection c hereof:
a. No person shall have constructive or actual possession of an open
beverage container in any public place or in any motor vehicle located in a
public place.
b. No person shall consume the contents of an open beverage container in
any public place or in any motor vehicle in a public place.
c. Notwithstanding subparagraphs a and b hereof, the Board of Selectmen
may give specific advance written approval for possession and consumption
from open beverage containers, including beer kegs, within Town parks.
3. Penalties
Persons convicted of violating this section shall be fined not more that $200.
ADOPTED: FEBRUARY 10, 1983

AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
The Selectboard of the Town of Williston hereby ordain:
Preamble: The spillage, discharge or emission of Hazardous Materials is
dangerous to the health and safety of the public and constitutes a public nuisance
which, at times, must be abated by the Town at considerable expense. Therefore,
this Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of 24 V.S.A. Sections 2291
(13) and (14).
Section 1: If, during the course of responding to an accident or emergency by
town police, fire or other personnel, such persons or property of the Town come into
contact with Hazardous Materials, as defined herein, including any residue, vapor,
or other form thereof, or come within such proximity to those materials as to create
a substantial risk of contamination or harm therefrom, the Persons in Possession of
those materials and/or the Persons at Fault for such accident or emergency, as those
terms are defined herein, shall be jointly and severally liable to the Town of
Williston for any damage, loss or expense occasioned thereby, including, but not
limited to, the cost of clean up and disposal of those materials.
Section 2: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words shall have
the following meaning:
(a) Hazardous Materials: Those substances, materials or agents in such quantity,
state or form as may constitute a potential risk to the health and safety of the people
and environment of the Town or which may constitute a risk of harm to the property
of the people or the Town including, but not limited to , explosives, radioactive
material, etiologic agents, flammable materials, combustible materials, poisons,
oxidizing or corrosive materials and compressed gasses. Also, any other materials
listed as hazardous by the Materials Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as amended, and those materials the disposal of which is
regulated under 9 V.S.A. Section 2821 et seg., 10 V.S.A. Section 601 et seq., and 10
V.S.A. Section 7001 et seg.
(b) Person: Any individual, corporation or other legal entity. In the case of any
corporation or other legal entity, in addition to the entity itself, its officers, directors
or other natural persons having legal responsibility for the control of said entity
shall be deemed to be Persons.
(c) Possession: To possess, own, hold or have within one's control any Hazardous
Material. It is the intent of this Ordinance to include within the definition of Person
in Possession not only the legal owner of Hazardous Material but also any and all
other Persons who have control of that Material. Therefore, Persons in Possession
shall include not only the owner of Hazardous Material but any agent, consignee,
employee, contractor or representative of such an owner who is within the chain of
control of such Material.
(d) Fault: To cause an event in which any Hazardous Material is released.
Section 3: In the event the Town commences legal proceedings to effect the
recovery of sums owned under this Ordinance, the Town shall also be entitled to
recover of Persons in Possession or Persons at Fault all expenses associated with
such legal proceedings, including a reasonable attorneys' fee.
Section 4: This Ordinance shall take effect sixty (60) days from the date of its
adoption.
ADOPTED: 12/9/93
EFFECTIVE: 2/7/94
ROAD NAME AND ROAD LOCATION
ADDRESSING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF WILLISTON, VERMONT
Amendment 2006
The Selectboard of the Town of Williston hereby ordains:
SECTION I - AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 24 VSA, Chapter 59, Chapter 61, Subchapter 11 and Chapter 117, and
24 VSA, Section 2291 (16). It shall constitute a civil ordinance within the meaning of 24 VSA, Chapter
59.
SECTION II - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, welfare and convenience and in order
to develop a more uniform road naming, road renaming and road location addressing system throughout the
Town of Williston to enable people to locate roads and addresses and to effectively provide emergency
services and deliveries to Town citizens.
SECTION III - DEFINITIONS
Road: For purposes of this Ordinance, a “road” is (i) a State or Town highway identified on the
latest Agency of Transportation General Highway Map for the Town of Williston, or (ii)
any non-public road, street, right-of-way, shared driveway, or other way which provides
access to three or more dwellings structures.
Structure: For purposes of this Ordinance, a “structure” shall include (i) any dwelling, (ii) any public
building, (iii) any place of business, and (iv) any building which the Zoning Administrator
determines should have a separate location number in order to effectively provide
emergency services.
SECTION IV - ROAD NAMING AND RENAMING
A. Each “road”, as defined herein, shall be assigned a name. The Selectboard may determine that other
roads, streets, rights-of-way, or other ways providing access to a structure, may require a name if
necessary to effectively provide emergency services.
B. Attached to this Ordinance is a list and map of all current roads and road names in the Town of
Williston and the names of such roads are hereby adopted.
Each road not named in Attachment A, or proposed for renaming, shall receive a proposed name. by
resolution of the Selectboard at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The proposed road
names must be separate and distinct from other designated road names in the Town of Williston and
surrounding communities.
Town of Williston, VT Page 1 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
C. The Selectboard shall add names to Attachment A or rename roads by following the procedures for
adoption and amendment of enforcement of ordinance as set forth in 24 V.S.A., Chapter 59.
(Note: Attachment A is the “E-911 Road Map” with road name list.)
SECTION V - FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
A. Prior to the approval of a subdivision by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall furnish a
plan for road naming in accordance with this Ordinance to the E-911 Coordinator, the Planning
Commission and the Development Review Board and Selectboard. The subdivider shall be
responsible for installation of road signs, per Town of Williston specifications, prior to the issuance
of any permits for construction on any of the subdivided lots.
B. Following the adoption of this Ordinance, the Selectboard E-911 Coordinator shall give written
approval for the proposed road name and the Selectboard shall add it to Attachment A pursuant to
the procedure set forth above.
SECTION VI - GENERAL NUMBERING SYSTEM GUIDELINES
A. Roads officially named by the Selectboard of the Town of Williston shall be measured in segments
of 5.28 feet where possible. If practicable, the end of the road nearest the intersection of Route 2
and Route 2A will designate the starting point for numbering purposes. Roads that are part of a
development with an irregular layout may be numbered using a number series rather than a
measured increment. Irregular layouts are determined by the E-911 coordinator. Even numbers
shall be assigned to the right side of the road and odd numbers to the left as they proceed from the
starting point.
B. The Town of Williston shall assign each structure, as defined herein, a “location number” based
upon its distance (i.e.: the number of 5.28 foot segments) from the starting point of the road to the
center of the driveway or entrance from the road to the structure. The Town shall have the authority
to assign a location number utilizing other physical information regarding the structure, if
appropriate and necessary in order to effectively provide emergency services.
C. Each of the location numbers for structures must be at least four (4) inches high and two (2) inches
wide. Location numbers must be dark sharply contrasting in color from the on a light colored
background with no other markings or symbols.
Numbers must be clearly visible from the road if the location number signs are affixed to the
structure. If the location number affixed to the structure is not clearly visible from the road, the
location number shall be affixed on a board or plaque no smaller than 8 inches wide by 4 inches
high and such board or plaque is affixed to a post, pole, fence or other structure near the driveway
entrance so as to be clearly visible from the road during all seasons.
Numbers may only be affixed to a mailbox if there is a single mailbox located at the entrance to the
structure from the road and, in such event, the location number shall be on both sides of the
mailbox. If there are multiple mailboxes at a single location or the mailbox is on the opposite side
of the road to the entrance to the structure, no location numbers may be placed on the sides of the
mailbox and any identifying information shall only be marked on the front of the mailbox facing the
road.
The property owner is responsible for the purchase and installation of numbers to be installed.
Town of Williston, VT Page 2 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
D. A multiple dwelling or use structure shall bear one number for each dwelling or use where possible.
If each dwelling or use does not have a separate number, then the Town shall determine the
appropriate numbering of each dwelling or use so as to effectively provide emergency services.
E. All location numbers shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the location number.
SECTION VII - ROAD NAME SIGNS
A. The Public Works Department, upon adoption of this Ordinance, shall institute a program for the
installation and maintenance of municipal and private road name signs in accordance with this
Ordinance. All private roads shall also be properly signed. The cost of initial installation (purchase
and installing post and sign) shall be by the Town on existing Town roads listed on Attachment A.
The owners/users of roads which are not State or Town highways shall be responsible for the
acquisition, installation and maintenance, repair and replacement of such road signs for the private
roads. The Town shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of road signs on
public highways.
B. All road signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
C. All signs shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the name of the road.
SECTION VIII - NUMBERING
All property owners of structures shall install their location numbers within sixty (60) days after the adoption
of the road name upon which the structure is located and numbers have been assigned by the Town.
SECTION IX - SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Ordinance and any Amendments made hereto are held unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance and Amendments made hereto shall not be
affected and shall remain in full force and effect. If any statute referred to in this Ordinance shall be
amended, this ordinance shall be deemed to refer to such statute amended.
SECTION X - ENFORCEMENT
A. The designated enforcement officer is the Town Manager or his or her assign.
B. This Ordinance is designated as a Civil Ordinance pursuant to 24 V.S.A. Section 1971 (b). This
Ordinance shall be enforced throughout the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau pursuant to 23
V.S.A. Chapter 24 and 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59, as may be amended from time to time.
Town of Williston, VT Page 3 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
C. The following civil penalties are hereby imposed for violation of the Ordinance, following an
initial warning:
First violation of the Ordinance: $ 50.00
Second violation of the Ordinance: $100.00
Third violation of the Ordinance: $200.00
Fourth and subsequent
violation of the Ordinance: $400.00
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
In cases where the violations of the Ordinance are brought in the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance
Bureau, and where the violation is admitted or not contested, in lieu of the above, the following
waiver penalties are imposed:
First violation of the Ordinance: $ 25.00
Second violation of the Ordinance: $ 50.00
Third violation of the Ordinance: $100.00
Fourth and subsequent
violation of the Ordinance: $200.00
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. In addition to any other remedy provided in this Ordinance or available at law or in equity, the
Town of Williston may institute a suit for an injunction to prevent, restrain or abate violations of
this Ordinance.
Adopted this 24th day of April, 1997:
Amended this ----- day of -------------, 2006
Williston Selectboard:
_______________________________ _______________________________
_______________________________ _______________________________
_______________________________
Received and Recorded this _____ day of _______________ , 2006
_______________________________
Deborah Beckett, Town Clerk
Town of Williston, VT Page 4 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
Amendments to Schedule “A”
TO BE DELETED
Bartlett Lane
Beartown Road
Carey Lane
Carlyss Court
Emerald Lane
Great Woods Lane
Hinesburg Road
Karma Court
O'Neill Lane
Short Street
Wood Lily Road
NEW ROADS TO ADD TO ORDINANCE
Avenue D Extension
Balsam Circle
Barrett Lane (changed from Bartlett)
Beartown Lane (changed from Road)
Benoit Lane
Bishop Avenue (changed from Short St)
Blair Park Road (road added back into name)
Blue Heron Drive
Boulder Drive
Boxwood Street
Boxwood Walkway
Breezy Meadow
Brennan Woods Drive
Caboose Lane
Callaway Drive
Casey Lane (changed from Carey)
Central School Drive
Cherrywood Lane
Chip Alley
Churchview Drive
Connor Way
Corena Court
Cornerstone Drive
Coyote Lane
Cypress Street
Deer Run (changed from Emerald Lane)
Demag Drive
Desarno Drive
Dimick Road (located in Richmond but is only access for one Williston property)
Douglas Road
Town of Williston, VT Page 5 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
Eagle Crest
Earnhardt Drive
Falcon Manor
Fiddlehead Lane
Gallop Drive (changed from Karma Ct)
Germaine Court
Greenwood Lane
Gun Club Road
Hanon Drive
Hawthorne Street
Holly Court
Honeysuckle Lane
Ian Place
IBM Road
Interstate Corporate Center
Juniper Lane
Katie Lane (changed from Wood Lily Rd)
Laclair Lane
Lawes Drive
Lawrence Place
Library Lane
Lois Lane
Maple Tree Place
Michael Lane
Miller Lane
Moss Ledge
Nora Pete Drive
Oneil Lane (to correct spelling)
Omega Drive
Paul Street
Pebble Lane
Penny Lane
Pioneer Drive
Primrose Lane
Prushko Lane
Raven Circle
Retail Way
Ricky Vista
Rosewood Drive
Town of Williston, VT Page 6 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
Town of Williston, VT Page 7 of 4 E911ORD.DOC (10/3/2006)
Route 116
Sadler Lane
Simons Plaza
Slate Barn Road
Snowdrift Lane
Sycamore Street
Taft Corners Shopping Center
Trader Lane
Trinity Drive
Tyler Way
Unity Lane
Vine Street
Walnut Street
Walnut Walk
Wellness Drive
Whitney Hill Homestead
Wright Avenue
Zephyr Road








1
TOWN OF WILLISTON
Firearm Discharge Ordinance
The Selectboard of the Town of Williston hereby ordains:
SECTION I - AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 24 V.S.A., section 2291 (8). It shall constitute a civil
ordinance within the meaning of 24 V.S.A. Chapter 59.
SECTION II - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate the discharge of firearms within the Town in order
to promote the public health, safety, and welfare throughout the Town of Williston.
SECTION III - DEFINITIONS
Unless the context indicates, as used in the ordinance:
A. "Discharge" shall mean to shoot or fire a firearm.
B. "Firearm" shall mean any weapon which will expel a projectile by the action of an explosive,
and includes any weapon commonly referred to as a pistol, revolver, rifle, gun, muzzle loader, or
shotgun.
C. "Loose Shot" shall mean multiple spherical type projectiles to be discharged from a Shotgun,
such as buck shot and bird shot.
D. “Muzzle Loader” shall mean a firearm designed to be loaded from the muzzle with powder
and projectile and primed at the breech with either powder or a cap and can only shoot a single
round without reloading.
E. "Pistol" shall mean a small firearm having a stock to fit the hand, and a short barrel, and fired
from one hand.
F. "Projectile" shall mean a bullet, slug, round ball, or pellets projected or thrown by force from
a firearm.
G. “Restricted Firearms Discharge Area (RFDA)” is the restricted area of discharge as depicted
on the map attached hereto as "Attachment A - Town of Williston Discharge Map - Restricted
Firearms Discharge Area."
H. "Revolver" shall mean a type of pistol having a revolving cylinder in the breech chambered to
hold several cartridges that may be fired in succession without reloading.
2
I. "Rifle" shall mean a firearm having a rifled or grooved bore, usually fired from the shoulder
and loaded from the breach.
J. "Shoot" shall mean to discharge a projectile from a firearm.
K. "Shotgun" shall mean a smooth or rifled bore gun, designed to shoot a shell containing either
single or multiple projectiles such as pellets or slugs.
SECTION IV – RFDA DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS
What is not allowed in the RFDA: No person shall discharge a rifle, pistol, revolver, or single
projectile from a shotgun or muzzle loader within that area of the Town of Williston, which is in
the Restricted Firearms Discharge Area (RFDA) as described herein. The discharge of other
types of firearms in the RFDA is permitted in accordance with the laws of the State of Vermont.
What is allowed in the RFDA: Any non-firearm (bow and arrow) and any firearm projecting or
throwing more than one projectile in a single discharge.
A. The restricted area of discharge is depicted on the map attached hereto as "Attachment A -
Town of Williston Discharge Map - Restricted Firearms Discharge Area," and is more
particularly described as follows:
1) RFDA Designation North of Interstate 89. All of that portion of the Town of Williston
situated north of Interstate 89 except the following area:
An area bounded by a line described as follows: beginning at the intersection of the Essex
town line and the center line of North Williston Road and running easterly along the
center line of the Winooski River; thence continuing generally southerly along the center
line of the Winooski to a point easterly of the point at which a brook or stream which
crossed Governor Chittenden Road to the West enters the westerly side of the Winooski
River; thence turning to the right and proceeding westerly to said point of entry of the
brook or stream; thence continuing southwesterly in and along the centerline of said
brook or stream to the center line of Governor Chittenden Road; thence turning to the left
and proceeding southerly in and along the center line of Governor Chittenden Road to the
point at which the southerly line of property presently of Riverhill Farms, Inc intersects
with Governor Chittenden Road; thence turning to the right and proceeding westerly
along the southerly line of said Riverhill Farms, Inc. property and following the perimeter
of said property southerly, then westerly, then northerly then easterly (along the southerly
line of properties now or formerly of Merrill and Leo) then northerly (along the easterly
line of property now or formerly of Leo) to the center line of centerline of Governor
Chittenden Road to the centerline of North Williston Road; thence turning to the right
and proceeding in a generally northerly direction in and along the centerline of North
Williston Road to the point or place of beginning.
3
2) RFDA Designation South of Interstate 89. A certain piece of land, known as Brownell
Mountain, and described as follows:
A parcel of land containing 106.697 acres, more or less, situated on the easterly side of
Town Highway No. 3 (South Brownell Road, so-called). Said parcel of land is bounded
southerly by land now or formerly owned by Richard A. and Susan G. Brownell, westerly
said by highway, northerly by northerly sideline of a 150 foot wide utility easement
granted to Vermont Electric Power Co., Inc., by deed recorded in Volume 56 at Pages
231-237 of the Town of Williston Land Records, and easterly by land now or formerly
owned by Vermont Electric Power Co., Inc., Kermit E. and Diane D. Laclair, Julie
Bonanno, John T. and Laural B. Clark, Jeffery J. and Deborah J. Brassord, and Message
Center, Inc. said land is subject to the aforementioned easement of Vermont Electric
Power Co., Inc., a 140 foot wide easement granted to Green Mountain Television Corp.
by deed recorded in Volume 25 at Pages 42-43 of said Land Records, and ten foot wide
right of way and lease granted to New England Telephone and Telegraph Co. by deed
recorded in Volume 17 at Page 449 and Volume 26 at page 199 of said Land Records.
Being Lot 25 as shown on a plan entitled “A Subdivision Plan for John C. Heins in the
Town of Williston, Vermont”, by Property Design – Montpelier, Vermont, dated
December, 1995, and recorded as Map Slide 466A of the Town of Williston Land
Records.
B. The discharge of any type of firearm outside of the restricted firearms discharge area is
permitted in accordance with the laws of the State of Vermont. The Selectboard reserves the
right to post any parcel of municipal land against hunting, shooting, and trapping in accordance
with 10 V.S.A. Section 5201. The areas currently posted against hunting, shooting, and trapping
are the Five Tree Hill Country Park, Mud Pond Conservation Area, Mud Pond Country Park, the
town-owned parcel located a 5035 St. George Road (also known as the former Hill property),
and other properties as may be designated by the town.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no firearm shall be discharged in
violation of the laws of the State of Vermont and/or the United States of America.
SECTION V - EXEMPTIONS - ACTS AUTHORIZED BY STATUTE
This ordinance shall not apply to the discharge of firearms by police officers, sheriffs,
constables, game wardens and other statutorily designated law enforcement officers in the
performance of their legal duties. This ordinance shall not be construed to limit any rights or
immunities to discharge firearms in the defense or protection of person or property provided by
Vermont Statutes. Nor shall this ordinance apply to the discharge of firearms on any existing
sport shooting range, as defined in 10 V.S.A., section 5227.
4
SECTION VI - ENFORCEMENT BEFORE THE TRAFFIC AND MUNICIPAL
ORDINANCE BUREAU
Any person who discharges a firearm in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil
penalty of up to $400 for each discharge. Any law enforcement officer may act as an Issuing
Municipal Official and issue and pursue before the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance Bureau a
municipal complaint for violation of this ordinance.
SECTION VII - WAIVER FEE FOR MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT
An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover a waiver fee, in lieu of a civil penalty, in
the following amounts, for any person who declines to contest a municipal complaint and pays
the waiver fee:
First offense $ 50.00
Second Offense $ 75.00
Third Offense $100.00
Fourth and subsequent offense $200.00
Offenses shall be counted on a 12-month basis beginning with the date of the first offense.
SECTION VIII - CIVIL PENALTY FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATION
An issuing municipal official is authorized to recover civil penalties in the following amounts for
each violation of this ordinance:
First Offense $ 75.00
Second Offense $ 100.00
Third Offense $ 200.00
Fourth and subsequent Offense $ 400.00
Offenses shall be counted on a 12-month basis beginning with the date of the first offense.
SECTION IX - ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT RIGHTS
In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the Traffic and Municipal Ordinance
Bureau, the Town is authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunctive of other
appropriate relief, or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law.
SECTION X - SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Ordinance and any amendments made hereto are held unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Ordinance and amendments
made hereto shall not be affected and shall remain in full force and effect. If any statute referred
5
to in this Ordinance shall be amended, this ordinance shall be deemed to refer to such amended
statute.
SECTION XI - REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCES
Any other ordinance or regulation heretofore adopted by the Town of Williston for the control of
firearm discharge is hereby repealed.
Williston Selectboard
__________________________ __________________________
Terry Macaig Jeff Fehrs
__________________________ __________________________
Chris Roy Debbie Ingram
__________________________
Jay Michaud
Received and Recorded this ______ day of _________________, 2011.
________________________________________
Kathy Boyden, Assistant Town Clerk
Sewer Allocation Ordinance
Adopted: September 10, 1997
Amended: August 18, 2008
Amended August 15, 2011
Legend
Roads
RFDA
PARCELS
E
0 0.5 1 2
Miles
Restricted Firearms
Discharge Area
Firearms Discharge Ordinance Map
Williston, Vermont
Effective October 15, 2011






TOWN OF WILLISTON
Notice of Adoption
Sewer Allocation Ordinance Amendments
The Williston Selectboard has adopted an amendment to the Sewer Allocation Ordinance
known as Attachment A for fiscal year 2017 following a public hearing held on April 18,
2017. The Ordinance is an existing ordinance pertaining to the allocation of public
sewerage. Attachment A designates the portion of the uncommitted reserve capacity that
will be available next fiscal year as follows:
Allocation Category Amount (gpd)*
New commercial/industrial 7,500
New residential 8,740
Residential additions 1,500
Affordable housing 0
Planned public facilities 0
Pollution abatement 1,500
Specific development 10,000
Reserve 72,800
TOTAL ALLOCATED 102,040
*gpd = gallons per day
All amendments to the Ordinance will take effect on July 1, 2017 unless a petition signed
by at least five percent of the voters of Williston is filed with the Town Clerk by June 1,
2017, asking for a vote to disapprove the adoption. If a petition is received, the
Selectboard will warn a special meeting and the voters may vote on that question
pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1973.
The full text of the Ordinance and amendments may be viewed at the Manager's office
located at 7900 Williston Road, Williston, Vermont, during regular business hours. A
copy may also be viewed at the Town web site (http://town.williston.vt.us).
(Opportunities - Legal Notices)
Any questions about the amendments should be directed to the Manager’s office (802-
878-0919).
Dated at the Town of Williston, Vermont this 19th day of April 2017
Publication Date(s): April 27, 2017 (Williston Observer)








































ORDINANCE PROHIBITING
SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCESS
The Selectboard of the Town of Williston hereby ordains:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1: Purpose
Section 2: Authority
Section 3: Definitions
Section 4: Smoking Prohibited Places of Public Access
Section 5: Exceptions
Section 6: Posting of "No-Smoking" Signs
Section 7: Enforcement and Penalties
Section 8: Severability
1. PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and welfare of
residents of and visitors to the Town Of Williston by prohibiting smoking in places of
public access.
2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in 24 V.S.A. section 2291
(14).
3. DEFINITIONS
3.1. "Persons": as used in this Ordinance shall mean and include any person, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
3.2. “Place or Public Access" shall have the same meaning contained in 18 V.S.A.
Section 1741 (2), as now enacted and hereafter amended.
3.3. "Publicly owned buildings and offices" shall have the same meaning contained
in 18 V.S.A. Section 1741 (3), as now enacted or hereafter amended.
3.4. "Tobacco products" shall have the same meaning contained in 7 V.S.A. section
1001 (4), as now enacted or hereafter amended.
4. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCESS
All persons shall be prohibited from possessing any lighted tobacco products, in any
form, in the common areas of all enclosed indoor places of public access and publicly
owned buildings and offices.
5. EXCEPTIONS
The restrictions in Section 5 on possession of lighted tobacco products shall not apply
to:
5.1. Buildings owned and operated by social, fraternal, or religious organizations
when used by the membership or the organization, their guests or families, or
any facility that is rented or leased for private functions from which the public is
excluded and for which arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the
function;
5.2. Workplace smoking areas designated under 18 V.S.A. Chapter 28, subchapter 2;
5.3. Areas not commonly open to the public of owner-operated businesses with no
employees.
6. POSTING OF "NO-SMOKING" SIGNS
6.1. Any person or employer who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the
use of any premises subject to the restrictions contained in Section 5, above,
shall have the responsibility of properly posting and maintaining "No Smoking"
signs or the international "No-Smoking: symbol (a picture of a burning cigarette
inside a red circle with a red bar across it) clearly and conspicuously throughout
the premises.
6.2. The color of such signs, when not of the international type, shall have lettering
that is distinct, contrasting to the background and easily read.
7. ENFORCEMENT & PENALTIES
7.1. Any person who violates a provision of this civil ordinance shall be subject to a
civil penalty of up to $500.00 per day for each day that such violation continues.
The Administrative Officer, or any Law Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Williston shall be authorized to act as Issuing Municipal Officials to issue and
pursue before the Judicial Bureau a municipal complaint.
7.2. Waiver Fee: An Issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover a waiver fee,
in lieu of a civil penalty, in the following amounts, for any person and/or
owner/lessee who declines to contest a municipal complaint and pay the waiver
fee:
f:\worddocs\neword\smoking ordinance.doc 2
f:\worddocs\neword\smoking ordinance.doc 3
Individual Owner/Lessee
First Offense: $25.00 $25.00
Second Offense: $50.00 $50.00
Subsequent Offenses: $100.00 $100.00
Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.
7.3. Civil Penalties: An Issuing Municipal Official is authorized to recover civil
penalties in the following amounts for each violation:
Individual Owner/Lessee
First Offense: $50.00 $50.00
Second Offense: $75.00 $75.00
Subsequent Offenses: $125.00 $125.00
Offenses shall be counted on a calendar year basis.
7.4. Other Relief: In addition to the enforcement procedures available before the
Judicial Bureau, the Town Manager is authorized to commence a civil action to
obtain injunctive relief by the Town Selectboard or to pursue any other remedy
authorized by law.
8. SEVERABILITY
Any part or provision of this Ordinance shall be considered severable, and if any
provision of this Ordinance or the application thereto to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions of application, and
to this end the provisions of this Ordinance are declared severable.
This ordinance adopted September 20, 2004 will take effect November 22, 2004.




































Town of Williston
Motor Vehicle and Traffic Ordinance
Adopted July 21, 2014, Effective September 19, 2014
This Ordinance replaced in entirety the following:
Winter Parking Ordinance (1997)
Snow and Manure Deposit Ordinance (1971)
Traffic Ordinance (1976)
Article I.
Article II.
Article III.
Article IV
Article V.
Article VI
Article VI
Section
Article VI
Article IX
Article X.
Section
Section
Article XI
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Article XI
Section
Section
Article XI
Section
Section
Section
Section
Article XIV
Section
Section
Section
Section
Article XV
Adoptio
Purpos
. Definiti
. Special
Speed R
. Stop/Yi
I. Turning
n 7.01 Autho
II. Motor V
. Weight
Parking
n 10.01 Ge
n 10.02 Wi
. Miscella
n 11.01 Dri
n 11.02 Tow
n 11.03 De
n 11.04 Tam
n 11.05 Loa
I. Enforce
n 12.01 Au
n 12.02 Pe
II. Parking
n 13.01 Au
n 13.02 Civ
n 13.03 Wa
n 13.04 Civ
V. Genera
n 14.01 Sev
n 14.02 Sep
n 14.03 Pe
n 14.04 De
V. Repeal
Willist
on Authority
e .................
ons .............
Regulations
Regulations .
eld Intersect
g/Intersection
ority to Estab
Vehicle Oper
Regulations
g Regulations
eneral Parking
nter Parking
aneous Provi
iving on Sidew
wing and Sto
epositing of Sn
mpering with
aded Vehicles
ement of Traf
thority .........
nalties ..........
g Related Offe
thority .........
vil Penalties ..
aiver Fee ......
vil Penalty for
l Provisions .
verability ......
parate Offens
nalties ..........
esignation .....
of Prior Ordi
ton Motor Ve
Table
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
tions .............
n Control ......
blish Location
ational Rules
....................
s ...................
g Rules ..........
.....................
isions ...........
walks or Recr
rage Fees .....
now and Ice ..
h Traffic Contr
s ...................
ffic Related O
.....................
.....................
enses ............
.....................
.....................
.....................
r Violations ...
....................
.....................
ses ................
.....................
.....................
nances .........
ehicle and Tra
e of Contents
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
s ...................
s ...................
....................
....................
......................
......................
....................
reation/Share
......................
......................
rol Devices ....
......................
Offenses .......
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
......................
......................
....................
affic Ordinan
s
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
.....................
....................
....................
....................
.....................
.....................
....................
ed Use Paths .
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
nce
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
.....................
....................
....................
....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
.....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
....................
......................
....................
....................
....................
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
......................
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
......................
......................
....................
......................
......................
......................
......................
....................
...... 1
...... 1
...... 1
...... 1
...... 2
...... 2
...... 2
....... 2
...... 3
...... 3
...... 3
....... 3
....... 4
...... 4
....... 4
....... 4
....... 5
....... 5
....... 5
...... 5
....... 5
....... 5
...... 5
....... 5
....... 5
....... 6
....... 6
...... 6
....... 6
....... 6
....... 6
....... 6
...... 7
Williston
Article I
Pursu
Title
the T
follow
ORD
the T
Article I
In th
adop
of W
Article I
(a
(b
(c
Article I
The T
(a
(b
(c
Motor Vehicl
I. Adop
uant to the p
24, Vermont
Town of Willis
wing Motor V
INANCE is ado
Town of Willis
II. Purp
e interest of
pted to establ
Williston, Verm
III. Defin
a) Words
ordina
the co
b) Whene
state s
deeme
otherw
c) The de
IV. Spec
TOWN Police
a) In conj
approp
interse
at such
b) To est
deeme
c) The dr
voice,
slowin
taking
e and Traffic
Motor V
ption Auth
rovisions of T
Statutes Ann
ston, it is here
Vehicle and T
opted pursua
ston and it is
ose
public health
lish special tra
mont, hereina
nitions
s and/or phra
ance, have the
ntext otherw
ever any wor
statute regula
ed to apply to
wise requires
efinitions of 2
ial Regulat
are hereby a
junction with
priate devices
ections where
h other place
ablish safety
ed necessary
river or opera
hand, or sign
ng down the v
up or setting
ORDINANCE
Vehicle Tra
Town
hority
Title 23, Verm
notated, Secti
eby ordained
raffic Ordinan
ant to the aut
designated a
, safety, and w
affic, and par
fter referred
ases when use
e meanings re
wise requires.
ds and/or ph
ating the ope
o such words
.
23 V.S.A. § 4 a
tions
authorized:
h the Departm
s, mark or lin
e there is par
s as may be d
zones of such
for the prote
ator of any ve
n of any mem
vehicle, appro
g down passe
affic and P
of Willisto
mont Statutes
ions 1971 and
by the Select
nce is adopte
thority of Title
s a Civil Ordin
welfare of th
rking regulatio
to as the “TO
ed in this ORD
espectively as
rases used he
ration of veh
and phrases
are incorpora
ment of Public
es upon the s
ticular dange
deemed nece
h kind and ch
ection of pede
hicle shall at
ber of the po
oaching or de
ngers or load
Parking Or
on, VT
Annotated, S
d 2291 (1), (4
tboard of the
ed for the Tow
e 24, VSA, Ch
nance.
e Town of W
ons on the pu
OWN”.
DINANCE sha
scribed to the
erein are not
icles, any suc
used herein,
ted by refere
c Works, to d
surface of the
er to pedestria
essary;
aracter and a
estrians.
all times com
olice departm
eparting from
ding or unload
rdinance
Section 1007
4), and (5), an
e Town of Wil
wn of Willisto
apter 59 and
illiston, this O
ublic highway
ll, for the pur
em in this art
defined, but
ch definition t
except when
ence.
esignate and
e roadway, cr
ans crossing t
at such places
mply with any
ent as to stop
any place an
ding goods in
1 | P
and 1008, an
d the Charte
lliston that th
n, VT. This
the Charter o
ORDINANCE is
ys within the T
rpose of this
ticle, except w
are defined i
therein shall b
n the context
maintain, by
rosswalks at
the roadway
s as may be
y direction by
pping, startin
nd the manne
any place, an
a g e
nd
r of
he
of
s
Town
when
in the
be
y
and
ng or
er of
nd
Williston
(d
Article V
(a
(b
(c
(d
Article V
(a
(b
Article V
Section
The S
signs
locat
Motor Vehicl
shall c
directe
d) The pr
vehicle
vehicle
blue/w
right o
emerg
due ca
vehicle
V. Spee
a) The Se
speed
the pro
(MUTC
b) The sp
by the
per ho
c) When
any pe
d) Opera
operat
would
VI. Stop/
a) The Se
interse
shall b
be cha
b) It shal
or tam
VII. Turn
7.01 Autho
Selectboard m
s at locations
tions will be r
e and Traffic
omply with th
ed otherwise
rovisions of th
es, shall not a
es are operat
white lights) i
of way in any
gency, but sha
are. Operatin
e from driving
d Regulati
electboard is a
limit of certa
ocedure and
CD) in effect w
peed limit on
Selectboard.
our shall be re
signs are in p
erson to oper
tors of motor
ting a motor v
believe to be
/Yield Inte
electboard ha
ections as “St
be recorded in
anged or upda
l be unlawful
mper with any
ing/Interse
ority to Esta
may approve
when require
ecorded in A
ORDINANCE
he instruction
by a membe
his ORDINANC
apply to autho
ing the same
in the necess
street and th
all approach a
ng a vehicle in
g with due ca
ions
authorized, b
ain TOWN roa
standards ou
when so desig
all Town road
. All roads w
ecorded in AP
place upon TO
ate a motor v
r vehicles mu
vehicle. No v
e too fast for
ersections
as the authori
top” or “Yield
n APPENDIX B
ated on a per
for any perso
y traffic contro
ection Con
blish Locatio
by a majority
ed for the con
PPENDIX C of
ns and directi
r of the polic
CE governing
orized emerg
in an emerge
ary performa
rough any pr
all official traf
n an emergen
re and regard
by vote of a m
ads and street
utlined in the
gnated.
ds is set at 25
with speed lim
PPENDIX A of
OWN roads o
vehicle in exc
st drive with
vehicle will be
existing road
ty, by vote of
”, consistent
of this ordin
riodic basis.
on to intentio
ol device.
ntrol
ons
y vote of its m
ntrol of traffic
f this ordinan
ions of all off
e departmen
the moveme
gency vehicles
ency (display
ance of duty.
rocession whe
ffic signs, sign
cy does not r
d for the gene
majority of its
ts. Such desi
Manual on U
5 miles per ho
mits set by the
this ordinanc
r State Highw
cess of the po
regard to cur
e driven at sp
d conditions.
f a majority o
with the MU
nance. APPEN
onally remove
members, the
c, consistent
ce.
ficial traffic sig
t.
ent, parking a
s while the dr
ing red or red
Said vehicle
en operated i
nals, and inte
relieve the op
eral public.
members, to
gnation shall
Uniform Traffi
our unless oth
e Selectboard
ce.
ways, it shall b
osted speed li
rrent road co
eeds that a re
of its member
UTCD, and suc
NDIX B of this
e, injure, obst
placement o
with the MUT
2 | P
gns, unless
and standing o
rivers of such
d/white or blu
es shall have t
in such
ersections wit
perator of said
o designate th
be based up
ic Control Dev
herwise appro
d above 25 mi
be unlawful fo
mit.
nditions whe
easonable pe
rs, to designa
ch designation
s ORDINANCE
truct, deface,
of traffic lights
TCD. Any suc
a g e
of
ue or
the
th
d
he
on
vices
oved
iles
or
en
erson
te
ns
E may
, alter
s or
ch
Williston
Article V
(a
(b
Article I
(a
(b
Article X
Section
(a
(b
(c
(d
(e
(f
(g
Motor Vehicl
VIII. Moto
a) When
must b
b) The Se
or oth
compl
IX. Weig
a) When
gross w
b) 24,000
a spec
X. Parki
10.01 G
a) No per
the im
b) No ope
private
traffic
c) Parkin
hydran
sidewa
nuisan
remov
place d
d) No per
as rese
e) Parkin
remov
Towin
f) Whene
ORDIN
mainte
police
expen
to Sect
g) The Se
may fr
e and Traffic
or Vehicle
a traffic signa
be operated i
electboard is
er turns and s
y with all app
ght Regula
signs are ere
weight in exc
0 pound limit
ial permit has
ing Regula
General Park
rson shall par
mproved porti
erator or driv
e driveway, la
or in complia
g of any vehi
nt, in front of
alk, within an
nce, and the C
ved, at the so
designated by
rson shall par
erved for a bu
g of any vehi
val of such ve
g and storage
ever a motor
NANCE of the
enance of the
department
se of the own
tion 11.02 of
electboard ma
rom time to t
ORDINANCE
Operation
al or sign is p
n a manner c
authorized to
shall erect ap
plicable signs.
tions
ected giving n
ess of the am
is in effect fo
s been issued
ations
king Rules
rk a motor ve
on of an inter
ver of any veh
ane or alley, e
ance with the
cle within an
f a private driv
y area where
Chief of Police
le expense of
y the Chief w
rk any vehicle
us stop.
cle in a privat
hicle is permi
e fees shall be
vehicle is pa
TOWN or so
e highways, in
of the TOWN
ner in an amo
this ORDINA
ay approve by
ime modify “
nal Rules
resent on a th
consistent wit
o approve the
ppropriate sig
.
otice thereof
mounts specifi
or all Town ro
d.
ehicle or othe
rsecting road
hicle shall sto
except when
e direction of
intersection,
veway, on a b
ein parking is
e may remove
f the owner o
ithin the TOW
e at any time
te driveway w
issible by tow
e borne by th
rked on the h
as to interfer
ncluding but n
N may cause t
ount not to ex
NCE.
y a majority v
No Parking” a
hrough street
th state law a
e placement
gns giving not
f, no person s
ied herein at
oads and bridg
r vehicle on a
way or street
p, stand or pa
necessary to
a police offic
, on a crosswa
bridge, viaduc
prohibited is
e any vehicle
of such vehicle
WN, by towing
in any space
without perm
wing at the so
he owner of su
highways of th
re with the po
not limited to
the motor veh
xceed the tow
vote, recomm
areas. “No Pa
t or at an inte
and regulation
of signs restr
tice thereof.
shall operate
any time so d
ges unless ot
any street wit
t.
ark the same
avoid conflic
cer or official t
alk, within 15
ct or the app
hereby decla
so parked, o
e, to any pub
g or otherwis
herein or her
mission is proh
le discretion
uch vehicle.
he TOWN con
olicing, const
o the remova
hicle to be tow
wing fees esta
mended “No P
arking” areas
3 | P
ersection, veh
ns.
ricting a “U" t
Operators m
any vehicle w
declared.
therwise post
thin thirty fee
in front of a
ct with other
traffic sign.
5 feet of a fire
roach hereto
ared to be pu
r cause it to b
blic garage or
se.
reafter specif
hibited and th
of the landow
ntrary to an
ruction or
l of snow, the
wed away at
ablished purs
Parking” area
s will be descr
a g e
hicles
urn
ust
with a
ted or
et of
e
, on a
blic
be
other
fied
he
wner.
e
the
uant
s and
ribed
Williston
(h
(i
(j
Section
(a
(b
(c
Article X
Section
No v
recre
a pub
Section
The S
situa
SECT
Motor Vehicl
in APP
marke
tempo
Fire Ch
constr
tempo
conspi
h) If the o
vehicle
remov
or oth
Sectio
) The pa
way is
) Nothin
to the
operat
10.02 W
a) There
hours
of this
storm
b) The pr
of this
vehicle
of Ver
c) Each d
SECTIO
XI. Misc
11.01 D
ehicles shall b
eation path ot
blic safety pu
11.02 T
Selectboard,
tions where t
TION of this o
e and Traffic
PENDIX D of th
ed as “No Park
orary “No Par
hief or Public
ruction or oth
orarily designa
icuously place
owner of a ve
e and pay all t
val, the title to
erwise dispos
n 11.
arking or stor
prohibited.
ng in this Artic
direction of a
tor.
Winter Parki
will be no pa
of 11:00 PM
ORDINANCE
or in the eve
resence of an
SECTION sha
e is registered
mont, comm
day a motor v
ON shall const
ellaneous
Driving on Sid
be driven alo
ther than tho
rpose, within
owing and S
by a majority
the police de
rdinance.
ORDINANCE
his ordinance
king” may be
king” areas m
Works Direct
her similar eve
ated “No Par
ed.
ehicle summa
towing and st
o such vehicle
sed of in acco
age of equipm
cle shall be co
law enforce
ng
rking on Willi
and 7:00 AM
may be towe
nt of past vio
y motor vehi
all be prima fa
d on the reco
itted or autho
vehicle is park
titute a separ
Provisions
dewalks or R
ng or upon an
ose vehicles th
n the Town.
Storage Fees
y vote, shall ad
partment has
e. Vehicles fo
towed away
may be establ
tor for emerg
ents for the d
king” area sh
arily removed
torage expen
e shall eschea
ordance with
ment or unre
onstrued to m
ement officer
iston TOWN S
from Decem
ed away at ow
olations.
cle in or upon
acie evidence
rds of the Co
orized such v
ked on a TOW
rate offense.
s
Recreation/
ny sidewalk o
hat are there
s
dopt reasona
s initiated the
ound parking i
at the owner
ished from ti
gency situatio
duration of th
all be identifi
d under this S
nses within 30
at to the TOW
Title 27, Verm
gistered vehi
make unlawfu
or for causes
Streets and T
mber 1 throug
wner’s expen
n any TOWN
e that the per
ommissioner o
iolation.
WN street or h
/Shared Use
or any paved s
to perform m
able towing fe
e towing of a
in areas clear
r’s expense.
me to time b
ons, special ev
he event. Whe
ied as such w
ECTION does
0 days of the
WN and the ve
mont Statute
icles within th
ul vehicular st
s beyond the
TOWN Highwa
h April 1. Ve
se in the eve
street or high
rson in whose
of Motor Veh
highway, in vi
e Paths
surface comm
maintenance
ees applicable
vehicle in vio
4 | P
rly posted or
In addition,
y the Police C
vents, repairs
ere practical,
with signs
not claim suc
date of such
ehicle may be
s Annotated,
he Town right
tops in obedi
control of th
ays between
hicles in viola
nt of a snow
hway in violat
e name such
hicles of the S
olation of thi
monly used as
or those used
e to all towing
olation of any
a g e
Chief,
s,
the
ch
e sold
t‐ofence
e
the
ation
tion
tate
s
s a
d for
g
y
Williston
Section
No p
othe
sidew
Section
(a
(b
Section
No v
as to
Article X
Section
Pursu
and 1
enfo
beco
note
Offic
Section
Traff
asses
Article X
Section
Offen
not a
Warn
Section
Any p
$50 f
issue
Motor Vehicl
11.03 D
erson, by the
rwise deposit
walk, or in suc
11.04 T
a) It shal
or tam
b) It shal
mistak
11.05 Lo
ehicle shall b
o prevent its c
XII. Enfor
12.01 A
uant to Title 2
1008, certifie
rce motor ve
ome effective
d, shall be co
cers will utilize
12.02 P
fic violations f
ssed accordin
XIII. Parki
13.01 A
nses relating
traffic violat
ning/Parking
13.02 C
person who is
for each viola
e and pursue
e and Traffic
Depositing of
eir own act, o
t snow or ice
ch a manner
ampering w
l be unlawful
mper with any
l be unlawful
ken for an off
oaded Vehic
e driven or m
contents from
rcement o
Authority
24 VSA 1931,
d Vermont po
hicle and par
in accordanc
onsidered and
e approved T
enalties
fall under the
ng to the Judic
ing Related
Authority
to winter ban
tion or offens
notices.
ivil Penaltie
s in violation
ation. Any law
before the Tr
ORDINANCE
f Snow and
r through the
on the paved
so as to cove
with Traffic C
for any perso
y traffic contro
for any perso
ficial traffic co
cles
moved on any
m dropping, si
of Traffic Re
1935, 1974,
olice officers
king ordinanc
ce with Vermo
d enforced as
raffic Compla
e jurisdiction o
cial Bureau W
d Offenses
n parking (Sec
se and officer
es
of (Article X )
w enforcemen
raffic and Mu
Ice
eir agents or e
d or travelled
r or hinder th
Control Devi
on to intentio
ol device.
on to install a
ontrol device,
street unless
tting, leaking
elated Off
and 1977, Tit
appointed by
ces promulga
ont Statute. O
traffic violati
aints accordin
of the Vermo
Waiver Penalty
s
ction 10.02) s
s enforcing th
this ordinan
nt officer may
nicipal Ordin
employees, s
portion of an
he use of a TO
ces
onally remove
any sign or de
, without prio
s such vehicle
g of otherwise
fenses
tle 24 APP 15
y the Town of
ated by the TO
Offenses in th
ions accordin
ng to Title 4 V
ont Judicial Bu
y Schedule in
shall be consi
his SECTION w
nce shall be su
y act as an Iss
ance Bureau
hall throw, pu
ny public stre
OWN fire hyd
e, injure, obst
evice that may
or approval of
e is so constru
e escaping th
6‐5 (d), and T
f Williston are
OWN or have
his ordinance,
ng to Title 23 V
VSA Chapter 2
ureau and hav
n effect at the
dered parkin
will utilize Tow
ubject to a civ
suing Municip
a municipal c
5 | P
ut, place, pus
eet, on any TO
rant.
truct, deface,
y resemble o
f the Town.
ucted or load
erefrom.
Title 23 VSA 1
e authorized
e otherwise
, unless other
VSA Chapter
29.
ve penalties
e time of viola
g violations a
wn of Willisto
vil penalty of
pal Official an
complaint.
a g e
sh or
OWN
, alter
r be
ed so
1007
to
rwise
24.
ation.
and
on
up to
d
Williston
Section
An is
follow
waiv
Section
An is
each
Article X
Section
If any
inval
made
in th
statu
Section
Each
Section
The p
respe
passa
Section
This
here
Motor Vehicl
13.03 W
ssuing munici
wing amount
er fee:
First
Seco
Thir
subs
13.04 C
ssuing munici
violation of t
First
Seco
Thir
subs
XIV. Gene
14.01 S
y portion of t
id by a court
e hereto shal
is ORDINANC
ute.
14.02 S
violation of a
14.03 P
provisions of
ect to all othe
age or enactm
14.04 D
ORDINANCE
under a copy
e and Traffic
Waiver Fee
pal official is
ts, for any per
t offense
ond Offense
d Offense and
sequent offen
ivil Penalty
pal official is
this ordinanc
t offense
ond Offense
d Offense and
sequent offen
eral Provis
everability
his ORDINAN
of competen
l not be affec
CE shall be am
eparate Off
provision of
enalties
this ORDINAN
er statutes or
ment.
Designation
may be refer
y of such ordin
ORDINANCE
authorized to
rson who dec
$ 25.0
$ 35.0
d
nse
$50.0
for Violatio
authorized to
e:
$ 35.0
$ 45.0
d
nse
$60.0
ions
NCE and any a
t jurisdiction,
cted and shall
mended, this O
enses
f this ORDINA
NCE shall be c
r ordinances n
red to as the
nance, certifie
o recover a w
clines to conte
00
00
00
ns
o recover civi
00
00
00
amendments
, the remaind
l remain in fu
ORDINANCE s
ANCE shall be
cumulative to
now or herea
Williston Tra
ed by the Tow
waiver fee, in l
est a municip
l penalties in
made hereto
der of this OR
ull force and e
shall be deem
deemed a se
o the fullest e
fter adopted
affic Ordinanc
wn Clerk shal
lieu of a civil
pal complaint
the following
o are held unc
RDINANCE and
effect. If any s
med to refer to
eparate offen
extent permit
regardless of
ce and in a pro
l be prima fac
6 | P
penalty, in th
and pays the
g amounts fo
constitutiona
d amendmen
statute referr
o such amend
nse.
tted by law w
f their order o
osecution
cie evidence
a g e
he
e
r
l or
nts
red to
ded
with
of

Williston Motor Vehicle and Traffic ORDINANCE 8 | P a g e
Appendices
Appendix A – Speed Limits
Appendix B – Stop/Yield Intersections
Appendix C – Traffic Control Signals
Appendix D – No Parking Areas
STREET NAME POINT OF BEGINNING ENDING POINT MPH Authorized
Boyer Circle Marshall Avenue Marshall Avenue 30 June 21, 2014
Fay Lane North Williston Road end of road 30 June 21, 2014
Harvest Lane Vermont Route 2 Marshall Avenue 30 June 21, 2014
Industrial Avenue Williston Road Essex Road 30 June 21, 2014
Lincoln Road St. George Road Dead End 30 June 21, 2014
Marshall Avenue St. George Road Shunpike Road 30 June 21, 2014
North Brownell Road Williston Road Industrial Ave 30 June 21, 2014
South Brownell Road I‐89 overpass U.S. Route 2 30 June 21, 2014
Williston Road 1.8 miles west of Richmond T/L 2.8 miles west of Richmond T/L 30 June 21, 2014
Butternut Rd Oak Hill Road St. George Road 35 June 21, 2014
Christmas Hill Road South Road Dead end 35 June 21, 2014
East Hill Road South Road Richmond Town Line 35 June 21, 2014
Hurricane Lane Vermont Route 2A Dead end 25 September 22, 2014
North Williston Road Bridge‐Essex Line Williston Road 35 June 21, 2014
Old Creamery Road St. George Road Oak Hill Road 35 June 21, 2014
Old Stage Road Williston Road Dead end 35 June 21, 2014
Redmond Road Mountain View Road Town Landfill 35 June 21, 2014
Shunpike Road So. Brownell Road Marshall Ave 35 June 21, 2014
South Road Intersection of Oak Hill Rd Intersection of Oak Hill Rd 35 June 21, 2014
St. George Road 3.4 miles from St George town line 3.8 miles from St George town line 35 June 21, 2014
Sunset Hill Road Old Creamery Oak Hill Road 35 June 21, 2014
Van Sicklen Road South Brownell Road Town Bridge 35 June 21, 2014
Walker Hill Road St. George Road South Brownell Road 35 June 21, 2014
Williston Road 2.8 miles west Richmond town line 5.2 miles west Richmond town line 35 June 21, 2014
Essex Road 2.1 miles from Essex town line Essex town line 40 June 21, 2014
Mountain View Road Essex Road Intersection of North Williston Rd 40 June 21, 2014
Oak Hill Road Williston Road St. Hilaire Farm (MM 2.4) 40 June 21, 2014
South Brownell Road I 89 Overpass St George Town line 40 June 21, 2014
St. George Road 2.7 miles from St George town line St. George town line 40 June 21, 2014
Williston Road 0.5 miles west Richmond Town line 1.8 miles west Richmond town line 40 June 21, 2014
Williston Road 5.2 miles west Richmond T/L South Burlington town line 40 June 21, 2014
Oak Hill Road St. Hilaire Farm (MM 2.4) St. George town line 45 June 21, 2014
Williston Road Richmond Town line 0.5 miles west Richmond town line 50 June 21, 2014
Appendix A
Speed Limits
Appendix A
Williston Motor Vehicle and Traffic Ordinance






STREET NAME INTERSECTION AUTHORIZED
Blair Park Road Williston Road June 21, 2014
Harvest Lane Marshall Ave (South) June 21, 2014
Harvest Lane Marshall Ave (North) June 21, 2014
Harvest Lane Marshall Ave (West) June 21, 2014
Harvest Lane Williston Road June 21, 2014
Marshall Avenue South Brownell (West) June 21, 2014
Marshall Avenue South Brownell (East) June 21, 2014
Maple Tree Place Road Williston Road June 21, 2014
Maple Tree Place Road Essex Road(RT 2A) June 21, 2014
North Brownell Road Williston Road June 21, 2014
Paul Street Essex Road(RT 2A) June 21, 2014
South Brownell Road Williston Road June 21, 2014
South Brownell Road Marshall Avenue June 21, 2014
Trader Lane Marshall Avenue June 21, 2014
Zephyr Road Essex Road(Route 2A) June 21, 2014
Appendix C
Traffic Control Signals
Williston Motor Vehicle and Traffic Ordinance
Appendix C

Unified Development Bylaw
for the
Town of Williston
Vermont
Adopted: June 1, 2009
Last Amended: October 15, 2019
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
i
Credits
This bylaw was prepared by the Williston Planning Commission, including Kevin Batson, Steve Bradish
(former), Jon Eddy (former), Ron Herath (former), Debbie Ingram, Joel Klein, Paula LeBlanc (former),
Jake Mathon, Cathy O’Brien (sitting as an alternate from the Development Review Board), George Osol
(former), Nicole Senecal, and Dave Yandell, who chaired the commission throughout the process. Members
of Williston’s Development Review Board, Conservation Commission, and Historic and Architectural
Advisory Committee contributed many helpful suggestions.
The principal author of this bylaw was former Town Planner, Lee Nellis, AICP. John Adams; Jessica
Andreoletti; Ken Belliveau, AICP; Matt Boulanger, AICP; Melinda Scott; Emily Heymann; Carrie Deegan;
D.K. Johnston, AICP; David Pesnichak; and Karen Van Gilder, AICP, made valuable contributions.
Director of Public Works Neil Boyden, Engineering Technician Lisa Sheltra, and Town Manager Rick
McGuire provided helpful reviews and suggestions. Paul Gillies provided excellent legal advice.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
ii
Note to the reader: Beginning with the version adopted on January 21, 2013, this bylaw has been
paginated by chapter to facilitate more efficient updating and revision. The pages in Chapter 1, for
example, are labeled 1-2, 1-2, 1-3… If you are unsure if you have the most current version of this
document, please contact the staff at Williston Planning.
Table of Contents
---- Administration ----
1 Authorities, Purposes, and Basic Principles
2 Vested Rights, Nonconforming Lots, Uses, and Structures
3 Actors in the Administration of this Bylaw
4 Permits and Exemptions
5 Administrative Permit Procedures
6 Discretionary Permit Procedures
7 Enforcement, Including Guarantees that Improvements Will be Made
8 Variances and Amendments
9 Specific Plans
10 Boundary Adjustments
11 Growth Management
12 Subdivisions and Final Plans
---- Standards That Apply In More than One Zoning District ---
The standards adopted in Chapters 13-16 combine with the procedures established in Chapter 7 to
ensure that safe and adequate access and infrastructure are available in all developments.
13 Access, Connectivity, and Traffic Studies
14 Off-Street Parking and Loading
15 On-Site Infrastructure
16 Maintenance
The standards adopted in Chapters 17-21 combine with the standards for the zoning districts to
prevent health and safety hazards and nuisances, and to ensure that new development is compatible
with neighboring uses.
17 Accessory Uses & Structures, and Temporary Uses & Structures
18 Compatibility, Potential Hazards, and Potential Nuisances
19 Density, and Transfer of Development Rights
20 Residential Improvements
21 Telecommunications Facilities
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
iii
The standards adopted in Chapter 22-26 combine with the standards for the zoning districts to
promote architectural, landscape, and lighting design that is compatible with neighboring uses and
community goals. These standards also ensure that signs support effective way-finding while not
dominating Williston’s streetscapes.
22 Design Review
23 Landscaping
24 Outdoor Lighting
25 Signs and Public Art
26 Street Trees
The standards adopted in Chapters 27-30 combine with the standards for the ARZD, MDRZD, and
other zoning districts to promote land conservation and protect environmental quality.
27 Conservation Areas
28 Special Flood Hazard Areas
29 Watershed Health
--- Zoning Districts & Specific Standards ---
30 The Official Zoning Map
31 Agricultural/Rural Zoning District (ARZD)
32 Business Park Zoning District (BPZD)
33 Gateway Zoning District North (GZDN)
34 Gateway Zoning District South (GZDS)
35 Industrial Zoning District East (IZDE)
36 Industrial Zoning District West (IZDW)
37 Mixed-Use Commercial Zoning District (MUCZD)
38 Mixed-Use Residential Zoning District (MURZD)
39 Residential Zoning District (RZD)
40 Gateway Zoning District West (GZDW)
41 Taft Corners Zoning District (TCZD)
42 Village Zoning District (VZD)
--- Impact Fees ---
43 Parks and Recreation Fees
44 School Impact Fees
45 Transportation Impact Fees
--- Definitions ---
46 Definitions
--- Appendices ---
Appendix A Board Procedures
Appendix B Conflict of Interest Ordinance
Appendix C Model Development Agreement
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
iv
Appendix D Road Name & Road Addressing Ordinance
Appendix E Special Events Ordinance
Appendix F Noise Ordinance
Appendix G Home Businesses
Appendix H Williston Village Historic District Review Guide
Appendix I Calculation of the Transportation Impact Fee
--- Administrative Forms ---
Administrative forms are not adopted. They are prepared by the Administrator, as authorized by WDB
4.3.6. A complete set is provided with copies of this bylaw, but please be certain you have the current
version before filing any of these forms.
Application for an Administrative Permit
Notice of Appeal
Appeal Checklist
Boundary Adjustment Application
Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
Certificate of Appropriateness Checklist
Request for a Certificate of Compliance
Certificate of Compliance
Discretionary Permit Application
Discretionary Permit Checklist
Request for Growth Management Review
Final Plan
Landscaping Plan Checklist
Request for Pre-Application Review
Pre-Application Checklist
Runoff & Erosion Control Checklist
Runoff and Erosion Control Plan Checklist
Application for a Sign Permit
Specific Plan Application
Specific Plan Application Checklist
Specific Plan Contents Checklist
Application for a Variance
--- Application Checklists ---
Application checklists are not adopted. They are prepared by the Administrator, as authorized by WDB
4.3.6. A complete set is provided with copies of this bylaw, but please be certain you have the current
version before using the checklists.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
Williston Development Bylaw, Adopted June 1, 2009
History of Amendments:
Date of
Approval
Bylaw Section Nature of Amendment
March 22,
2010
Ch. 28 Special Flood
Hazard Areas
-Minor Changes to insure FEMA approval of SFHR
Ch. 2 Vested rights,
Nonconforming Lots, uses
and Structures
-Update to include nonconformities in Special Flood Hazard
Areas
August 23,
2010
Ch. 11 Growth
Management
-Allow extension of time for developments underway
Ch. 37 Mixed Commercial -Allow Industrial and Warehouse Uses
June
18,2012
Ch. 45 Transportation
Impact Fees
-Provided alternate method of calculating fee
-Amended List of Projects
-Provided Additional Credits for Construction of facilities
January
22, 2013
Overall Document
-General bylaw clean-up of various minor corrections, repagination,
and revisions to the Table of Contents
Ch. 32 Business Park
Zoning District
-Change street setback from 50 feet to 25 feet
Ch. 42 Village Zoning
District
-Change side yard setback from 15 feet to 10 feet
February
18, 2014
Ch. 43 Recreation Impact
Fee
-Revise fee schedule
Ch. 44 School Impact Fee -Revise fee schedule, added School impact fees to Bylaw,
repealed School Impact fee ordinance
Ch. 45 Transportation
Impact Fees
-Revise fee schedule, added construction of Zephyr Road
and the US2/Industrial Avenue Intersection to the list of
eligible projects
Ch. 36 Industrial Zoning
District West
-Allow Medical Marijuana Dispensaries
April 21,
2014
Ch. 27 Conservation Areas -Created provisions for conservation and wildlife habitat
protection as a component of all levels of development
review.
Ch. 31 Agricultural/ Rural
Residential Zone
-Add references to Ch. 27
Ch. 39 Residential Zoning
District
-Add references to Ch. 27
Ch. 46 Definitions -Added a definition of “Conservation Areas”
Maps -Adopted new maps: “1988 LESA Farmland,” “Significant
Wildlife Habitat,” “Unique Natural Communities,”
Uncommon, Threatened and Endangered Species,” and
“Visual Assessment” for use with Ch. 27
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
Williston Development Bylaw, Adopted June 1, 2009
History of Amendments:
Date of
Approval
Bylaw Section Nature of Amendment
January
26, 2015
Ch. 11 Growth
Management
-Sets the new growth management criteria to run through
FY 2025
-Changed the use of the term “dwelling unit” for growth
management purposes to count a one-bedroom unit as .5 of
a dwelling unit
-Reserves 25% of available dwelling units in each growth
management area for affordable housing
-Limits the number of units that can be allocated to any one
project in any one year
-Limits the number of units that can be allocated in future
years to ensure units are available throughout the 10-year
cycle.
-Extends expiration of allocation from four to five years
-Extends available extensions from two to five years
-Adjusts scoring criteria for the provision of affordable
housing
Ch. 24 Outdoor Lighting -Prohibits “bands of light” on buildings
-Requires outdoor lighting to be turned off at 10:00Pm or
within ½ hour of close of business
-Limits façade-mounted lights to a height of 15 feet
Ch. 25 Signs -Allowed for some off-site signs for agricultural businesses
-Requires signs with internal illumination to be eliminated in
2025
Ch. 29 Watershed Health -Creates the Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area
(LISPA)
-Requires a 100 foot setback for new structures from Lake
Iroquois
Ch. 31 Agricultural/Rural
Residential Zoning District
-Reduces allowed building height within the LISPA from 36
to 30 feet.
-Adds standards and requirements for new development in
the LISPA.
May 4,
2015
Ch. 33 Gateway Zoning
District North
-Adds “Professional and Technical Services (NAICS 541),
Admin and Support Services (NAICS 561-5616), and Civic
and Professional Organizations (NAICS 813) to the list of
allowed uses in the Gateway Zoning District North.
Ch. 31 Agricultural/Rural
Residential Zoning District
-Allows “Banquet Facilities” to be established in historic
barns with approval of a discretionary permit.
August 18,
2015
Ch. 17 Non Residential
Accessory Uses and
Structures
-Allows food sales in conjunction with accessory sales
-Restricts size of food sales areas to 10% of floor area, not
to exceed 1500 square feet.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
Williston Development Bylaw, Adopted June 1, 2009
History of Amendments:
Date of
Approval
Bylaw Section Nature of Amendment
-Removes prohibition on advertising of limited service
eating places allowed under the chapter
-Specifically allows mobile food vendors as an accessory use
to commercial properties with a discretionary permit.
Ch. 40 Gateway Zoning
District West
-Establishes a new mixed-use zoning district in the area of
the intersection of South Brownell Road and Williston Road.
-Allows for greater residential density than the RZD
-Allows for limited commercial uses of properties in the
zone.
Ch. 22 Design Review -Adds a reference to the new GZDW as a zone included
within the Design Review District
Ch. 32 Business Park
Zoning District
-Extends the building height incentives for structured
parking and affordable housing available in the Taft Corners
Zoning district and elsewhere to properties within the
Business Park Zoning District
Ch. 37 Mixed Use
Commercial Zoning
District
-Allows required design elements for new development in
the district to be provided cumulatively (as opposed to on
each building) under a site plan approval, where previously
approval of a specific plan was required.
-Replaces the “ice rink” required design element with “onsite
renewable energy generation.”
Ch. 41 Taft Corners
Zoning District
-Allows required design elements for new development in
the district to be provided cumulatively (as opposed to on
each building) under a site plan approval, where previously
approval of a specific plan was required.
-Replaces the “ice rink” required design element with “onsite
renewable energy generation.”
-Clarifies that “multiple stories” required design element
must involve a second story that is 60% or greater the area
of the first story.
December
7, 2015
Ch. 31 Agricultural/Rural
Residential Zoning District
Approval of the use of a portion of the former Pine ridge
School property for use as a theological seminary under a
Specific Plan
May 1,
2018
Ch.
1,2,4,7,9,11,12,13,14,15,1
7,18,19,20,23,25,27,28,29
,30,31,32,34,35,36,38,40,
41,42,43,45,46; Appendix
G
General updates to reference the new 2016 Williston
Comprehensive Plan, changes in statute, and corrections of
errors in cross-referencing.
Ch. 14 Parking - Add language allowing EV charging spaces to be a portion
of required spaces up to 5%.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
Williston Development Bylaw, Adopted June 1, 2009
History of Amendments:
Date of
Approval
Bylaw Section Nature of Amendment
- allow carpool spaces, EV spaces, etc. to be counted as part
of required parking.
- Increase number of parking spaces generating ADA
requirements in line with federal requirements.
- There is a conflict between minimum backup distance and
minimum aisle width. Make minimum aisle width 24 feet for
consistency with backup distance requirement.
Ch. 17 Accessory Uses and
Structures
- Create provision expanding accessory sales of food and
drink for food and drink manufacturers only: 30% of
tenancy not to exceed 2,000 square feet with a contiguous
outdoor seating area not to exceed 500 square feet.
- Make it clear that accessory structures must be accessory
to a primary structure.
Ch. 20 Residential
Improvements
- Change to allow the owner to live in either the primary or
the accessory unit.
- Remove requirement for DRB review of ALL home
businesses in tow-or-more- family homes. Require DRB
review of proposed home businesses in a two or multifamily
building that involve overnight parking of large work
vehicles.
Ch. 25 Signs - Make it clearer which standards can be adjusted or waived
under an approved master Sign Plan. Add clarification that
internal illumination cannot be approved as part of a Master
Sign Plan.
- Allow for temporary “information centers” at active,
permitted construction sites.
Ch. 31 Agricultural Rural
Residential District
- Added a statement that unless no other suitable lands
area is available, creation of a building lot on 15%-19%
slopes is not allowed.
- Added guiding language to help the DRB determine if
protected open space is “contiguous” as required by this
chapter.
- Require protected open space to be platted as a separate
lot.
- Remove provisions related to “Invisible Development.”
- Require historic barns to be restored for banquet facilities
or multifamily housing to be on the state or national
registers of historic places. Remove DRB discretion to
determine that other barns not on one of those lists are
“historic.”
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
Williston Development Bylaw, Adopted June 1, 2009
History of Amendments:
Date of
Approval
Bylaw Section Nature of Amendment
February
19, 2019
Ch. 11, Growth
Management
-changes allocation tracking and permitting procedures
-replaces allocation expiration provisions with “slow build”
-replaces 10-year fixed allocation schedule with 10-year
“rolling” allocation window.
-adjusts allocation scoring criteria and adds sustainable
transportation criteria
-exempts dwelling units that will be affordable at 80% Area
Median Income entirely from allocation requirements.
-allows for projects scoring 70 or more points in the growth
management process to proceed without allocation and in
excess of the 80 unit per year “cap” on new residential
growth.
Ch. 36, Industrial Zoning
District West
- Added Financial Advisors” to the list of allowed uses in
table 36.A for the IZDW.
October
15, 2019
Ch. 45, Transportation
Impact Fee
- fee increase from $750.00 per trip to $1943.00 per trip.
- definition of trips has been broadened to include all types of
trips: walking, transit, bicycling, and driving.
- prediction of new trips has been adjusted to account for the
transportation benefits of compact, mixed-use development.
- Clarify how developers who build projects or portions of
projects on the project list will be credited for their contribution
to the Town’s infrastructure.
- Provide an exemption from the fee for affordable housing and
childcare.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 - | 1
Chapter 1
Authorities Purposes - Basic Principles
This chapter cites the statutory authorities for the
adoption of this bylaw and states its purposes. It
also adopts basic principles that guide the
administration of this bylaw.
1.1 Authority
1.1.1 What is the legal authority for adoption of this bylaw? Vermont law provides abundant
authority for the adoption of this bylaw. 24 V.S.A. § 4401, 4402, and 4410 authorize the regulatory
implementation of municipal plans. 24 V.S.A § 4402 and 4419 specifically authorize the adoption
of a unified development bylaw. 24 V.S.A. § 4419 states:
Any bylaws authorized under this chapter may be integrated into a unified land development
bylaw that combines the separate requirements into a consolidated review and permitting
process.
1.1.2 What is a unified development bylaw? This unified development bylaw integrates zoning, as
authorized by 24 V.S.A. §§ 4411-4414; site plan review, as authorized by 24 V.S.A. § 4416;
planned unit development regulations, as authorized by 24 V.S.A § 4417, subdivision regulations,
as authorized by 24 V.S.A. § 4418; requirements for adequate public facilities and growth
management, as provided by 24 V.S.A. § 4423; the transfer of development rights, as authorized by
24 V.S.A. § 4423; and the regulation of shorelands and flood hazard areas, as authorized by 24
V.S.A. § 4424. Citations of authority for specific portions of this bylaw are given where needed.
1.2 Purposes. This bylaw is adopted for the purposes established by 24 V.S.A. § 4292 and to
implement the regulatory policies of Williston’s Town Plan. Policy 14.1 of that plan states:
The Town of Williston will revise its bylaws to be consistent with the policies adopted in this
plan. These revisions will take the form of a unified development bylaw.
The requirements of this bylaw are the minimum necessary to ensure that individual land use decisions
are consistent with the Town Plan, as required by 24 V.S.A. § 4410.
1.3 Basic Principles Applicants Should Understand. Your signature on an application for a permit is an
acknowledgement of the following basic principles.
1.3.1 State and federal regulations may apply. Applicants should understand that state and federal
regulations apply to many projects. Where those regulations are not as restrictive as this bylaw, this
bylaw applies. State and federal regulations may also be more restrictive than this bylaw, in which
case both the requirements of this bylaw and the state or federal regulation apply. You should not
submit an application for a permit to the town until you have a clear understanding of how state
and federal regulations affect your project. If you obtain a permit from the town, then make a
substantial change in the approved final plans to comply with state or federal regulations, you must
apply for and obtain a new or amended town permit.
1.3.2 Private agreements may apply. Applicants should be aware that covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, and similar private agreements affect many projects. Those agreements may be more
restrictive than this bylaw. You should not submit an application for a permit to the town until you
have a clear understanding of how private agreements affect your project. If you obtain a permit
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 - | 2
from the town, then make a substantial change in the approved final plans to comply with a private
agreement, you must apply for and obtain a new or amended town permit.
1.3.3 Burden of proof. Applicants should understand that the burden of demonstrating compliance
with this bylaw rests with them. Be sure you understand the relevant requirements of this bylaw
before submitting an application for a permit. It is important to submit a clear, complete
application. The town provides application forms and checklists, but most applicants will need to
retain qualified professional help to prepare their application.
1.3.4 Representations are binding. All representations made on application forms and checklists,
and in the drawings and other materials that accompany an application, are binding. What does
‘binding’ mean? It means that the applicant must build the project as it is described and depicted in
the materials approved by the Administrator or the DRB. Minor changes in approved final plans
may be permitted by WDB 5.6. Substantial changes require a new administrative permit and may
require the amendment of a discretionary permit or, possibly, a new discretionary permit
1.4 Severability. If any provision of this bylaw or the application of this bylaw in specific circumstances
is held invalid by any court, the remainder of the bylaw and/or its application in other circumstances shall
be unaffected.
1.5 Disclaimer of Liability. These regulations do not create any liability on the part of the Town of
Williston, its officials, agents, employees, or representatives for alleged damages that result from reliance
on these regulations or any lawful administrative action or decision taken under these regulations.
1.6 Effective Date. These regulations became effective on June 22, 2009.
1.7 Title and Citation. This bylaw should be referred to as the Williston Development Bylaw. Sections
should be cited as “WDB, (chapter number), (section number), (subsection number), (sub-subsection
number).
1.8 About Text Boxes. The text boxes provide information that supplements this bylaw. They are not part
of the bylaw, however, and the Administrator may edit them as necessary.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 - | 1
Chapter 2
Vested Rights
Nonconforming Lots,
Uses, and Structures
This chapter provides for the transition from
the previous bylaws to this one. It repeals the
previous bylaws, while protecting the rights
of projects that are underway to proceed in
compliance with those bylaws. It also
establishes the rights of nonconforming lots,
uses, and structures.
2.1 Previous Bylaws. All bylaws authorized by Chapter 117, Title 24 of the Vermont Statutes that existed
on the effective date of this bylaw are hereby repealed to the extent of their inconsistency with this bylaw.
2.2 Vested Rights. It is important to understand the difference between these provisions for vested rights
and the provisions this bylaw makes for existing, but nonconforming, lots, uses, and structures in WDB
2.3-2.6. This section applies only to developments for which a complete application had been filed or a
permit approved, but that were not completed, and thus not ‘existing,’ on the effective date of the current
version of this bylaw.
2.2.1 What is a vested right? A vested right is the right for a development to be completed in
compliance with the rules that were in effect on the date the application for a permit for that
development was deemed complete.
Complete? Completed? A ‘complete’ application is one that has been accepted as such by the Administrator, as provided
by WDB 5.1.6 or 6.4.6. A ‘completed’ development is one for which a certificate of compliance (CC) has been issued, as
provided by WDB 7.3, or where a CC is not required, one on which all work has been completed, as permitted.
2.2.2 How is a vested right established?
2.2.2.1 For Residential Subdivisions. Obtaining approval of a residential subdivision in
Williston is a competitive process. Subdivisions are evaluated and ranked on the basis of their
consistency with the town’s goals, as stated in the town plan and this bylaw. Development
rights do not vest until a residential subdivision has been through pre-application review as
required by WDB 6.2; obtained an allocation from the town’s residential growth target as
provided by Chapter 11 of this bylaw; and submitted a timely and complete application for a
discretionary permit following the procedures established in WDB 6.4, et seq.
2.2.2.2 For Other Developments. A vested right can be established only by having filed a
complete application for a discretionary permit or an administrative permit, whichever is the
appropriate first step in the proposed development’s review. Vested rights cannot be
established by filing a request for pre-application review.
2.2.3 What is the extent of a vested right?
2.2.3.1 For Subdivisions. Lots in subdivisions that are completed in reliance on a vested right
may be conveyed, even if they have become nonconforming. Development of the lots must,
however, comply with this bylaw or obtain a variance, as provided by WDB 8.1.3.6.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 - | 2
2.2.3.2 For Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are completed in reliance on a vested
right may be occupied, even if they become nonconforming. See WDB 2.5 and 2.6 regarding
nonconforming uses and structures.
2.2.4 Can vested rights expire? Yes. Both this bylaw and the previous bylaws provide for the
expiration of permits or approvals. Vested rights expire with the permit or approval.
2.2.5 Can a plan with vested rights be revised? Any substantial change in the approved final plans
for a development voids its vested rights. Minor changes may be allowed, with the approval of the
Administrator, as provided at WDB 5.6.
2.3 Specific Authority. The provisions of WDB 2.4, 2.5, and 2.6 are specifically authorized by 24 V.S.A
§ 4412(7), which requires all bylaws to “define how nonconformities will addressed, including standards
for nonconforming uses, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming lots.” These provisions are also
consistent with 24 V.S.A § 4412(2), which limits municipal regulation of “existing small lots.”
2.4 Nonconforming Lots
2.4.1 What is a nonconforming lot? Per 24 V.S.A. § 4303 (13), nonconforming “lots or parcels do
not conform to the present bylaws covering dimensional requirements, but were in conformance with
all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws,
including a lot or parcel improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.”
Usually a lot is nonconforming because it is too small to accommodate any use that is permitted in
its zoning district. Lots may also be nonconforming for other reasons, including the lack of legal or
safe access.
2.4.2 Must nonconforming lots be merged? Contiguous, nonconforming lots that are under the same
ownership are considered merged, except as provided below.
2.4.2.1 Exception to Merger. Contiguous, nonconforming lots may be conveyed in their preexisting,
nonconforming configuration where, on the effective date of this bylaw, each lot:
· was connected to central water and sewer systems or developed with a water
supply and wastewater disposal system that is functioning in an acceptable
manner, as verified in the field by a licensed designer, or
· had an allocation for a dwelling unit approved under any of the previous
versions of the growth management system that is embodied in Chapter 11 of
this bylaw.
2.4.2.2 Easements Required. The instruments of conveyance for contiguous, nonconforming
lots that are not merged must create easements sufficient for the replacement and maintenance
of water and wastewater systems on all lots involved.
What does it mean to “merge” lots? Lots are merged for the purposes of this bylaw only. They may still appear
as separate in the land records or be subject to separate property tax bills. Merger means only that the lots are
treated as one for the purposes of determining compliance with the standards of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 - | 3
2.4.3 How can a nonconforming lot be used? A nonconforming lot that is not subject to merger as
required by WDB 2.4.2; is in individual, separate, and nonaffiliated ownership from surrounding
properties; and was in existence on the effective date of this bylaw, may be used as provided here.
2.4.3.1 Boundary Adjustment. Nonconforming lots may be divided and added to adjoining
lots using the boundary adjustment procedure established by Chapter 10 of this bylaw.
2.4.3.2 Development. A nonconforming lot may be developed for any of the uses permitted in
the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the proposed development complies
with all other requirements of this bylaw. If full compliance is not possible, a variance may be
approved using the nonconformity as a basis for the findings required by WDB 8.1.3.
2.5 Nonconforming Uses
2.5.1 What is a nonconforming use? Per 24 V.S.A. § 4303(15), a nonconforming use is “a use of
land that does not conform to the present bylaws, but did conform to all applicable laws, ordinances,
and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws, including a use improperly authorized
as a result of error by the administrative officer.”
2.5.2 Can nonconforming uses continue? Yes, but only with the limitations described in WDB 2.5.3
and 2.5.4.
2.5.3 Can a nonconforming use be changed? No. Any change in use, or in the nature or extent of
use, is subject to the requirements of this bylaw.
2.5.4 What happens if a nonconforming use ceases to operate? If a nonconforming use ceases
operation for more than one year (twelve months) it may be replaced only with a conforming use.
2.6 Nonconforming Structures
2.6.1 What is a nonconforming structure? Per 24 V.S.A. § 4303(14), a nonconforming structure is
“a structure or part of a structure that does not conform to the present bylaws, but was in conformance
with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations prior to the enactment of the present bylaws,
including a structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrative officer.”
2.6.2 Can a nonconforming structure continue? Yes. Nonconforming structures can continue
indefinitely in their present form, unless they are determined to be dangerous buildings, in accord
with WDB 18.2. Routine maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures is permitted.
2.6.3 Can a nonconforming structure be replaced? Yes, with some limitations. A nonconforming
structure may be replaced with a new one as long as there is no change in the nature or extent of any
nonconforming use if present, and the degree of the structure’s nonconformity is not increased. A
nonconforming structure that is demolished or destroyed may only be replaced if a permit to replace
the nonconforming structure is obtained no later than one year (12 months) from the date when the
nonconforming structure was destroyed.
2.6.4 Can a nonconforming structure be modified? Yes, with some limitations. A nonconforming
structure may be modified or expanded as long as there is no change in the nature or extent of
any nonconforming use if present, and the degree of the structure’s nonconformity is not
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 - | 4
increased. WDB 31.3.4.4 contains specific restrictions on the expansion of nonconforming
structures in the Lake Iroquois Shoreline Protection Area (LISPA).
Is allowing the replacement or enlargement of a nonconforming structure good policy? First, remember that a
conforming use can be housed in a nonconforming structure. This means that the replacement or enlargement of a
nonconforming structure may not result in a change in the nature or extent of a nonconforming use. Second, refusing to
allow the replacement of nonconforming structures often results in blight, as these structures are not maintained. Allowing
replacement may result in an improvement. Finally, most nonconforming structures are not nonconforming in every
dimension. Consider a building that is too close to a stream or a property line. The side nearest the stream or property line
is nonconforming, but as long as that side doesn’t change, it may be possible to expand the building in another direction in
full compliance with this bylaw. This possibility gives the owner an asset instead of a building there is little incentive to
maintain.
2.7 Nonconforming Signs. See WDB 25.9.
2.8 Correction of Nonconformities. The DRB may require that nonconformities be corrected as a
condition of approval of a discretionary permit for additional development on the same lot or on adjacent
lots in the same ownership. This power is limited to requiring work that is reasonably proportional to
the scale of the proposed development.
2.9 Additional Regulations for Nonconformities
2.9.1 What if a nonconforming lot, use, or structure is in a watershed protection buffer?
2.9.1.1 Within SFHA’s. As provided by WDB 28.l6 and the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program, nonconformities located in watershed protection buffers that are
also Special Flood Hazard Areas may not be maintained, repaired, replaced, or enlarged unless
it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses conducted in accordance
with standard engineering practices and certified by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed work will result in no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood.
2.9.1.2 Outside SFHAs. Nonconformities located in watershed protection buffers that are not
also Special Flood Hazards Areas may be maintained, repaired, replaced, and enlarged
provided that the degree of nonconformity is not increased, and that all exterior work is subject
to the runoff and erosion control requirements of Chapter 29 of this bylaw, but no change that
permits or expands the processing, manufacture, storage, or handling of regulated hazardous
materials or materials that could float and be dispersed downstream during a flood may be
permitted.
2.9.2 What if a nonconforming lot, use, or structure is in the Village Zoning District? All exterior
changes in the Village Zoning District must comply with the Williston Village Historic District
Design Review Guide.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 - | 1
Chapter 3
Actors in the Administration
of this Bylaw
This chapter lists the actors in the administration
of this bylaw and explains their roles. It also
addresses conflicts of interest and ex parte
contacts.
3.1 Administrator. The Administrator is the town employee or contractor charged with the
administration of this bylaw. As required by 24 V.S.A. App. § 156-16h(3)(J) (Section 16h(3)(J) of the
Williston Town Charter), he or she is appointed by the Town Manager based on merit and fitness without a
definite term. He or she may be removed for cause by the Town Manager, at any time. The Town Manager
may also appoint Deputy Administrators.
3.2 Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission is created by § 15(2)(C) of the Town
Charter, which describes its composition and the appointment of its members, and in accord with 24
V.S.A. § 4501, et seq. Its role in the administration of this bylaw is to review developments for which a
discretionary permit is required and advise the DRB regarding their compliance with this bylaw. The
Conservation Commission reviews all developments that implement open space, including all
neighborhood parks and watershed protection buffers, and/or recreation paths or trails. The Administrator
may also refer other developments to the Conservation Commission.
Town Charter? Williston’s charter may be found at the Town’s website or in Title 24, Appendix Chapter 156 of the Vermont
Statutes Annotated.
3.3 Development Review Board. The Development Review Board (DRB) is created by § 15(b)(2)(B) of
the Town Charter, which describes its composition and the appointment of its members, and in accord
with 24 V.S.A. § 4460 and 4461 (in Williston, the DRB is the AMP, appropriate municipal panel referred
to in those statutes). The powers of the DRB are established by this bylaw. The DRB hears appeals from
decisions of the Administrator, as provided by WDB 5.4 and reviews and acts on applications for
discretionary permits, as described in Chapter 6 of this bylaw. The DRB’s rules of procedure are
generally established in this bylaw. See WDB 3.10 and 3.11, below, and Chapters 4-12. Rules for the
organization of the DRB, including the election of officers, are established in Appendix A of this bylaw.
3.4 Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works (DPW) is the town employee or contractor
charged with the overall supervision of the town’s infrastructure. The DPW promulgates the Public
Works Standards that are referred to in many places in this bylaw and assists the Administrator and DRB
in the review of proposed developments.
3.5 Historic and Architectural Advisory Committee (HAAC). The Historic and Architectural Advisory
Committee is a seven-member advisory committee, appointed by the Selectboard under the authority of
24 V.S.A § 4433. Its role in the administration of this bylaw is:
3.5.1 … to review proposed developments, including major additions, in the design review districts
established in Chapter 22 of this bylaw and advise the DRB regarding their compliance with the
design review standards adopted in that and other chapters of this bylaw;
3.5.2 … to review proposed development for which a discretionary permit is required by this bylaw
in the VZD and advise the DRB regarding its compliance with the standards established in Chapter
42 of this bylaw, including the standards of the Williston Village Historic District Design Review
Guide; and
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 - | 2
3.5.3 … review applications for administrative permits on referral from the Administrator, as
provided by WDB 42.2.2.
3.6 Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is created by § 15(b)(2)(A) of the Town Charter,
which describes its composition and the appointment of its members, and in accord with 24 V.S.A. §
4311, et seq. It prepared this bylaw, as provided by 24 V.S.A. 4441, and is responsible for the preparation
of any amendments. The Planning Commission may also be asked to advise the Administrator and/or the
DRB on the interpretation of this bylaw.
3.7 Selectboard. The five Selectboard members are Williston’s chief elected officials. The Selectboard
adopted this bylaw, as provided by 24 V.S.A § 4442 and must make any amendments. The Selectboard
also appoints the Administrator and the members of the other bodies described in this chapter.
3.8 Town Clerk. This bylaw, as adopted, and some documents produced in its administration must be
filed with the Town Clerk.
3.9 Town Manager. The Town Manager is the chief executive officer retained by the Selectboard. The
Town Manager signs contracts on behalf of the town, including the development agreements required by
Chapter 7 of this bylaw.
3.10 Conflicts of Interest
3.10.1 What is a conflict of interest? Conflicts of interest are defined by Williston’s Conflict of
Interest Ordinance, which is appended to this bylaw as Appendix B.
3.10.2 What is the proper response to a conflict of interest? Any actor in the administration of this
bylaw, including staff or any member of the town boards listed in this chapter, who has a conflict
of interest in the review of any application for a permit, or in any other proceeding authorized by
this bylaw, shall declare that conflict and refrain from any participation in the proceedings.
3.11 Ex Parte Contacts
3.11.1 What is an ex parte contact? An ex parte contact occurs when a member of the DRB or
either of the advisory boards (Conservation Commission, HAAC) discusses an application for a
permit with the applicant, the applicant’s representative, or any of the potentially affected
neighbors outside a public meeting or their representatives. Ex parte contacts are defined in the
town’s Conflict of Interest Ordinance: see Appendix B.
3.11.2 What is the proper response to an ex parte contact? Members should avoid ex parte
contacts whenever possible. When such a contact is unavoidable, members must disclose ex parte
contacts for the record of the hearing.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 1
Chapter 4
Permits Exemptions
This chapter requires a permit for all development
activity. It also allows some complete and partial
exemptions from that requirement and establishes
the two types of permits used in the administration
of this bylaw. Permit application, review, and
appeal procedures are found in Chapters 5 and 6 of
this bylaw.
4.1 Permit Requirements
4.1.1 Is a permit required for development? Yes. Permits are required for all development that is
not specifically exempted by WDB 4.2. Failure to obtain a permit before beginning development is
a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
4.1.2 What is development? 24 V.S.A. § 4293(10) defines “land development” as “the division of a
parcel into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining, excavation, or landfill,
and any change in the use of any building or other structure, or land, or extension of use of land.”
This bylaw uses the term ‘development’ rather than land development, but they are synonymous.
4.1.3 Are land boundary adjustments development? See Chapter 10 of this bylaw, which
establishes the review procedure for proposed boundary adjustments that create no significant
potential for future subdivision, but must be reviewed for content and form. Proposed boundary
adjustments that present some potential for future subdivision will ordinarily be treated as
development for which a discretionary permit is required, but WDB 10.1.3 does provide two
possible exceptions to this rule.
4.1.4. Are outdoor sales and storage development? Yes. Outdoor sales and storage are
development, and are regulated by this bylaw. Outdoor sales and storage are not permitted in all
zoning districts. Where they are permitted, outdoor sales and storage areas must be specifically
delineated on the plans submitted with an application for a permit. If approved, outdoor sales and
storage will be confined to the delineated areas. Specific standards for outdoor sales and storage
appear in the chapters establishing each zoning district.
4.1.5 Are exterior changes that do not change a building’s dimensions development? They may
be. 24 V.S.A. § 4414(e) specifically authorizes Williston to regulate such changes in design review
districts and several zoning districts are designated as design review districts, including the BPZD,
GZDS, GZDW, MUCZD, MURZD, TCZD, and VZD. Development on lots in the IZDW that
adjoin Marshall Avenue and Route 2 are also subject to design review.
4.1.6 Is the posting or placement of a sign development? Yes. The installation, posting, or
placement of any sign, including temporary and portable signs, is development regulated by this
bylaw. 24 V.S.A. § 2291(7) also gives the Town independent authority to regulate signs.
4.1.7 Is a change of use development? Yes. A ‘change of use’ for which a permit is required by
this bylaw occurs when the use of a building, a space within a building, or a lot is changed and the
new use is not in the same four-digit North America Industry Classification System (NAICS)
category as the old use.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 2
4.1.8 When is a permit required for development? Before ANY land division or work begins.
Permits must be obtained before lots are created or before a site is cleared of vegetation or any
earth is moved. Clearing or grading a site before applying for the required permits is a violation of
this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6. Restoration of the site to its
original condition may be required.
4.2 Exemptions from the Requirements of this Bylaw
4.2.1 Are there exemptions from this bylaw? There are a few, which are listed below. There are
also some partial exemptions, which are listed in WDB 4.2.2
4.2.1.1 State-Regulated Utilities. As provided by 24 V.S.A § 4413(b), this bylaw does not
apply to public utility power generating plants and transmission facilities.
4.2.1.2 Agricultural and Silvicultural Practices. As provided by 24 V.S.A § 4413(d), this
bylaw does not apply to specific Required Agricultural Practices and Accepted Management
Practices in forestry defined by the secretary of agriculture, food, and markets or the
commissioner of parks, forests, and recreation, respectively. Farmers must notify the
Administrator in writing of the proposed construction activity. This notification must
include a sketch of the proposed structure including how it meets local setbacks from
adjoining property lines and road rights-of-way.
What are Required Agricultural Practices? Agricultural practices that are governed by these regulations
[regulations promulgated by the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food and Markets] include, but are not limited
to, the following: (a) the confinement, feeding, fencing, and watering of livestock; (b) the handling of livestock
wastes and by-products; (c)the collection of maple sap and production of maple syrup; (d) the preparation, tilling,
fertilization, planting, protection, irrigation and harvesting of crops; (e) the ditching and subsurface drainage of
farm fields and the construction of farm ponds; (f) the stabilization of farm field streambanks constructed in
accordance with the USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service standards and specifications or other
standards approved by the Commissioner; (g) the construction and maintenance of farm structures in accordance
with Federal Flood Insurance Management Program standards, the construction and maintenance of farm ponds,
farm roads, walls, fences, structures to control the grade and head cutting in natural or artificial channels, and an
irrigation, drainage or other water management system that conveys water, controls the direction or rate of flow,
or maintains a desired water surface elevation; (h) the on-site production of fuel or power from agricultural
products produced on the farm; (i) the on-site storage, preparation and sale of agricultural products principally
produced on the farm; and (j) the on-site storage of agricultural inputs including, but not limited to, lime,
fertilizer and pesticides. Farm Structure means a building, enclosure, or fence for housing livestock, raising
horticultural or agronomic plants, or carrying out other practices associated with accepted agricultural or farming
practices, including a silo, as "farming" is defined in subdivision 6001(23) of Title 10, but excludes a dwelling
for human habitation.
4.2.2 Are there partial exemptions from this bylaw? As provided by 24 V.S.A § 4413(e), this
bylaw applies to the following developments only to the extent that it does not have the effect of
interfering with their intended functional use:
4.2.2.1 … institutions and facilities owned and operated by the state or a municipality;
4.2.2.2 … public and private schools and other educational institutions certified by the state
department of education;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 3
4.2.2.3 … churches and other places of worship, convents, and parish houses;
4.2.2.4 … public and private hospitals;
4.2.2.5 … regional solid waste management facilities certified under 10 V.S.A. Chapter 159;
and
4.2.2.6 … hazardous waste management facilities for which a notice of intent to construct
has been received under 10 V.S.A § 6606a.
4.2.2.7 Permit Requirement for Partially Exempted Developments. Permits are required for
the uses listed above. The town is specifically authorized to regulate the “location, size,
height, building bulk, yards, courts, setbacks, density of buildings, off-street parking, loading
facilities, traffic, noise, lighting, landscaping, and screening” of these developments.
However, the statute then states that the town may not interfere with the intended functional
use. In order to clarify the local application of this language, the town adopts the policy
stated in WDB 4.2.2.8.
4.2.2.8 Policy on the Regulation of Partially Exempted Developments. The town strongly
discourages partially exempted development on sites that are not zoned for the proposed use.
In compliance with the statute cited above, however, the town will accept an application for
a discretionary permit for a partially exempted development in any zoning district. The DRB
will then apply all standards of this bylaw to the proposed development and impose any
conditions it finds necessary to maximize compliance. The burden of demonstrating that a
condition imposed on a partially exempted development interferes with the intended
functional use rests with the applicant.
4.2.3. Are there exemptions from the requirement for a permit, but not from the requirements of
this bylaw? Yes. As explained below, permits are not required for some minor development
activity that is still subject to all requirements of this bylaw.
4.2.3.1 Accessory Structures on Residential Properties. No permit is required for residential
accessory structures, including decks, patios, play structures, and portable structures that are
less than 10 feet in height and have a footprint of less than 120 square feet, unless those
structures are located within the VZD. Accessory structures on residential properties must,
however, comply with the requirements of this bylaw. For example, placing a 100 square
foot play structure within 10 feet of a side property line in the MDRZD would not require a
permit, but would be a violation of the 15-foot minimum side setback required in that zoning
district, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6. This exemption does not apply
to accessory structures located in the Special Flood Hazard Area.
4.2.3.2 Boundary Adjustments. Boundary adjustments must be reviewed and approved by
the Administrator, as required by Chapter 10 of this bylaw, but do not require a permit.
4.2.3.3 Outdoor Lighting of Residential Properties. No permit is required for outdoor
lighting associated with one and two family dwellings, but that lighting must comply with
the requirements of Chapter 24. For example, installing more lighting than is permitted by
WDB 24.2.3.2, would not require a permit, but would be a violation, subject to enforcement
as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 4
4.2.3.4 Signs. All signs must comply with the requirements of this bylaw, but no permit is
required for the placement or posting of certain signs, including directional signs. For
example, no permit is required for directional signs, but placing one in a public right-of-way
would be a violation, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
4.3 Types of Permits. This bylaw establishes two types of permits: administrative and discretionary.
4.3.1 What is an administrative permit? An administrative permit is required for all development
that is not specifically exempted by WDB 4.2.1. Applications for administrative permits are
reviewed and approved or denied by the Administrator following the procedures of Chapter 5 of
this bylaw. Approval of an administrative permit authorizes development to begin. Approval of a
discretionary permit may be required before an application for an administrative permit is
submitted.
4.3.2 What is a discretionary permit? Discretionary permits are required for the developments
listed in WDB 4.3.3 and 4.3.4. Applications for discretionary permits are reviewed and approved or
denied by the DRB, following the procedures established in Chapter 6. Approval of a discretionary
permit does NOT authorize development to begin, but allows the developer to apply for one or
more administrative permits. For example, approval of the discretionary permit for a subdivision
does not allow the developer to begin grading streets or building homes. An administrative permit
must be obtained before grading or building construction begins.
4.3.3 Do I always have to obtain a discretionary permit before applying for an administrative
permit? Usually, but not always. A discretionary permit is not required for:
4.3.3.1 … development that was exempted by WDB 4.2.1;
4.3.3.2 … the construction of one or two family dwellings on existing or approved lots,
except in the VZD, where a discretionary permit is required;
Existing? Approved? For the purposes of the exemption established by WDB 4.3.3.2, an existing lot is one that
is: a) zoned for residential use, b) is presently unoccupied by a dwelling, c) is separate from all adjoining parcels
because it is in separate ownership and control or is a split parcel, as defined by WDB 12.1.3.1; and d) was not
made separate from adjoining parcels that are in the same ownership by a violation of the town’s subdivision
regulations. In determining whether a parcel is ‘existing,’ please refer to the requirements of WDB 2.4. An
approved lot is part of a residential subdivision for which a final plan has been recorded, as provided by this or
previous bylaws.
4.3.3.3 … accessory dwellings that comply with WDB 17.1;
4.3.3.4 … accessory structures, decks, patios, pools, and certain other improvements on
residential properties, as provided in WDB 4.2.3.1 and Chapter 17 of this bylaw;
4.3.3.5 … minor accessory structures, additions, exterior remodels, and site work on multifamily
residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial properties, as explained in WDB
4.3.5:
4.3.3.6 … certain boundary adjustments, as provided by Chapter 10 of this bylaw;
4.3.3.7 … certain signs, as provided by WDB 4.2.3.4;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 5
4.3.3.8 … demolition, except in the VZD, where a discretionary permit is required; and
4.3.3.9 … clearing, grading, or excavation that disturbs less than one-quarter (1/4) acre of
land and is not undertaken in anticipation of a development for which a discretionary permit
will be required. For more on the requirements for clearing, grading, or excavation see
Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
4.3.4 To ask a different way: what types of development need a discretionary permit? A
discretionary permit is required for all other development, which includes:
4.3.4.1 … the subdivision of land, except the administrative boundary adjustments that are
permitted by Chapter 10 of this bylaw;
4.3.4.2 … clearing, grading, or excavation that disturbs one-quarter (¼) or more acres of
land, excluding agricultural and forestry practices exempted by WDB 4.2.1.2; and
4.3.4.3 … all multi-family residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial development,
including both site improvements and structures, and including both new structures and
additions, except ‘minor work,’ which is defined by WDB 4.3.5.
4.3.5. What “minor” work is exempt from the requirement for a discretionary permit? The
construction or installation of small accessory structures, additions, exterior remodels, and minor
site work on commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family residential properties may
require only an administrative permit. The exemptions listed in WDB 4.3.5.1-5 do not apply in the
VZD.
4.3.5.1 Accessory Structures. To be ‘minor,’ accessory structures must be less than 10 feet in
height and have a footprint of less than 120 square feet
4.3.5.2 Additions. To be minor, additions must be architectural extensions of the existing
building, using identical or essentially identical exterior materials, and include less than
1000 square feet.
4.3.5.3 Exterior Remodels. To be minor, exterior remodels must be architectural extensions
of the existing building, using identical or essentially identical exterior materials. An
example would be the addition of windows or a door using a fully consistent spacing,
rhythm, scale, and materials.
4.3.5.4 Site Work. To be minor, site work must affect less than 1,000 square feet.
4.3.5.5 Outdoor Lighting. To be minor, outdoor lighting work must involve only changes in
materials that may be approved by the Administrator or involve the installation of no more
than eight (8) luminaires.
4.3.6 Where do I obtain administrative forms? The Administrator is authorized to prepare permit
applications and other administrative forms, and to update those forms as experience and
amendments to this bylaw necessitate. These forms may be obtained at Williston Planning, which
is located in the Town Hall Annex at 7878 Williston Road or, with some exceptions, on-line at the
town’s website.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 - | 6
4.4 Other Permits. State and federal regulations may apply. Applicants should understand that state and
federal regulations apply to many projects. Where those regulations are not as restrictive as this bylaw,
this bylaw applies. Private agreements may apply. Applicants should be aware that covenants, deed
restrictions, easements, and similar private agreements affect many projects. Those agreements may be
more restrictive than this bylaw.
4.4.1 What other permits might be required? Given the elevation of some areas within Williston
and their proximity to the approach path for BTV Runway 15-33, The Federal Aviation
Administration has requested that a form 7460-1 be submitted for any construction or alteration
that is more than 100 feet above ground level at its site. The form contains instructions and
information to be filled out, including the location of the project, the duration of construction, the
height of the permanent structure, and the tallest of any construction equipment to be used.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 5 - | 1
Chapter 5
Administrative Permit Procedures
This chapter establishes application, review, and
appeal procedures for administrative permits. All
development that is not specifically exempted by
WDB 4.2 must obtain an administrative permit
following these procedures.
5.1 Filing an Application for an Administrative Permit
5.1.1 Who can apply for a permit? All applications for permits must be signed by the owner of the
land on which the development is proposed or by a trustee or guardian of the owner. The owner
may appoint a representative to prepare and file the application, but his or her signature is required
on the application form. If the proposed development will involve more than one property, the
owners of all lots or parcels involved must sign the application for a permit.
5.1.2 What if I have questions before applying for a permit? The town staff can explain the
requirements of this bylaw. Staff can also discuss proposed developments and make suggestions
prior to the filing of an application. Staff cannot design your project or provide drawings. If you
need that type of assistance, retain a qualified professional.
Please Make an Appointment! People who drop in to Williston’s Planning Department are often disappointed to find
that the entire staff has other commitments. Making an appointment guarantees that a staff person can spend time with
you.
5.1.3 Is there an application form? Applications for administrative permits must be submitted on
the forms provided by the Administrator, as authorized by WDB 4.3.6. There is a separate form for
applications for administrative permits for signs. These forms may be obtained at Williston
Planning, which is located in the Town Hall Annex at 7878 Williston Road or, with some
exceptions, on-line at the town’s website. Please be sure you have the most current version.
Applications made on outdated forms will not be reviewed.
5.1.4 What type of plans must accompany the application form? The plans required will vary with
the complexity of the proposed development.
5.1.4.1 Where a Discretionary Permit Was Required. The approved final plans must be
submitted with the application for an Administrative Permit.
5.1.4.2 Where No Discretionary Permit was Required. The plans submitted must be accepted
by the Administrator as sufficient to demonstrate compliance with this bylaw. Meeting this
standard will ordinarily require submission of scaled, dimensioned drawings of the proposed
development. For very simple projects, like the addition of a deck by a homeowner, a simple
sketch and/or photographs illustrating existing conditions may be accepted.
5.1.5 How much does it cost to apply? Application fees are set by resolution of the Selectboard,
which may revise the fees at any time. A copy of the current fee schedule is available from the
Administrator or on-line at the town’s website.
5.1.6 What happens if my application is incomplete? Incomplete applications will be returned
with a list of what is needed to make the application complete.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 5 - | 2
5.2. Administrator’s Review and Decision
5.2.1 How long will it take to review my application? 24 V.S.A. § 4448(d) gives the Administrator
30 days from the date a complete application is filed to review that application and make a
decision.
Will it really take a month for my application for a permit to be reviewed? Williston Planning makes every effort to
process administrative permits promptly. Some permits may be issued on the day the application is filed, but normally
there is a short review period. The time required will vary with the workload and the complexity of the permit, however,
and applicants are reminded that state law allows 30 days.
5.2.2 How will my application be evaluated?
5.2.2.1 Compliance. The Administrator will review the proposed development for
compliance with all applicable requirements of this bylaw.
5.2.2.2 Consistency. The Administrator will review the proposed development for
compliance with all applicable conditions of approval.
Conditions of Approval? Many proposed developments will be subject to conditions of approval imposed on
previous permit approvals. For example, a subdivision may have been approved with the condition that no more
than ½ acre of vegetation be cleared from each lot. The Administrator must review the development of each lot to
ensure compliance with this condition.
5.2.2.3 Site Visits. The Administrator often needs to visit the site of a proposed development
to assess compliance and consistency, as required by WDB 5.2.2.1 and 5.2.2.2. The filing of
an application constitutes permission for a site visit at any time during regular business hours
or as otherwise arranged with the applicant. Applicants must provide notice of hazardous
conditions on a site and arrange a safe site visit at the Administrator’s request.
5.2.2.4 Referrals. The Administrator may refer any application for an administrative permit
to Conservation Commission or HAAC, for review and advice. Referrals must take place
within the 30 days allowed for permit review by WDB 5.2.1.
5.2.2.5 Decision. If the proposed development complies with all applicable requirements of
this bylaw and all applicable conditions imposed on previous permit approvals, the
application will be approved and a permit issued. If the proposed development fails to
comply, the application will be rejected and the applicant will receive a written explanation
listing the requirements and/or conditions with which the proposed development did not
comply.
5.2.3 Can conditions be imposed on my permit? Yes. The Administrator may impose conditions
on the approval of administrative permits. All such conditions must be provided in writing with the
approved permit and designed to ensure compliance with specifically cited requirements of this
bylaw or of previous permit approvals.
5.2.4 How will I be notified of the administrator’s decision? Some applications for permits may be
reviewed while the applicant waits, but usually there is a short review period. In all other cases, the
Administrator’s decision will be mailed to the applicant via first class mail.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 5 - | 3
5.2.5 Must I keep a copy of the approved permit on the site while construction is underway? Yes. A
legible copy of the approved administrative permit and the approved final plans must be maintained on
the site and readily accessible to Town staff or contractors who are conducting inspections at all times
until a certificate of compliance is issued or, where no certificate of compliance is required, until work
is complete.
5.3 When Permits Take Effect. As explained in WDB 5.4, any decision of the Administrator may be
appealed to the DRB. This means that an appeal period must run before permit approval takes effect.
5.3.1 How long is the appeal period? The appeal period begins on the day after the application for a
permit is approved or rejected and runs for 15 days.
5.3.2 What must I do during the appeal period? Upon submitting your application, you should post
the notice provided by the town in a location on your property that is prominently visible from the
nearest public road. You must leave that notice in place for 15 days after receiving your approved
permit [24 V.S.A. 4449(b)].
5.3.3 When can I begin work? Work on the development should not begin during the appeal period.
ANY WORK DONE DURING AN APPEAL PERIOD IS A VIOLATION OF THIS BYLAW
SUBJECT TO ENFORCEMENT AS PROVIDED IN CHAPTER 7 AND IS UNDERTAKEN
ENTIRELY AT THE OWNER’S RISK. You could be required to remove the work done and
restore the site to its original condition.
5.3.4 What happens if an appeal of my permit approval is filed? If an appeal is filed, the permit is
suspended until the DRB has heard and made a final decision on that appeal, as provided in WDB 5.4.
and the time for taking an appeal of the DRB’s decision to the Environmental Court has passed.
5.4 Appeals. 24 V.S.A §4465, et seq. provide that any decision of the Administrator may be appealed
to the DRB.
5.4.1 Who may file an appeal? Any interested party. This term is defined at WDB 6.5.5.
5.4.2 How long do interested parties have to file an appeal? 15 days, starting on the day after the
permit is approved. A notice of appeal must be filed with the Administrator within 15 days of the
day after the decision that is being appealed was made.
5.4.3 What contents are required for a notice of appeal? A notice of appeal must be submitted on
the form provided by the town and accompanied by all materials required by the Appeal Checklist.
5.4.4 When will the appeal be heard? Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the Administrator will set
a date and time for the hearing of the appeal at the next regular meeting of the DRB for which the
notice requirements for DRB hearings can be met.
5.4.5 How will the appeal be heard? Appeals hearings will follow the master hearing procedure
established at WDB 6.5.6, except that no hearing will be held in the case of successive appeals
where the DRB, acting under the authority of 24 V.S.A. § 4470(a), determines that the issues raised
and/or facts presented have been decided in an earlier appeal. In such cases, the DRB may reject
the appeal and give notice of its action as provided by WDB 6.6.6.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 5 - | 4
5.4.6 What action can the DRB take on an appeal? Following its hearing of an appeal, the DRB
may uphold, modify, or overturn the decision of the Administrator. In every case the DRB shall
adopt written findings and conclusions supporting its action.
5.4.7 How will notice of the DRB’s decision be given? Notice of the DRB’s decision on the appeal
will be provided as required by WDB 6.6.6.
5.4.8 Can I appeal the DRB’s decision on an appeal? Yes. Appeals of DRB decisions go to the
Environmental Court, as provided 24 V.S.A. § 4471.
5.5. Expiration of Administrative Permits
5.5.1 Do administrative permits expire? Yes. An administrative permit is valid for two (2) years
from the date of its approval. Note that any time during which a permit is under appeal, either
before the DRB or in court, the appeal time will not be counted toward the two (2) year deadline
established here.
5.5.2 Can an administrative permit be renewed? Once. An administrative permit will be
automatically renewed for one (1) year from the date of its expiration upon written request to the
Administrator. Such requests must be received before the permit expires. No further renewals are
permitted.
5.6 Changes in Development Plans after a Permit is Approved
5.6.1 What happens if I change a project after an administrative permit is approved? Failure to
build in accord with the approved final plans is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as
provided by WDB 7.4-7.6. A fine may be imposed and you may be required to remove all work
that is not in accord with the approved final plans.
5.6.2 Aren’t minor changes inevitable in any development? The town recognizes that small
changes may be necessary as construction proceeds. The Administrator may permit minor revisions
or changes to approved final plans as provided here. For substantial changes see WDB 5.6.3.
5.6.2.1 Revised Plans. The applicant must submit revised plans to the Administrator for
review. Failure to do this before the proposed change is made is a violation of this bylaw,
subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
5.6.2.2 Dimensional Changes. The Administrator may permit small dimensional changes
provided that they do not result in a violation of this bylaw or conditions imposed on
previous permit approvals, or in a substantial change, as defined by WDB 5.6.3. For
example, the Administrator could permit a builder to shift a door, and the sidewalk leading
from the parking area to that door, by a few feet in order to accommodate a change in a
proposed building’s floor plan.
5.6.2.3 Materials Changes. The Administrator may permit substitutions for proposed
building materials provided that the proposed substitute has the same appearance and
performance as the approved material. For example, the Administrator could allow a builder
to change the brand of outdoor light fixtures proposed for a parking area, if (and only if) the
proposed substitute brand was the same height, had the same cutoff, and produced the same
level of illumination.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 5 - | 5
5.6.2.4 Public Works Changes. Minor changes in the location and specifications of required
improvements may be permitted. They must be referred to and approved by the DPW before
being permitted by the Administrator.
5.6.2.5 Referral. The Administrator may refer proposals for minor changes or revisions to
approved developments to the Conservation Commission or HAAC for review and comment
before making a decision. Conservation Commission or HAAC reviews must be completed
within the time allowed for review of the application by WDB 5.2.1.
5.6.3 What if the change I propose is substantial? If you are going to make a substantial change in a
development for which plans have been approved you must apply for a new permit, as required by this
bylaw. A substantial change changes:
5.6.3.1 … the approved use (more specifically, a change in use is from one three-digit
NAICS classification to another);
5.6.3.2 … the location or extent of a proposed open space;
5.6.3.3 … the location or extent of the area proposed to be cleared, graded, or otherwise
disturbed by more than 1,000 square feet (a smaller change in the area that will be cleared,
graded, or otherwise disturbed is a minor dimensional change, as provided for by WDB
5.6.2.2);
5.6.3.4 … the location, extent, or design of any required improvements, public or private,
including, but not limited to, proposed runoff and erosion control measures, utilities, parking
areas, driveways, roads, trails, sidewalks, street trees, and landscaped buffers, except where a
minor change is approved by the DPW, as provided by WDB 5.6.2.4;
5.6.3.5 … the approved number of lots, buildings, structures, units, or bedrooms;
5.6.3.6 … the approved location, number, type, and size of signs, excepting signs that would
be exempt from the requirement for a permit; and/or
5.6.3.7 … any other architectural or landscape feature that is not “minor work,” as defined
by WDB 4.3.5.
Making a substantial change from approved final plans without obtaining a new permit is a
violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 1
Chapter 6
Discretionary Permit Procedures
This chapter establishes the application, review,
and appeal procedures for discretionary permits.
6.1 Overview
6.1.1 What are the steps in the discretionary permit procedure? The principal steps in the review
of a development for which a discretionary permit is required are:
· pre-application;
· for residential subdivisions only: growth management review;
· submission of an application, including a filing conference;
· public hearing notice;
· the public hearing;
· DRB action;
· submission of final plans;
· final plan review; and
· obtaining an administrative permit/s to authorize work.
Minor exceptions to some of these steps are explained below. REMEMBER THAT APPROVAL
OF A DISCRETIONARY PERMIT AND FINAL PLAN DOES NOT AUTHORIZE
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. IT AUTHORIZES THE APPLICANT TO OBTAIN AN
ADMINISTRATIVE PERMIT OR PERMITS.
6.1.2 What if I have questions before applying for a permit? The town’s staff can explain the
requirements of this bylaw. Staff can also discuss proposed developments and make suggestions
prior to the filing of an application. Staff cannot design your project or provide drawings. If you
need that type of assistance, retain a qualified professional.
Please Make an Appointment! People who drop in to Williston’s Planning Department are often disappointed to find
that the entire staff has other commitments. Making an appointment guarantees that a staff person can spend time with
you.
6.2 Pre-Application
6.2.1 When is pre-application review required? Pre-application review is required for all
subdivisions and all other new development for which a discretionary permit is required by Chapter
4 of this bylaw, except for subdivisions that create no new development potential and changes in
existing developments, including accessory structures, additions, and remodels of multi-family,
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 2
commercial, institutional, and industrial properties. For these developments, an application for a
discretionary permit may simply be filed as provided by WDB 6.4. Applicants are, however,
strongly encouraged to review plans with the Administrator before filing an application.
6.2.2 What is the purpose of pre-application review? The purpose of pre-application review is to
acquaint the DRB and its advisors with a proposed development site and its possibilities without
requiring the presentation of extensive surveying, engineering, or design data. At this step in the
review process, plans for complex projects should be presented in an informal way that invites
comment and the discussion of alternatives.
6.2.3 How do I schedule a pre-application review? Pre-application review shall be scheduled by
filing the appropriate form provided by the Administrator and all additional information required
by the Pre-Application Checklist. Payment of a pre-application fee will also be required. Upon
determining that it is complete, the Administrator will place the pre-application on the agenda of
the next regularly scheduled DRB meeting at which time will allow its consideration.
6.2.4 Will my neighbors be notified about the pre-application? Yes. Notice will be provided to
adjoining property owners and the general public in the same way as required for a hearing on an
application for a discretionary permit: see WDB 6.5.3.
6.2.5 How will my pre-application be reviewed? Pre-applications will be referred to the
Conservation Commission and/or HAAC, as relevant, before they are reviewed by the DRB. The
Administrator may also provide comments.
6.2.6 Will site visits be required? Yes. The Administrator and members of the Conservation
Commission, HAAC, and DRB often need to visit the site of a proposed development. The filing of
a pre-application constitutes permission for a site visit at any time during regular business hours or
as otherwise arranged with the applicant. Applicants must provide notice of hazardous conditions
on a site and arrange a safe site visit at the Administrator’s request.
6.2.7 I only want to develop a portion of my land. Why does the Pre-Application Checklist
require me to cover it all? Town planning tries to ensure that the decisions individuals make in
their own interest are consistent with the community’s interests, as expressed in the Town Plan.
This means looking at how development proposals implement goals like connectivity and
watershed health. The requirement that concept plans present a proposed pattern of development
for the entire contiguous holdings of the owner is necessary if the town is to do this well. The Pre-
Application Checklist allows the level of detail presented in a concept plan to vary, and requires
little more than a “bubble diagram” for areas that the applicant does not intend to include in the
application for a discretionary permit. Actual development may proceed in phases, as provided in
WDB 6.4.4 and 7.1.4
6.2.8 What type of action is taken on a pre-application? A pre-application is a basis for
discussion. It is neither approved nor rejected and creates no vested rights. The DRB will adopt
written recommendations that should be reflected in the application for a discretionary permit. The
DRB may also require that certain information be included in the application for a discretionary
permit, including:
6.2.8.1 … the wetlands delineation and/or functional assessment that may be required by
WDB 29.8.1;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 3
6.2.8.2 … the shared parking study that may be required by WDB 14.2.2; and/or
6.2.8.3 … a traffic study, where it is determined that existing studies do not provide
sufficient information (see WDB 13.8).
6.2.8.4 Other Determinations. Pre-application review is also the time at which the DRB may:
· exempt proposed infill developments in the RZD from open space
development requirements; and/or
· authorize the transfer of development rights in a discretionary permit
application.
· The DRB may also recommend that the applicant prepare a specific plan
before an application for a discretionary permit is filed.
6.2.9 How will I be notified of the action taken on my pre-application? The DRB’s
recommendations will be sent to the applicant and other interested parties by first class mail.
6.2.10 How soon after pre-application review must an application be filed?
6.2.10.1 For Residential Subdivisions. Proposed residential subdivisions are subject to
growth management review in the year following their pre-application review. See WDB 6.3
and Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
6.2.10.2 For Other Developments. All other proposed developments must file an application
for a discretionary permit within one year after pre-application review or repeat the preapplication
process.
6.3 Growth Management Review. All applications for discretionary permits must go through the
process described in WDB 6.4. There is, however, a step that all proposed residential developments must
take first. That step is the growth management review established in Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
6.4 Filing an Application for a Discretionary Permit. Where required by WDB 6.2, a pre-application
must have been submitted and reviewed before an application for a discretionary permit is filed. For
proposed residential developments, the growth management review required by WDB 6.3, must also have
been completed before an application for a discretionary permit is filed.
6.4.1 Who can apply for a permit? All applications for permits must be signed by the owner of the
land on which the development is proposed or by a trustee or guardian of the owner. The owner
may appoint a representative to prepare and file the application, but his or her signature is required
on the application form. If the proposed development will involve more than one property, the
owners of all lots or parcels involved must sign the application for a discretionary permit.
6.4.2 Is there an application form? Applications for discretionary permits must be submitted on
the forms provided by the Administrator, as authorized by WDB 4.3.6. These forms may be
obtained at Williston Planning, which is located in the Town Hall Annex at 7878 Williston Road
or, with some exceptions, on-line at the town’s website. Please be sure you have the most current
version. Applications made on outdated forms will not be reviewed.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 4
6.4.3 What plans and documents must accompany the application form? A preliminary plan,
which may be presented on one or multiple sheets, and includes all items listed in the Discretionary
Permit Application Checklist must be submitted.
6.4.4 Am I allowed to propose developing in phases? Yes. Where development in phases is
proposed, the proposed development agreement that accompanies the application for a
discretionary permit must show which parts of the proposed development will be constructed in
each phase. A map showing the phases is also required. If the application for a discretionary permit
is approved, final plans will be filed and reviewed for each phase.
6.4.5 How much does it cost to apply for a discretionary permit? Application fees are set by
resolution of the Selectboard, which may revise the fees at any time. A copy of the current fee
schedule is available from the Administrator or on-line at the town’s website.
6.4.6 Can I just hand an application for a discretionary permit across the counter? Only if
pre-application review was not required. All other applications for a discretionary permit must
be filed at a filing conference.
6.4.6.1 Completeness When a Filing Conference is Not Required. The Administrator has 15
working days to determine whether an application for a discretionary permit that was not
subject to pre-application review is complete and, if it is complete, to schedule a hearing
before the DRB. Incomplete applications will be returned with a checklist indicating what is
needed to make the application complete.
6.4.6.2 When a Filing Conference is Required. A filing conference is required for
applications for proposed developments that were subject to pre-application review. The
applicant must schedule this conference with the Administrator. Its purpose is to review the
application materials and determine whether the application is complete. If the application is
found to be complete, the Administrator has 15 working days to schedule a hearing before
the DRB. If the application is not complete it may be withdrawn, a schedule for the
submission of additional materials before a hearing is scheduled may be established by
agreement of the applicant and the Administrator, or the applicant may appeal the
Administrator’s determination that the application is incomplete to the DRB, as provided by
WDB 5.4.
6.4.7 Who may communicate with the town about an application for a discretionary permit?
Applicants for a discretionary permit must designate a single representative who is responsible for
communication with the town.
6.4.8 May I make changes in my application after it is filed, but before the DRB’s hearing? Not
after the hearing date has been noticed. Due process requires that the DRB’s hearing be on the
application that was noticed and made available for public review. You may ask the Administrator
for time to make changes in response to recommendations of the Conservation Commission or
HAAC before a hearing date is set, but must submit a set of plans that is complete and will remain
unchanged BEFORE the Administrator schedules a hearing before the DRB.
6.5 Review of Applications for Discretionary Permits
6.5.1 Who reviews applications for discretionary permits? Your application will be reviewed by
the DRB. In most cases, however, the Administrator will first refer your application to the
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 5
Conservation Commission and/or HAAC and to potentially affected departments of town
government. Your application will not be placed on a DRB agenda until the Administrator is sure
that review by the Conservation Commission and/or HAAC and by town departments will be
complete before the hearing.
6.5.1.1 What is the Conservation Commission’s role in the review of applications for
discretionary permits? The Conservation Commission conducts an informal, but thorough,
review of most applications for discretionary permits and makes written recommendations to
the DRB. You may be required to arrange and participate in a site visit with the
Conservation Commission.
6.5.1.2 What is the HAAC’s role in the review of applications for discretionary permits? The
HAAC conducts an informal, but thorough, review of applications for permits within the
VZD and of applications for discretionary permits for proposed multiple family residential,
commercial, industrial, and institutional developments, including major additions, and then
makes written recommendations to the DRB. The specific responsibilities of the HAAC are
described in WDB 3.5. Applicants may be required to arrange and participate in a site visit
with the HAAC.
6.5.1.3 What role do town departments play in the review of applications for discretionary
permits? Department heads review applications for discretionary permits and may make
written recommendations to the DRB. The Administrator may also convene a project review
committee consisting of department heads to provide input to the DRB. Applicants may be
required to arrange and participate in meetings and/or site visits with department heads or
their designees.
6.5.1.4 Are other agencies involved in development review? The Williston schools will be
provided with notice of applications for discretionary permits for proposed residential
developments. This notice will be provided in the same way as for an adjoining property
owner. The town may also consult with potentially affected state and federal agencies.
6.5.2 Is a public hearing required for all applications for discretionary permits? Yes. The DRB
holds a formal public hearing on all applications for discretionary permits.
6.5.3 What type of hearing notice is required? As required by 24 V.S.A. §4464(a)(1), notice of a
hearing on an application for a discretionary permit must be given at least 15 days before the hearing,
by the following means:
6.5.3.1 … publication of the date, place, and purpose of the hearing in a newspaper in general
circulation in Williston;
6.5.3.2 … posting of the same information in three or more public places within the town,
including an on-site posting within view from the public right-of-way most nearly adjacent to
the property for which development review is required; and
6.5.3.3 … written notification to the applicant and the owners of all properties adjoining the
property for which development review is required. This notice shall include:
· a brief description of the proposed development;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 6
· an explanation of how and where the recipient may obtain additional information about
the proposed development; and
· a statement that participation in the hearing is required to become an interested party, as
defined by WDB 6.5.5.
6.5.3.4 Roles in Providing Notice. The Town will provide the text of the newspaper, posted, and
written notices. The developer will provide stamped envelopes addressed to every owner of
adjoining property for the Town to use in its mailings, as required by the Discretionary Permit
Checklist. The developer will also post the notice on the development site and provide the Town
with a dated photograph showing that sign, as seen from the nearest public right-of-way.
6.5.4 Must I be present at the hearing? Yes. The applicant or a representative must be present at the
hearing. If the applicant or a representative fails to appear, the hearing will be re-scheduled once. If the
applicant fails to appear at the re-scheduled hearing, the application for a discretionary permit will be
considered void.
6.5.5 Who may speak at the hearing? All persons are free to offer oral or written testimony at
hearings conducted by the DRB, but state law provides that only interested parties may appeal
decisions. Consistent with 24 V.S.A. § 4465(b), interested parties include:
6.5.5.1 … the owner of the property for which the permit is required by this bylaw;
6.5.5.2 … any municipality or solid waste district that is empowered to condemn such a
property, or an interest in it;
6.5.5.3 … the town or any adjoining municipality; and
6.5.5.4 … any person owning or occupying property in the immediate neighborhood of a
property for which a permit or other approval required by the town’s bylaws is requested who
can show that approval of the permit would result in a physical or environmental impact on his
or her interests; and alleges that approval of the permit would not be in accord with goals and
policies of the Town Plan or the requirements of this bylaw.
6.5.5.5 Petitioners. Interested parties also include any ten persons who are owners of real
property and/or voters in the town who submit a signed petition alleging that the reversal or
modification of the Administrator’s decision will not be in accord with goals and policies of the
Town Plan or the requirements of this bylaw. The petition must designate one person as the
group’s representative.
6.5.5.6 State Agencies. Interested parties also include any department or administrative
subdivision of the state that owns property, or an interest in property, in the town, and the
Agency of Commerce and Community Development.
6.5.5.7 Interested Parties Must Participate. In order to file an appeal of a DRB decision, a party
must meet the criteria adopted above and show that it participated in the hearing before the
DRB. Participation is defined as having offered, through oral or written testimony, evidence or a
statement of concern.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 7
6.5.6 What is the hearing procedure?
6.5.6.1 Opening Statements. The presiding member shall state the purpose of the hearing;
· ask whether any member wishes to be excused on account of a conflict of interest, as
defined at WDB 3.10, or report an ex parte contact, as defined at WDB 3.11, and
excuse any member declaring a conflict-of-interest; and
· advise participants that there are specific statutory requirements for becoming an
interested party who can appeal a decision. The chair need not review those
requirements, but shall refer the participants to the requirements of this bylaw and state
law. The chair shall also state that anyone wishing to be considered an interested party
must sign the register specifically provided for that purpose.
6.5.6.2 Questions and Answers. The purpose of a hearing is to take statements for consideration
by the DRB. Once the hearing is opened, the DRB will not answer questions nor will it permit
questions or discussion among members of the audience. For this reason, the hearing will be
preceded by a staff report, which may be followed by questions and answers from the audience.
6.5.6.3 Staff Report. The Administrator or a staff person assigned by the Administrator will
present a report that summarizes the findings of fact and conclusions of law included in the
written report from the staff. This may be followed by questions from the audience, which shall
be directed through the presiding member. No statements of position or opinion will be taken at
this time. The purpose of the question and answer session is to help participants understand the
development process and to establish the facts.
6.5.6.4 Testimony. Before taking testimony, the presiding member shall remind those who wish
to speak to first state their name and address, and that statements are to address the merits of the
proposed development, as demonstrated by its compliance or failure to comply with specific
requirements of this bylaw. The presiding member shall then ask for testimony, which will
begin with the statement of the applicant. Commission members may ask questions following
any statement, with questions and responses being directed through the presiding member.
6.5.6.5 Time Limits. The DRB may set and enforce a time limit on oral statements.
6.6 DRB Action
6.6.1 On what basis will the DRB make its decision? The DRB’s decision will be based on the
proposed development’s compliance or failure to comply with the requirements of this bylaw. Where
it is considering a proposed development that is subject to a previously approved permit, it will also
determine whether or not that proposed development is consistent with all applicable conditions
imposed on the previous approval.
6.6.2 Will I be able to listen to the DRB discuss my application? Not necessarily. The DRB may enter
a closed deliberative session to discuss any application.
6.6.3 What options does the DRB have after the hearing?
6.6.3.1 Recess. The DRB may recess any hearing to a date certain pending the submission of
further information. This is a recess for the purpose of obtaining information only. The 45 days
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 8
permitted for a decision by WDB 6.6.4 does not begin until the DRB has received the requested
information, closed the hearing, and commenced its deliberations.
6.6.3.2 Approve. The DRB may find that the proposed development complies with the
requirements of this bylaw and approve the application for a permit. Conditions may be
imposed on the approval of a permit, as provided by WDB 6.6.5.
6.6.3.3 Deny. The DRB may find that the proposed development fails to comply with the
requirements of this bylaw and reject the application for a permit.
6.6.4 How long does the DRB have to make a decision? No hearing may be recessed for more than
45 days, except at the request of the applicant, and all decisions must be made and reported within 45
days after the close of a hearing. If a decision is not made within 45 days after a hearing, the proposed
development will be deemed approved.
6.6.5 May conditions be imposed on the approval of a discretionary permit? Yes. Conditions
designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of this bylaw may be imposed on any approval,
as specifically authorized by 24 V.S.A. § 4464(b)(2).
6.6.6 How will the DRB’s decision be reported? Within 45 days after the DRB’s decision, the
administrator shall prepare a record of decision that conveys the DRB’s findings of fact and
conclusions of law. Copies of the record of decision shall be sent to all agencies or persons who
submitted testimony, verbally or in writing, at the hearing. A copy shall also be filed with the Town
Clerk. The applicant’s copy shall be sent by certified mail.
6.7 Expiration
6.7.1 Do approvals of discretionary permits expire? Yes. Final plans or, where phased development
has been approved, final plans for the first phase must be submitted for review within one year of the
day the record of decision was issued. If final plans are not filed within the specified time frame set
forth in this bylaw, the approval of the discretionary permit shall become null and void.
6.7.2 Is it possible to extend the deadline for filing final plans? Yes. One extension of six months will
automatically be granted upon written application to the Administrator.
6.7.3 Are there any additional extensions to the deadline for filing final plans? Yes. The DRB may
grant one additional six month extension for the filing of final plans.
6.7.4 Do approvals of discretionary permits expire after final plans are signed? In some case, yes.
Discretionary permits approved for non-residential development shall have one year from the date the
final plans are signed to obtain administrative permits in accordance with the provisions of WDB
Chapter 5, or the discretionary permit approval shall expire.
6.8 Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the DRB may be taken to Environmental Court, as provided by 24
V.S.A. § 4471.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 9
6.9 Final Plans
6.9.1 How soon after approval of the discretionary permit must final plans be filed? As
established by WDB 6.7.1, within one year, unless an extension is granted as provided by WDB
6.7.2. Appeals to the Environmental Court must be filed within 30 days after the DRB’s decision.
6.9.2 What must be included in final plans? Everything required by the Final Plan Checklist.
6.9.3 How are final plans evaluated? The purpose of final plan review is to demonstrate compliance
with all conditions imposed on the approval of the discretionary permit and to file final paper work,
including a development agreement.
6.9.3.1 Review by Administrator. The DRB may, in its record of decision, delegate review of
the final plans of any proposed development to the Administrator.
6.9.3.2 Are the Plans Complete? The Administrator has 15 working days after the filing of a
final plan to determine whether it is complete. Upon determining that it is complete the
Administrator shall, if authorized as provided by WDB 6.9.3.1, review it, or schedule its review
at the next regular DRB meeting at which time permits its consideration.
6.9.3.3 Basis of Review. Compliance with this bylaw was determined when the application was
approved by the DRB. The Administrator or the DRB review final plans to ensure that they are
in full compliance with the DRB’s action, including all conditions of approval imposed in the
record of decision.
6.9.3.4 Signatures. Approval of the final plan is indicated by the signature of the Chair of the
DRB, or where this authority has been delegated as provided by WDB 6.9.3.1, the
Administrator, in the signature block provided on the final plan, and by the signature of the
Town Manager on the development agreement, where one is required.
6.9.3.5 Notice of Decision. One copy of the signed plan and development agreement will be
provided to the applicant by hand delivery or certified mail. A copy will also be provided to the
DPW and any other department head who requests one. Copies will be made available to any
other interested party for the cost of copying.
6.9.3.6 Recording. Final plans for subdivisions must be recorded in the town’s land records.
WDB 6.9.5 sets a deadline on the recording of subdivision plans. Other final plans are not
recorded.
6.9.4 Can conditions be imposed on the approval of a final plan? No. A final plan is complete and
ready to build by definition. It must be either approved or denied. The approved development
agreement and the other means of enforcement adopted in Chapter 7 of this bylaw will ensure
compliance with all conditions of approval.
6.9.5 When must a final subdivision plan be recorded? If the final plan of a proposed subdivision
or phase of a subdivision is not recorded within 180 days after the approval of the final plans for
that subdivision, its approval becomes null and void. The Administrator may, upon written request,
extend this deadline by up to 90 days if other local or state approvals are pending.
6.10 Amendments
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e 6 - | 10
6.10.1 What if I want to change the approved plan before, or during, construction? Final plans
are binding, as approved. No administrative permit will be approved for development that is not
consistent with the approved final plans. WDB 5.6 does allow some exceptions for minor changes.
6.10.2 Is making a change without a permit a violation of this bylaw? Yes. Making a substantial
change from approved final plans without obtaining a new permit is a violation of this bylaw,
subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
6.10.3 What if a substantial change is necessary? The approved final plans must be amended.
Final plan amendments are made using the discretionary permit procedure of this chapter, but
skipping the pre-application step, and subject to the additional rules established here.
6.10.3.1 Limited Scope. The scope of the hearing and DRB action will be limited to
determining whether the proposed amendment complies or fails to comply with this bylaw.
6.10.3.2 Exception to Limited Scope. The scope of review may be expanded when an
amendment to the approved final plans is proposed on a property that is not in full
compliance with those plans or this bylaw.
6.10.3.3 Conditions. The DRB may impose conditions designed to ensure compliance with
specific, cited requirements of this bylaw on the approval of a proposed amendment.
6.10.3.4 Depiction. The plans submitted with the proposed amendment must show the
proposed changes from the approved final plans using color or another technique that makes
it easy for reviewers to identify the changes.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 1
Chapter 7
Enforcement,
Including Guarantees that Improvements
will be Made
This chapter provides for the enforcement of this
bylaw. It requires developers to provide adequate
guarantees that required improvements will be
installed as proposed and requires that a certificate
of compliance be issued before most developments
or phases of developments may be occupied or
used. This chapter also establishes the procedures
by which violations of this bylaw may be
addressed, including civil penalties.
7.1 Required Improvements
7.1.1 What is a required improvement? A required improvement is any improvement, public or
private, required for compliance with this bylaw. Required improvements – not all of which are
required in every development - include the following, as shown on the final plans approved by the
DRB:
7.1.1.1 … roads, public or private, including bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
street lights, signs, signals, street trees, and other associated improvements;
7.1.1.2 … access driveways, off-street parking and loading areas, and associated
improvements;
7.1.1.3 … paths, trails, urban parks, neighborhood parks and other open spaces, and
associated improvements;
7.1.1.4 … water and sewer mains, community sewerage systems, storage reservoirs, pump
stations, and associated improvements;
7.1.1.5 … runoff, erosion control, and stormwater management measures, including
plantings;
7.1.1.6 … landscaping, including landscaped buffers, landscaping in required setbacks,
parking area landscaping, and all other required and/or approved landscaping, screening or
buffering; and
7.1.1.7 … all other improvements required by this bylaw to protect public safety or mitigate
the potential impacts of the development.
7.1.2 Who pays for the installation of required improvements? Installation of required
improvements shall be at the developer's expense. An exception may be made where it is prudent
for the town to participate in the installation of improvements in order to correct existing
deficiencies in service to other properties or to anticipate future needs. The town’s participation
shall be negotiated by the DPW before final plans are reviewed and included in the signed
development agreement.
7.1.3 Are there standards for required improvements? Yes. Required improvements shall be
installed in compliance with this bylaw and the Public Works Standards.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 2
7.1.4 When must required improvements be installed? All required improvements must be in
place and accepted before a certificate of compliance - which permits a development, or a phase of
a development, to be occupied - can be issued by the town, as provided by WDB 7.3. Certificates
of compliance may be issued for all improvements at once or by phase. Either way, the installation,
inspection, acceptance, and warranty of required improvement shall proceed as provided by a
development agreement.
7.1.5 What is a development agreement? A development agreement is a contract between the
applicant and the town, signed by both. A development agreement is required for all developments
that include required improvements. It:
7.1.5.1 … incorporates by reference the approved final plans of the entire development or,
where phased development of required improvements has been approved, detailed plans of
the initial phase;
7.1.5.2 … sets a schedule for the completion of the required improvements in the entire
project or the initial phase, and, where applicable, provides an anticipated schedule for the
submission of final plans, cost estimates, and guarantees of improvements in future phases;
7.1.5.3 … lists all required improvements, either for the entire project or the initial phase,
and their estimated cost;
7.1.5.4 … guarantees completion of all required improvements using one of the methods
listed at WDB 7.1.6;
7.1.5.5 … establishes a schedule for the inspection of required improvements as work
progresses;
7.1.5.6 … provides a process by which the town may, if necessary, complete required
improvements using the guarantees provided;
7.1.5.7 … provides a process by which either party may request renegotiation of the
development agreement,
7.1.5.8 … provides a process by which the development agreement may be transferred, with
notice to the town, to the developer’s successors; and
7.1.5.9 … provides that the development agreement and any vested rights created by
approval of the final plan become void if the town is required to use a guarantee to complete
required improvements or if the anticipated schedule of improvements required above is not
met or renegotiated. The anticipated schedule may be renegotiated without losing vested
rights, provided that such negotiations are initiated within 180 days after failure to initiate or
complete a phase as scheduled.
7.1.5.10 Maintenance. A development agreement may also include a contract for town
plowing of roads or other routine maintenance to be performed by the town during the
warranty period required by WDB 7.2.1.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 3
A draft development agreement must be submitted with the preliminary plans, as required by the
Discretionary Permit Application Checklist.
Model Development Agreement. Development agreements can be complex. The town provides a model, which is
attached as Appendix C. but each agreement will require careful thought and drafting.
7.1.6 How will the installation of required improvements be guaranteed? Completion of the
improvements identified in a development agreement must be guaranteed by one of the following
methods:
7.1.6.1 For Required Improvements that Will Come Into Public Ownership. This may
include arterial and collector roads, and associated improvements; local roads that will
become town toads, and associated improvements; water and sewer mains and associated
improvements; certain paths and trails and associated improvements; and other required
improvements specified as public in the approved final plans and the development
agreement. The applicant must place an amount equal to 110% of the estimated cost of
installing the required improvements in escrow for the town before an administrative permit
for work on the required improvements will be approved. The development agreement will
specify the location and terms of the escrow account, including the phased return of portions
of the funds taken in escrow as work proceeds, provided that at least one-third (33%) of the
funds taken shall be retained until a certificate of compliance has been issued.
7.1.6.2 For Required Improvements that Will Not Come Into Public Ownership. Many
required improvements, parking areas and landscaping, for example, will remain in private
ownership, maintained by the applicant, the applicant’s successors, or an owner’s
association. These improvements are still necessary for compliance with this bylaw and must
be in place before a certificate of compliance is issued. The town will seek to ensure timely
completion of these improvements by requiring the applicant to provide an irrevocable letter
of credit or place money in escrow, in the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the
required private improvements before any administrative permit for work on the project is
approved. The letter of credit will be surrendered or the amount taken in escrow returned
when a certificate of compliance has been issued. The development agreement will specify
the terms of the letter or credit or escrow account, including the phased return of portions of
the funds taken in escrow as work proceeds, provided that at least one-third (33%) of the
credit offered shall be retained until a certificate of compliance has been issued.
7.1.6.3 In Case of Default. If any of the required improvements are not completed as
provided by the development agreement, the town shall use as much as necessary of the
money held in escrow or the credit offered to complete those improvements. Any balance
remaining in the escrow account will be returned to the applicant.
7.1.6.4 Disposition of Interest. Interest earned on escrow accounts established to comply
with WDB 7.1.6.1 and 7.1.6.2 shall be added to the account to reflect the inflating cost of
making the improvements in the event of default.
7.1.7 Will required improvements be inspected? Yes.
7.1.7.1 By the Town. Required improvements must be inspected by the Administrator and/or
the DPW or their designees before a certificate of compliance is issued and the guarantees
required by WDB 7.1.6 are returned. As provided by WDB 7.1.5.5, a proposed schedule of
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 4
inspections must be included in the draft development agreement. A final schedule will be
included in the approved development agreement.
7.1.7.2 By the Applicant. Applicants may be required to provide reports of inspections made
by their own architects, engineers, landscape architects, or other appropriate professionals
during the construction or installation of required improvements. The frequency of these
reports may vary with complexity and extent of the work. A schedule will be determined by
the Administrator, with the advice of the DPW and included in the development agreement.
7.1.8 Are there inspection fees? Yes. Fees for the inspection of required improvements are
established in the Public Works Standards. Inspection fees must be paid at the pre-construction
meeting.
7.1.9 Are as-built drawings of required improvements required? Yes. Reproducible as-built
drawings of all required improvements must be provided to the town in the format specified by the
DPW, at the applicant’s expense.
7.2 Maintenance of Required Improvements
7.2.1 Is continuing maintenance of required improvements required? Yes. Continuing
maintenance of required improvements that will not come into ownership of the town or another
public agency is required. Failure to maintain a required improvement is a violation of this bylaw,
subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
7.2.2 Must there be a warranty for required improvements? Yes. The applicant is responsible for
the maintenance of all required improvements that have been dedicated to the town for three years
after the certificate of compliance is issued. This includes correcting defects in materials and
workmanship, and repairing damage to required improvements caused by construction. This
warranty will be secured by keeping 10% of the funds placed in escrow and/or made available via
an irrevocable letter of credit to comply with WDB 7.1.6 available to the town. As provided by
WDB 7.1.6.3, the town may use those funds where an applicant fails to make good on the warranty
required here.
7.2.3 How will maintenance of required improvements be guaranteed when the developer is
gone? Continuing maintenance of improvements that will not come into ownership of the town or
another public agency is the responsibility of the owner. Any development that results, or may
reasonably be expected to result, in the creation of multiple ownerships, including subdivisions and
condominiums, shall create an owner’s association or similar mechanism that is responsible for
continuing maintenance of required improvements. Drafts of the declaration of covenants, articles
of incorporation, and bylaws for that association shall be submitted with the application for a
discretionary permit. The final version of these documents must be approved with the final plan,
and recorded before an administrative permit is issued for any work on the project.
7.2.4 What does maintenance include? Standards for the maintenance required by WDB 7.2.3 are
set in Chapter 16 of this bylaw.
7.3 Certificates of Compliance
7.3.1 When is a certificate of compliance required? A certificate of compliance (CC) is required
upon the completion, inspection, and acceptance of required improvements and/or when any new
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 5
structure is connected to town utilities. CC’s are not required for other developments. Failure to
obtain a CC where one is required is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided
by WDB 7.4-7.6.
7.3.2 How do I get a certificate of compliance The applicant must file a written request for a CC
before the final inspection scheduled in the development agreement or as a condition of approval.
If all required improvements have been completed in accord with the approved final plans and the
development agreement, a CC will be issued within 15 working days following that final
inspection.
7.3.3 Winter is coming! Is it possible to get a temporary certificate of compliance? Yes. The
Administrator may, upon written application, and after consulting with the DPW, issue temporary
certificates of compliance (TCC) for periods of up to 365 days. TCC’s shall expire on a date certain
and shall specifically list all work that must be completed before a CC will be issued. Failure to
complete work as scheduled when a TCC has been issued is a violation of this bylaw, subject to
enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
7.4 Enforcement I. The town has access to two different enforcement procedures. The first is established
by the state’s planning enabling legislation. It is explained in this section. The second enforcement
procedure is the same as for ordinances. It is explained in WDB 7.5. Either procedure may be used to
address any violation of this bylaw. Generally the procedure established here, in WDB 7.4, will be used
for major violations, while the procedure established in WDB 7.5 will be used for minor violations, like
the posting of a temporary sign without a permit.
7.4.1 How is this bylaw enforced? As provided by 24 V.S.A. § 4452, the administrator may, in the
name of the town, institute any appropriate action, injunction, or other proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate a violation of this bylaw.
7.4.2 Must the owner be notified before enforcement? Yes, but only for the first offense. As
required by 24 V.S.A § 4451, alleged offenders will be given seven (7) days warning, via certified
mail, and an opportunity to correct the violation before the Administrator institutes an action. The
seven-day warning and opportunity to correct the violation need not be provided for a second
offense that occurs within 12 months of a warning being provided.
7.4.3 What is the penalty for a violation? Any person who violates this bylaw may be fined not
more than $200 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
Can I submit a complaint? Yes. Violations are addressed on a complaint basis and at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator (ZA). The Zoning Violation Complaint Form can be found on the website and in the office. A letter will be
issued to the property owner if the ZA determines that a property is in violation of the bylaw. Violations are often corrected
by a retroactive administrative permit. Structures, signs, or uses may have to be modified, removed, or reviewed by the DRB
in order to comply with the bylaw. Complaints regarding noise, public safety, or trespassing can be directed to the Williston
Police Department. The ZA does not enforce homeowner’s association covenants or bylaws. The ZA does not handle
disputes regarding property line boundaries..
7.5 Enforcement II
7.5.1 Can the administrator issue tickets for violations of this bylaw? Yes. As authorized by 24
V.S.A. § 1974a, the Administrator may issue a Vermont Civil Violation Complaint for any
violation of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 7 - | 6
7.5.2 How do I respond to a civil violation complaint? Violations of this bylaw are civil matters,
supervised by the Judicial Bureau. You have 20 days to respond to a complaint issued by the
Administrator. You may respond by admitting the violation or pleading “no contest” and paying
the waiver fee. You may also deny the violation, in which case a hearing will be scheduled before
the Judicial Bureau.
What is the Judicial Bureau? See http://www.vermontjudiciary.org/courts/JudicialBureau/FAQmunord.htm
7.5.3 What is the penalty for a civil violation? First, you should understand that each day in which
a violation continues is a separate violation, subject to a separate complaint and penalty.
7.5.3.1 First Offense. The penalty for a first offense shall be $250.00, but the waiver fee for
those who admit the violation or plead no contest shall be $150.00.
7.5.3.2 Subsequent Offenses. The penalty for each subsequent offense shall be $500.00, but
the waiver fee those who admit the violation or plead no contest shall be $400.00.
7.6 An Additional Means of Enforcement. No permit, administrative or discretionary, may be approved
for development on a parcel on which there is an outstanding violation of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 8 - | 1
Chapter 8
Variances
and Amendments
This chapter establishes a variance procedure that
provides for relief from the strict application of this
bylaw when certain findings can be made. It also
explains how this bylaw can be amended.
8.1 Variances
8.1.1 Is it possible to obtain a variance from the requirements of this bylaw? Yes, but not easily.
A variance may be granted only where the DRB can make the findings required by WDB 8.1.3 or,
if applicable, WDB 8.1.4.
8.1.2. How would I apply for a variance? An application for a variance is treated as an application
for a discretionary permit. It will be combined with such an application where the variance would
permit development for which a discretionary permit is required. Where only an administrative
permit would ordinarily be required, a development for which a variance is needed will be treated
as if a discretionary permit was required.
8.1.3 What findings are required for the DRB to approve a variance? The DRB must, as required
by 24 V.S.A. §4469, make the following findings:
8.1.3.1. …there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that unnecessary hardship is due
to these conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this bylaw in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
8.1.3.2. …because of these physical circumstances or conditions there is no possibility that
the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this bylaw, and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
The “Bottom Line” on Variances. If the property has been, or can be, developed for a conforming use, the town
cannot allow a variance. See WDB 8.1.4 for a narrow exception to this rule for renewable energy resource
structures.
8.1.3.3. … the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant or his/her
predecessors in interest.
8.1.3.4 … the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located, substantially or permanently impair
the appropriate use or development of adjacent property, reduce access to renewable energy
resources, or be detrimental to the public welfare, and
8.1.3.5. … the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford
relief and will represent the least deviation possible from the bylaw and the Town Plan.
8.1.3.6 For Nonconformities. A variance may be approved to permit the reasonable use of a
nonconforming lot, but only in the limited situations that are made possible by WDB 2.2.3.1
and 2.4.3.2,
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 8 - | 2
8.1.4 Isn’t it easier to obtain a variance for renewable energy resource structures? A little. As
provided by 24 V.S.A. § 4469(b), a variance for a proposed renewable energy resource structure
may be approved where the DRB finds that it is unusually difficult or unduly expensive for the
applicant to build a suitable renewable energy resource structure in conformance with this bylaw,
and can also make the findings of WDB 8.1.3.3 through 8.1.3.5.
8.2 Amendments. This section is based on 24 V.S.A. § 4441 which provides the statutory requirements
for bylaw adoption, amendments, and repeal.
8.2.1 Who may propose an amendment of this bylaw? Amendments may be proposed by the planning
commission or any other person or body. Proposed amendments that are not prepared by the planning
commission must be submitted in writing, along with supporting materials, at least 30 days before the
regularly-scheduled planning commission meeting at which their consideration is requested. Requests
for consideration of an amendment may be accompanied by a petition, as explained in WDB 8.2.2.
8.2.2 Can the planning commission be compelled to conduct a hearing on a proposed amendment?
The planning commission may find that an amendment proposed by another person or body would be
consistent with the Town Plan and proceed as if it had prepared that proposal. If the planning
commission declines to consider a proposed amendment, it may be compelled to do so by a petition
signed by not less than five percent (5%) of the town’s registered voters.
8.2.3 Can the planning commission change proposed amendments that are submitted via petition?
The planning commission may correct technical deficiencies in proposed amendments submitted via
petition, but may make no other changes before preparing the report required by WDB 8.2.4, and
scheduling a hearing.
8.2.4 How will proposed amendments be explained to the public? The planning commission must
prepare a report on all proposed amendments. That report is required to explain the proposed
amendment and its purpose, and address the following:
8.2.4.1 … how it conforms with or furthers the goals and policies contained in the Town Plan,
including the effect of the proposal on the availability of safe and affordable housing;
8.2.4.2 … how it is compatible with the proposed future land uses and densities of the Town
Plan; and
8.2.4.3 … how it, as applicable, carries out any specific proposals for planned community
facilities.
8.2.5 How will notice of the hearing be given? Upon completion of the report required by WDB 8.2.4,
above, the planning commission shall schedule at least one public hearing on the proposed
amendment. Notice of that hearing shall be given as provided here.
8.2.5.1 Publication. The hearing, the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the town at least 15 days before the
hearing.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 8 - | 3
8.2.5.2 Posting. The date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be posted in three or
more public places within the town, including the offices of the town clerk, at least 15 days
before the hearing.
8.2.5.3 Additional Contents. The hearing notice shall also include:
· a statement of purpose for the proposed amendment, which shall be same as the
statement of purpose included in the report required by WDB 8.2.4;
· a map or description of the area that will be affected by adoption of the proposed
amendment;
· a table of contents or list of section headings, and
· an explanation of how a copy of the full text may be obtained.
8.2.5.4 Notice to Agencies. At least 15 days before the hearing, a copy of both the proposed
amendment and the report required by WDB 8.2.4, above, shall be delivered, with proof of
receipt, or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each of the following: the
chairperson of the planning commission of each adjoining municipality, or in the absence of a
planning commission, the clerk of the m:unicipality; the Executive Director of the Chittenden
County Regional Planning Commission; and the Vermont Department of Housing and
Community Affairs.
8.2.6 What is the hearing procedure?
8.2.6.1 Opening Statements. The presiding member shall state the purpose of the hearing, and if
the hearing concerns a zoning map amendment or another change that affects the interests of a
particular landowners or owners (as opposed to a change that affects the entire town):
· ask whether any member wishes to be excused on account of a conflict of
interest, as defined at WDB 3.11 or report an ex parte contact, as defined at
WDB 3.11, and excuse any member declaring a conflict of interest; and
· advise participants that there are specific statutory requirements for becoming
an interested party who can appeal a decision. The chair need not review those
requirements, but shall refer the participants to the requirements of this bylaw
and state law. The chair shall also state that anyone wishing to be considered an
interested party must sign the register specifically provided for that purpose.
8.2.6.2 Questions and Answers. The purpose of a hearing is to take statements for consideration
by the planning commission. Once the hearing is opened, the commission will not answer
questions, nor will it permit questions or discussion among members of the audience. For this
reason, the hearing will be preceded by a staff report, which may be followed by questions and
answers from the audience.
8.2.6.3 Staff Report. The staff will summarize the written report required by WDB 8.2.4 and
present additional information regarding the proposed amendment. This report may be followed
by questions from the audience, which shall be directed through the presiding member. No
statements of position or opinion will be taken at this time. The purpose of the question and
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 8 - | 4
answer session is to help participants understand the amendment process and to establish the
facts.
8.2.6.4 Testimony. Before taking testimony, the presiding member shall remind those who wish
to speak to first state their name and address, and that statements are to address the merits of the
proposed amendment. The presiding member shall then ask for testimony. Members may ask
questions following any statement, with questions and responses being directed through the
presiding member.
8.2.6.5 Time Limits. The Planning Commission may set and enforce a time limit on oral
statements.
8.2.7 What actions can the planning commission take? After considering all statements taken at the
hearing, the Planning Commission may decide that no further action on the proposed amendment is
justified or revise the proposed amendment and the accompanying report as it deems necessary, then
submit them to the Selectboard for consideration.
8.2.8 Can the Planning Commission be compelled to send a proposed amendment to the
Selectboard? Yes. Upon written request of the Selectboard or where the proposal was accompanied by
a petition signed by not less than five percent (5%) of the town’s registered voters, the Planning
Commission shall correct any technical deficiencies and promptly submit the proposal, together with
its recommendation, to the Selectboard.
8.2.9 Must the Selectboard hold a hearing on a proposed amendment? Yes. Within 120 days of
receiving a proposed amendment from the Planning Commission, the Selectboard shall schedule one
or more public hearings on that proposal. Notice shall be given in the same way as provided for
planning commission hearings. The Selectboard may make minor revisions to the proposed
amendment, but these shall be complete and available for public review at least 14 days before the
scheduled hearing.
8.2.10 What actions can the Selectboard take? The Selectboard may, at any meeting after the final
public hearing, decide not to adopt the proposed amendment, adopt the proposed amendment as
presented, or make revisions. If the Selectboard makes substantial revisions in the proposal, it shall
schedule and give notice of new hearings. Proposed revisions shall also be filed with the Town Clerk
and the Planning Commission at least 10 days before the scheduled hearing. Upon receipt of such
changes, the Planning Commission shall amend the report required by WDB 8.2.4, and submit that
report and its recommendation to the Selectboard at, or before, the hearing.
8.2.11 When does an amendment or repeal become effective? Upon adoption by the Selectboard, an
amendment becomes effective in 21 days.
8.2.12 Is the public allowed to vote on amendments to this bylaw? A petition calling for a popular
vote may be filed with the Town Clerk within 20 days following the adoption of an amendment by the
Selectboard. If the petition is signed by not less than five percent (5%) of the town’s registered voters,
the amendment shall not take effect, and a town meeting shall be warned for the purpose of voting
upon the proposed amendment by Australian ballot.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 9 - | 1
Chapter 9
Specific Plans
This chapter provides for the creative evolution of
development in Williston, consistent with the
vision and objectives of the Town Plan, and as
specifically called for by 3.3.6 of that plan. To do
this, it sets up a procedure by which landowners
work cooperatively with the Planning Commission
and public to draft and propose amendments to the
Town Plan and this bylaw.
9.1 Purpose – Definition - Authority
9.1.1 What is the purpose of the specific plan option? The 2016-2024 Town Plan called for the
use of the specific plan as a tool that replaces the PUD/PRD provisions of the bylaws as they then
existed. The availability of this tool will encourage and permit the creative redesign and
redevelopment of commercial areas. The specific plan option may also be used in other areas
where it would help realize the objectives of the Town Plan. The two principal advantages of the
specific plan option are explained below.
9.1.1.1 A Specific Commitment. Conventional zoning makes it impossible for a community
to change zoning for a specific use that provides substantial public benefits without the risk
that the desirable use will not materialize and the zoning change will permit less desirable
ones. A ‘specific’ plan remedies this by providing detailed performance standards for
development in the area it includes. Its adoption permits only the specific types of changes
proposed by the applicant/s. If the specific changes proposed by the applicants are not made,
the standards will continue to apply until changed by another specific plan or an amendment
proposed by the Planning Commission and adopted as provided in Chapter 8 of this bylaw.
9.1.1.2 But Not Spot Zoning. The specific plan avoids claims of “spot” zoning because it is
not a “deal” between a community and an individual landowner. A specific plan must go
through the same process required for adoption of the Town Plan and bylaws. This ensures
that, while it will (as all land use changes do) serve private interests, it will also provide
substantial public benefits. The specific plan process cannot begin without a finding, by the
Planning Commission, that substantial public benefits could result.
9.1.2 What is a specific plan? A specific plan is a set of amendments to the town’s Comprehensive
Plan and this bylaw that has been developed by one or more landowners working with the Planning
Commission and the public, at the landowners’ expense. The contents of a specific plan will vary
with the type and complexity of the development or redevelopment it would permit: see WDB
9.3.5
9.1.3 Is the specific plan option permitted by Vermont law? Yes. Because a specific plan is a set
of amendments to the Town Plan and bylaws, it is adopted using the procedures set forth in 24
V.S.A. § 4384-4385 for the amendment of plans and 24 V.S.A § 4441-4442 for the amendment of
bylaws, as well as the additional procedures established here.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 9 - | 2
9.1.4 Could a specific plan also be a master plan, as permitted by Vermont’s growth centers law?
Possibly. 24 V.S.A. § 2793c(i)(5) provides for master plan applications to district environmental
commissions.
9.2 Use of the Specific Plan Option
9.2.1 When is use of the specific plan option permitted? The specific plan option may be used
only where the Planning Commission determines that a substantial benefit to the town could result.
9.2.2 What is a substantial benefit? A substantial benefit is an action or actions, to be taken by the
applicant/s at their expense, which implements the Town town’s Comprehensive Plan by:
9.2.2.1 Open Space. Conserving one or more open space assets identified in the town’s
Comprehensive Plan, or another open space asset acceptable to the Conservation and
Planning Commissions.
Open Space Assets? Potential open space acquisitions are identified in Chapter 13 - Open Space & Working
Landscapes.
9.2.2.2 Housing. Providing a substantial number of perpetually affordable, entry-level, or
employee housing units, as called for by the town’s Comprehensive Plan.
Affordable Housing? The need for more affordable housing is addressed in Chapter 5 of the 2016-2024 Town
Plan. See 5.2 – Housing Opportunities.
9.2.2.3 Infrastructure. Providing a major infrastructure asset, the need for which is identified
in the town’s Comprehensive Plan.
Major Infrastructure Assets? Major infrastructure assets that could be provided as part of a specific plan
include development of the park north of the Allen Brook School, as described in the Open Space Plan, any of
the major transportation improvements listed in Chapter 6 of the 2016-2024 Town Plan; and/or any of the
improvements listed in Chapter 7 of that plan, including construction of a new town shop in a suitable location
and major sewer and water system improvements.
9.2.2.4 Town Center. Making a major contribution to the public infrastructure required for
the development of a pedestrian-friendly, design-conscious, mixed-use town center,
consistent with the vision and objectives of the town’s Comprehensive Plan.
Town Center Development? See Chapters 3 and 4 of the 2016-2024 Town Plan, specifically 3.3 Taft Corners,
4.2 Commercial Design, and 4.3 Mixed Use. See also the vision presented in Williston’s successful application
for growth center designation.
9.2.2.5 Jobs. Providing significant job retention or expansion in a basic industry may also be
considered a substantial benefit, but ONLY when combined with at least one of the other
substantial public benefits listed above.
What is a “basic industry?” A basic industry is one that exports goods, services, and/or information from the
region. While Williston is a regional shopping hub, retailing and personal services are not considered basic.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 9 - | 3
9.2.2.6 Transit. Where transit is available, any development permitted by a specific plan that
will employee 100 or more people must provide discount bus passes to its employees and
otherwise participate in the available transportation demand management programs.
9.2.2.7 Consultation. In making its determination of substantial benefit, the Planning
Commission shall consult, as appropriate, with the Conservation Commission, the Historic
and Architectural Advisory Committee, the DPW, and other town boards and officials.
9.2.2.8 Mere Compliance is NOT a Substantial Public Benefit. Compliance with the
requirements of this bylaw is a minimum expectation, not a substantial benefit to the
community. Substantial benefits must be actions above and beyond what an applicant would
be required to take to comply with this bylaw.
9.3 Specific Plan Procedure
9.3.1. How does the specific plan process begin? Development of a specific plan begins with an
application from one or more landowners to the Planning Commission. This application shall be
submitted on the form provided by the Administrator and accompanied by all of the materials
required on the Specific Plan Application Checklist.
9.3.2 How does the planning commission respond to an application to create a specific plan? The
Planning Commission will review the application at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the
Commission tentatively determines that a substantial benefit may result from adoption of the
proposed specific plan, it will schedule public review of the application.
9.3.3 How will the public be involved in reviewing a proposed specific plan? The review process
will always end with public hearings before the Planning Commission and the Selectboard, but will
begin with a community meeting and, in most cases, the appointment of a citizen’s advisory
committee.
9.3.3.1 Community Meeting: Notice. The Planning Commission will schedule a community
meeting regarding the proposed specific plan. This informal meeting will be preceded by at
least 15 days’ written notice to all owners of adjoining properties and potentially affected
public service providers and agencies. Notice will also be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in Williston and provided by such other means as the applicants and
commission agree. Notice will be provided by the applicants, at their expense. Failure to
provide timely notice will end the process.
9.3.3.2 Community Meeting: Procedure. The community meeting on a proposed specific
plan will be informal. The applicants will present their proposal for discussion. Following
that discussion, the Planning Commission will:
· decide not to continue the process, having determined that no substantial community
benefit is likely result; or
· determine, in written findings, that substantial community benefits could result and
appoint a citizen advisory committee to work with the applicant/s to develop the
specific plan.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 9 - | 4
· The Planning Commission may also determine, again in written findings, that the
proposed specific plan provides a substantial benefit/s without having the potential
of adverse impacts on neighboring properties, the town’s infrastructure, or the
environment, and direct the applicants to work with staff to complete the specific
plan and schedule a public hearing.
9.3.3.3 Advisory Committee Composition. Advisory committees will vary with the nature
of the proposed plan, but should include:
· at least one Planning Commission member;
· one or more representatives of other town boards, as they may be affected or
involved:
· one or more representatives of the affected neighborhood;
· representatives from adjoining municipalities and state agencies, as they may
be affected or involved, or offer special expertise;
· members representing the community at large; and
· independent experts qualified to contribute to and evaluate the work of the
applicants as the specific plan is developed, who may serve as ex officio
members.
The goal is to create a committee that is both broadly representative of those whose
interests may be affected by the proposed specific plan and well-qualified.
9.3.3.4 Deadline. The Planning Commission shall impose a reasonable deadline on the
work of a specific plan advisory committee.
9.3.4 How will the specific plan be developed? The applicants will work with the advisory
committee and/or staff to develop a specific plan within the deadline established by the Planning
Commission. The applicants will be responsible for the costs of this process, including scheduling
and conducting meetings, which must be public meetings, and providing the services of attorneys,
designers, facilitators, and planners, as needed.
9.3.5 What will the specific plan include? A specific plan is a detailed guideline for the
development or redevelopment of a given site, or sites, presented in the form of proposed
amendments to the town’s Comprehensive Plan and this bylaw. A specific plan also includes a plan
for the provision of any major public infrastructure needed to serve the development or
redevelopment it enables. See the Specific Plan Contents Checklist for details.
9.3.6 What can a specific plan change?
9.3.6.1 The Plan. A specific plan can refine and add detail to the objectives and policies of
the Town Plan, provided that it is consistent with and implements the overall vision stated in
the Town Plan.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 9 - | 5
9.3.6.2 The Bylaw. A specific plan can refine the standards adopted in this bylaw. It can also
create new zoning districts, with their own standards. No specific plan can change the
administrative procedures established in this bylaw or state statute.
9.3.7 Presentation of the specific plan. The advisory committee and applicants will, upon
completing their work, present the proposed specific plan to the Planning Commission at the next
regularly scheduled meeting at which time will allow its consideration.
9.4 Adoption of a Specific Plan. Adoption of a specific plan will follow the procedures established at
24 V.S.A. §§ 4384-4385 for the amendment of plans and the procedures established at 24 V.S.A §§
4441-4442 and in Chapter 8 of this bylaw for the amendment of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 0 - | 1
Chapter 10
Boundary Adjustments
This chapter provides for the administrative
approval of boundary adjustments where no new
building lots are created and there is no adverse
impact on roads, other public facilities, or
neighboring uses.
10.1 Definition – Authority - Limitations
10.1.1 What is a boundary adjustment? A boundary adjustment is any revision to property lines,
including revisions to a plat that has been legally filed with the Town, which moves property lines,
but creates no new separate lots or parcels and has no adverse impact on access, the provision of
public services and utilities, or neighboring uses. A boundary adjustment may occur between two
or more adjacent parcels. Because a boundary adjustment is not a subdivision, it may be approved
by the Administrator.
10.1.2 What gives the Administrator the authority to approve boundary adjustments? This power
is delegated to the Administrator, as authorized by 24 V.S.A. § 4464(c).
10.1.3 Are there any limitations on administrative boundary adjustments? If the total acreage that
would be transferred from one lot or parcel to another as a result of the boundary adjustment would
be large enough to subdivide (based on the average density permitted in its zoning district, which
will be taken as a minimum lot size for this purpose) the proposed boundary adjustment will be
treated as a subdivision for which a discretionary permit is required. There are two possible
exceptions to this rule.
10.1.3.1 DRB Waiver. The Administrator may ask the DRB to authorize administrative
approval of a larger boundary adjustment where an absence of public road access, difficult
terrain, or other physical characteristics of the land involved allow the DRB to find that there
is no significant potential for future subdivision.
10.1.3.2 Land Conservation. Boundary adjustments that expand the holdings of the town or
other public agencies for land conservation purposes may be of any size.
10.2 Administrative Boundary Adjustment Procedure. The boundary adjustment procedure begins
with the submission of a preliminary sketch for review by the Administrator. If the Administrator finds
that the proposed boundary adjustment complies with this bylaw, an application form, checklist, fee, and
plat must be filed.
10.2.1. How does the boundary adjustment process begin? The applicant should, having first
made an appointment, visit the Administrator’s office with a preliminary sketch of the proposed
boundary adjustment for the Administrator’s review. This sketch need not be professionally drawn.
10.2.2. What will the administrator look for? Before authorizing a proposed boundary adjustment
the Administrator shall determine that:
10.2.2.1 … no new lot is being created;
10.2.2.2 … no lot will made nonconforming or more nonconforming; and
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 0 - | 2
10.2.2.3 … the proposed boundary adjustment will have no adverse impact on access, the
provision of public services and utilities, or neighboring uses.
10.2.3 What happens next if the administrator approves my proposed boundary adjustment? You
must prepare a plat of the proposed boundary adjustment, and submit it to the Administrator for
recording in the town’s land records. A plat is a legal drawing made by a registered land surveyor.
It must include all information required by the Boundary Adjustment Application Checklist and and
be accompanied by the Boundary Adjustment Application form provided by the Administrator.
Plats of boundary adjustments must also comply with the surveying standards established by
Chapter 12 of this bylaw. The application must also be accompanied by draft deed documents that
include language reflecting the proposed boundary line change(s) to the affected properties.
10.2.4 How do I get the plat of my proposed boundary adjustment recorded? The Administrator
will act on the plat within 15 working days of its receipt. If it complies with all requirements of the
Boundary Adjustment Application Checklist, the Administrator will sign the plat and submit it for
recording in the land records. If the plat fails to comply, the Administrator will return it to the
applicant with a list of deficiencies that must be corrected before it can be recorded.
10.2.5 Can the administrator’s decision on a proposed boundary adjustment be appealed? Yes.
An appeal may be made using the procedure provided by WDB 5.4.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 1
Chapter 11
Growth Management
This chapter establishes a competitive
growth management system for residential
subdivisions. The policy basis for this
system appears in Section 5.1 of the town’s
Comprehensive Plan. Readers are
encouraged to read that material first, as
background for understanding the procedure
established here.
11.1 Purpose - Authority
11.1.1 Why does Williston limit the pace of residential development? The purposes of growth
management review are to:
11.1.1.1 … ensure that residential growth does not exceed the capacity of the town’s existing
infrastructure and support planning for the expansion of municipal facilities and services; and
11.1.1.2 … given the limited capacity of the town’s infrastructure, to encourage residential
subdivisions that successfully implement the goals of the Town Plan.
11.1.1.3 More specifically, the residential growth management system adopted here supports
the development of a compact, pedestrian-friendly mixed-use center in the Taft Corners
growth center by encouraging housing construction in close proximity to that center, while
also rewarding the protection of open space resources, the provision of trails, energy
conservation, and other actions residential developers can take to help implement the Town
Plan.
11.1.2 What gives the town authority to limit the rate of development? Limiting the pace of
development “to avoid or mitigate any undue impact on existing or planned community facilities or
services” is specifically authorized by 24 V.S.A. § 4422.
11.2 Applicability
11.2.1 Which developments are subject to growth management review? Growth management
review is required before a proposed residential subdivision or the residential portion of a proposed
mixed-use development may apply for a discretionary permit.
11.2.2 Are there any exceptions to growth management review? There is a full exemption for the
construction of a single dwelling on certain existing undeveloped parcels. The DRB has authority,
but is not required, to provide a partial exemption for proposed minor residential subdivisions.
11.2.2.1 Existing Lots. One dwelling may be constructed on any undeveloped parcel on which
dwellings are permitted by this bylaw that was, and has continued to be, in separate ownership
since the town adopted its first growth management system in 1990. It is important to review
the lot merger requirements of this bylaw (see WDB 2.4) before determining that an existing
parcel qualifies for this exception.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 2
11.2.2.2 Minor Subdivisions. The DRB may, after having evaluated and ranked all proposed
residential subdivisions as provided in this chapter, allocate as many as four dwelling units
each fiscal year to proposed minor residential subdivisions, regardless of their score on the
evaluation standards established in WDB 11.6, 11.7, or 11.8. The parent parcels of residential
subdivisions must have a base lot area of the parent parcel of less than 10 acres and the
applicant must be requesting no more than two units of allocation to be considered as a minor
subdivision.
Why is there a Minor Subdivision Exception? This exception is needed to allow the town to adopt evaluation
standards that are stringent enough to encourage positive performance by larger subdivisions without penalizing
landowners who wish to create only one or two lots from a relatively small parcel.
11.2.2.3 Affordable Housing. Dwellings meeting the town’s requirements as perpetually
affordable at 80% or less than the Area Median Income (AMI) as defined in WDB 46.3.9 may
receive all of their required allocation separate from the number of allocation units specified
by the Residential Growth Target provided in WDB 11.3. For units proposed in the sewer
service area, the discretionary permit must include a finding that adequate sewer treatment
capacity is available pursuant to WDB 11.5.1.6. For units proposed outside of the sewer
service area, projects must meet the on-site sewage disposal requirements of WDB 15. l7.
11.3 Residential Growth Target
11.3.1 What is the town’s annual residential growth target? Section 5.1.2 of the Town Plan sets a
residential growth target of 80 dwelling unit equivalents, as defined in WDB 46.3.46, per fiscal year.
11.3.2 How is a dwelling unit equivalent defined? For the purposes of this chapter and for
calculating density under WDB Chapter 19, one dwelling equivalent is defined as a dwelling unit
containing 2 or more bedrooms. A dwelling containing only one bedroom or less (studio) is counted
as 0.5 of a dwelling unit equivalent.
11.3.3 Is there a geographic component to the growth target? Yes. Section 5.1.3 of the Town Plan
provides for 80 dwelling unit equivalents which will be distributed as follows:
11.3.3.1 … in the sewer service area, in the designated growth center, 50 dwelling unit
equivalents;
11.3.3.2 … in the sewer service area, outside the designated growth center, 20 dwelling unit
equivalents, and
11.3.3.3 … outside the sewer service area, 10 dwelling unit equivalents.
11.3.3.4 Shift to the Growth Center. The DRB may shift available units from areas outside the
growth center to proposed residential and mixed-use developments within the designated
growth center.
11.3.3.5 Accessory Dwellings. Accessory dwellings permitted by WDB 20.1 are not dwelling
unit equivalents for the purposes of this chapter.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 3
11.3.4 How does affordable housing affect the growth target? Residential developments that
include affordable units as some portion of the dwellings proposed shall be given priority in making
allocation decisions in the evaluation criteria of residential developments. Of the 80 dwellings
available for allocation each fiscal year, a minimum of 25% of those dwelling units in each allocation
area shall be reserved expressly for perpetually affordable housing as defined in WDB 46.3.9. Units
that are proposed to be perpetually affordable at 80% or less of the Area Median Income may be
approved outside of the Growth Target as provided in WDB 11.2.2.3.
11.4 Growth Management Procedure
11.4.1 At what point in the development review process does growth management review occur?
Growth management review follows pre-application review. All proposed residential subdivisions
that have cleared pre-application review on or before December 31 of any year shall be subject to
growth management review in the following year except as otherwise exempted. If a proposed
residential subdivision has not cleared pre-application review by December 31 of a given year, it will
not be reviewed during the following year.
11.4.2 How is growth management review conducted?
11.4.2.1 Notice to Eligible Applicants. All applicants whose proposed subdivisions qualify for
growth management review shall be notified of the date of the DRB’s growth management
hearing (see WDB 11.4.2.2) and provided with a Growth Management Questionnaire by
January 15.
11.4.2.2 Growth Management Questionnaires. Applicants must return their completed growth
management questionnaires by March 1. All representations made on a Growth Management
Questionnaire are binding and must be reflected in the application for a discretionary permit
if the proposed residential subdivision receives an allocation of dwelling units.
11.4.2.3 Public Hearing. The DRB shall, in March of each year, hold a public hearing at which
it reviews all proposed residential subdivisions that cleared pre-application review during the
preceding year. This hearing shall follow the procedures prescribed in Chapter 6 for the review
of applications for discretionary permits.
11.4.2.4 Evaluation and Ranking. Following the public hearing required by WDB 11.4.2.3,
the DRB shall evaluate and rank the proposed residential subdivisions using the evaluation
criteria established in this chapter. These criteria guide the DRB in awarding points to
proposed residential subdivisions based on their implementation of specific goals and
objectives of the Town Plan.
11.4.2.5 Allocation of the Growth Target. The DRB shall allocate the available portion (see
WDB 11.5.1.2) of the growth target established in the Town Plan to the proposed residential
subdivisions according to their ranking and the rules established in WDB 11.5, below. The
DRB may also decide to allocate as many as four dwelling unit equivalents, no more than two
dwelling unit equivalents per project, under the exemption established by WDB 11.2.2.2.
11.4.2.6 Notification of Allocation. Notice of the DRB’s decision and the approved allocation
schedule shall be provided in the form of a letter from the Administrator and sent to each
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 4
applicant by certified mail. Documentation of approved allocation must be presented by the
applicant with the application for the administrative permit to build the dwelling(s).
11.5 Allocation Rules
11.5.1 Are there rules the DRB must follow in making the allocations authorized by WDB 11.4.2.5,
above? Yes.
11.5.1.1 Minimum Score. No proposed subdivision that is awarded fewer than 30 points shall
receive an allocation, except via the exemption provided by WDB 11.2.2.2.
11.5.1.2 Number of Units. The DRB may allocate only the number of dwelling unit
equivalents allowed by the residential growth target adopted in the Town Plan. This does not
mean that the DRB allocates 80 dwelling unit equivalents each fiscal year. It does not. The
number of dwelling unit equivalents previously allocated is deducted from the growth target
for each fiscal year in which those allocations were made, ensuring that an average of no more
than 80 dwelling units per fiscal year are allocated.
What’s Left? A chart showing the number of allocations that remain available in each fiscal year may be obtained
from Williston Planning.
11.5.1.3 “Rolling Allocation” The DRB will make allocations based on a 10-year timeframe
that begins with the upcoming fiscal year. Any allocation that was not awarded in past fiscal
years is void and no longer available for allocation to future projects. The DRB will have a
consistent 10-year “horizon” over which it can make allocations, within the rules of WDB
11.5.1.5 and within the limits of sewer treatment capacity as discussed in WDB 11.5.1.6.
11.5.1.4 Partial Allocations. The DRB may make partial allocations to help create an equitable
division of the dwelling units available among proposed residential subdivisions that have
equal or essentially equal rankings. The DRB may also, due to the limited availability of
dwelling units and the rules adopted here, including WDB 11.5.1.5’s limit on allocations to
any one proposed residential subdivision, allocate fewer units to a proposed residential
subdivision than were requested in its pre-application or on its growth management checklist.
11.5.1.5 Maximum Allocation. There are limits on the number of units of allocation that may
be allocated in any of the allocation years. No more than 75% of the units available in a given
fiscal year and in any of the three ‘allocation areas’ established by WDB 11.3.3 may be
allocated to any one proposed residential subdivision. In addition, no more than 50% of the
number of allocation units in any of the allocation areas may be allocated two or more years
prior to the fiscal year the allocation becomes available, and no more than 75% of the number
of allocation units in any of the allocation areas may be allocated one year prior to the fiscal
year the allocation becomes available.
11.5.1.6 Changes in Capacity. Sewage treatment plant capacity may change due to changing
regulations, the failure of plant components, and other causes. The DRB shall not allocate
units for which adequate sewage treatment plant capacity is not available regardless of the
growth target established in the Town Plan. Any decision not to allocate units on this basis
shall be based on a written finding by the Selectboard that changing conditions have resulted
in inadequate capacity.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 5
11.5.1.7 High Scoring Developments. Residential developments that can achieve a score of
70 points or more as determined by the DRB, and meet the highest level of energy conservation
and efficiency as defined in WDB 11.7, 11.8, or 11.9, respectively, may proceed to
discretionary permit review immediately after pre-application, and their units are awarded
outside of the Growth Target. High Scoring Developments do not compete at the yearly
Growth Management hearing. Based on information submitted by the applicant as part of their
Discretionary Permit application, the DRB shall make a finding of fact that the project
achieves a score of 70 points or more based on the criteria in WDB 11.7, 11.8, or 11.9, and
that the project can be supported by available sewer capacity as discussed in WDB 11.5.1.6.
11.5.1.8 Changes to Allocation Rules. Growth management review occurs once a year in
March. To maintain consistency of review, any amendments made to this chapter shall not be
effective until immediately following the close of the next growth management hearing.
Applicants who complete pre-application review between January 1 and the upcoming growth
management hearing shall be notified of any pending changes to this chapter as part of their
pre-application recommendations.
Example: a project is heard by the DRB as a pre-application in July of 2018. In November of 2018,
the Selectboard adopts changes to this chapter that impact the project’s potential score or
approvability under this chapter. The project, along with any other project heard by the DRB as a
pre-application in calendar year 2018, is subject to the allocation rules in this chapter as they
existed at the beginning of calendar year 2018. The changes become effective following the
allocation hearing in March of 2019 and are applied to all projects heard by the DRB in calendar
year 2019.
11.5.2 Do allocations made by the DRB expire? Yes. Applicants must meet two deadlines, one for
the submission of an application for a discretionary permit for the proposed residential subdivision
and one for the actual construction of the dwelling unit.
11.5.2.1 Submission of Plans. An application for a discretionary permit for the proposed
residential subdivision must be filed within one year of the date of the record of decision for
the DRB meeting at which the allocation of dwelling units to that subdivision was made. If an
application is not filed within one year, the allocation becomes void and the units of allocation
it included will be made available for allocation to another proposed residential subdivision or
development.
11.5.2.2 Construction of Units. Allocations are available beginning on July 1 of a particular
year (the start of the town’s fiscal year). A development will receive an allocation schedule
based on the town’s residential growth target. Once the first year of the allocation schedule is
reached, any of the units within the allocation schedule of the development may be constructed
within the time frame of the allocation schedule. An administrative permit for the construction
of an allocated dwelling unit must be approved within five years after the July 1 on which it
becomes available.
After the initial five-year allocation period, residential developments may continue to obtain
necessary administrative permits to construct any of the remaining dwellings at the following
pace:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 6
Developments with 1 to 9 dwelling unit equivalents – one dwelling unit equivalent per year
Developments with 10-19 dwelling unit equivalents – up to two dwelling unit equivalents per year
Developments with 20 + dwelling unit equivalents – up to four dwelling unit equivalents per year
11.7 Evaluation Criteria for Proposed Residential Subdivisions in the Growth Center. The evaluation
criteria the DRB will use to evaluate and rank proposed residential subdivisions or the residential portion
of proposed mixed-use developments in the growth center are summarized to create a 100-point scoring
scale. They are explained in detail below.
11.7.1 Conserve Energy (0-10 points) All new dwellings must meet the required Vermont
Residential Energy Standards. This criterion encourages additional energy conservation in accord
with Policy 11.4 of the Town Plan. Scoring will be based on the percentage of total dwelling units
that either meet enhanced energy efficiency standards or that generate renewable energy as part of
the proposed development.
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level and generate at
least 75% of their estimated energy demand through onsite renewable sources or will
store at least four days of typical energy demand on-site – 10 points
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 6 points
· 50% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 4 points
· all units meet Vermont Residential Energy Standards – 0 points
11.7.2 Build Affordable Housing (0-20 points). Consistent with Policy 5.2.1 of the Town Plan, this
criterion provides an advantage to applicants who will build perpetually affordable housing.
“Affordable” includes three levels: what is affordable at 120%, 100%, and at 80% of the median
income. The units affordable at the 100% and 80% of median income level are included in the overall
percentage of affordable units.
· 40% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 20 points
· 30% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 16 points
· 20% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 10% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 7
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 12 points
· 15% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 5% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 8 points
· 10% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable – 4 points
· Less than 10% perpetually affordable units will be provided – 0 points
11.7.3 Offer Housing Choices (0-20 points). Consistent with Policy 5.2.3 of the Town Plan, this
criterion encourages each subdivision to include housing options for a broad spectrum of household
incomes and types, and for both owners and renters. The goal is not merely to promote affordability
as WDB 11.6.2 does, but to ensure that limited housing choices do not result in a community with
limited cultural and social diversity.
· Proposed residential subdivisions should include a mix of dwelling types and sizes
that will result in a mix of different housing costs and tenures. Where the proposed
residential subdivision is part of a mixed-use development, it must include units that
are demonstrably affordable to the typical employee who will be working there in
order to be awarded any points for this criterion. 1-20 points depending on the range
of housing options proposed
· The proposed residential subdivision does not contribute to housing diversity. – 0
points.
11.7.4 Provide Neighborhood Space (0-10 points). This criterion encourages the provision of urban
and/or neighborhood parks, and/or of indoor space for neighborhood activities. Points will be
awarded for the construction of an urban or neighborhood park, as defined in Policies 1.2 and 2.2
of the Chapter 13 of the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan, and/or for the construction of a
building space that can be used as a meeting room, fitness center, day care center, or other
neighborhood space acceptable to the DRB. The developer must commit to equip the space provided
for its purpose to earn points. The intent here is to encourage the creation of places for recreational
and civic activities that foster neighborliness, but need not be maintained by the town.
· The proposed subdivision provides developed neighborhood space that is easily
accessible and useful to its inhabitants – 1-10 points, depending on the size, diversity
of functions, and other characteristics of the space/s provided.
· The proposed residential subdivision provides no such space, or inadequate space –
0 points.
11.7.5 Build Paths and Trails (0-10 points). This criterion favors proposed residential subdivisions
that build their portion of the paths and trails called for by the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive
Plan (see Policy 6.6).
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 8
· The majority of the proposed dwelling units are served by the town’s path and trail
system, with the developer building all on-site segments – 1-10 points, depending on
the length of the path or trail segment/s.
· no path or trail connection is built – 0 points
11.7.6 Conserve Open Space (0-10 points). While there are limited opportunities for open space
conservation within the growth center, this criterion encourages the permanent conservation of any
remaining lands identified in the Chapter 13 of the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan or
another open space asset acceptable to the Conservation Commission via dedication or conservation
easement.
· the proposed development will protect open space lands identified in Chapter 13 of
the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan or another open space asset acceptable
to the Conservation Commission via dedication to the town or another public agency,
or via a conservation easement – 1-10 points depending on the extent and the
importance of the open space protected
· the proposed development will not provide permanent open space protection – 0
points
11.7.7 Design for the Context (0-10 points). Proposed residential subdivisions should provide for a
scale of housing (height, bulk) that is compatible with the surrounding uses. This does not mean that
the density or mix of housing forms must be identical or very similar. It means that the overall
character of the proposed residential subdivision will complement neighboring uses.
· the proposed development is in scale and compatible with the surrounding uses – 1-
10 points depending on the effort made to ensure compatibility
· the proposed development is not in scale and not compatible with its context – 0
points
11.7.8 Sustainable Transportation. (0-10 points) Developments that will support
transportation sustainability by providing publicly-available facilities that allow for transit use,
carpooling, electric vehicle charging, car-sharing, or secure, covered bicycle storage will
receive 1-10 points in addition to the points available for energy efficiency above.
A minimum of one covered carpool or transit shelter, one carpool parking space, one electric
vehicle charging port and space, one carshare space, or two secure covered bicycle storage
lockers per 25 Dwelling Unit equivalents (DUe) in the project is required for points to be
scored for any of these facilities. Developments may also meet one of the scoring criteria
elements by showing that the project will be part of a Transportation Management Association
that provides programming and incentives to the residents of the project and any onsite
employees to reduce single-occupant vehicle trips.
· The proposed development will provide five of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 10
points
· The proposed development will provide four of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 8 points
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 9
· The proposed development will provide three of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 6
points
· The proposed development will provide two of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 4 points
· The proposed development will provide one of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 2 points
· The proposed development will not provide any sustainable transportation facilities-
0 points
11.8 Evaluation Criteria for Proposed Residential Subdivisions that Have Sewerage, but Are Not
Within the Growth Center. The evaluation criteria the DRB will use to evaluate and rank proposed
residential subdivisions in the Residential and Village zoning districts are summarized and weighted to
create a 100-point scoring scale in the Growth Management Checklists. They are explained in detail below.
11.8.1 Conserve Energy. (0-10 points) All new dwellings must meet the required Vermont
Residential Energy Standards. This criterion encourages additional energy conservation in accord
with Policy 11.4 of the Town Plan. Scoring will be based on the percentage of total dwelling units
that either meet enhanced energy efficiency standards or that generate renewable energy as part of
the proposed development.
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level and generate at
least 75% of their estimated energy demand through onsite renewable sources or will
store at least four days of typical energy demand on-site – 10 points
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 6 points
· 50% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 4 points
· all units meet Vermont Residential Energy Standards – 0 points
11.8.2 Build Affordable Housing (0-20 points). Consistent with Policy 5.2.1 of the Town Plan, this
criterion provides an advantage to applicants who will build perpetually affordable housing.
“Affordable” includes three levels: what is affordable at 120%, 100%, and at 80% of the median
income. The units affordable at the 100% and 80% of median income level are included in the overall
percentage of affordable units.
· 40% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 20 points
· 30% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 10
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 16 points
· 20% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 10% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 12 points
· 15% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 5% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 8 points
· 10% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable – 4 points
· Less than 10% perpetually affordable units will be provided – 0 points
11.8.3 Offer Housing Choices (0-20 points). Consistent with Policy 5.2.3 of the Town Plan, this
criterion encourages each subdivision to include housing options for a broad spectrum of household
incomes and types, and for both owners and renters. The goal is not merely to promote affordability
as WDB 11.6.2 does, but to ensure that limited housing choices do not result in a community with
limited cultural and social diversity.
· Proposed residential subdivisions should include a mix of dwelling types and sizes that
will result in a mix of different housing costs and tenures. Where the proposed residential
subdivision is part of a mixed-use development, it must include units that are
demonstrably affordable to the typical employee who will be working there in order to
be awarded any points for this criterion. 1-20 points depending on the range of housing
options proposed
· The proposed residential subdivision does not contribute to housing diversity. – 0 points.
11.8.4 Provide Neighborhood Space (0-10 points). This criterion encourages the provision of urban
and/or neighborhood parks, and/or of indoor space for neighborhood activities. Points will be
awarded for the construction of an urban or neighborhood park, as defined in Policies 1.2 and 2.2
of the Chapter 13 of the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan, and/or for the construction of a
building space that can be used as a meeting room, fitness center, day care center, or other
neighborhood space acceptable to the DRB. The developer must commit to equip the space provided
for its purpose to earn points. The intent here is to encourage the creation of places for recreational
and civic activities that foster neighborliness, but need not be maintained by the town.
· The proposed subdivision provides developed neighborhood space that is easily
accessible and useful to its inhabitants – 1-10 points, depending on the size, diversity
of functions, and other characteristics of the space/s provided.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 11
· The proposed residential subdivision provides no such space, or inadequate space –
0 points.
11.8.5 Build Paths and Trails (0-10 points). This criterion favors proposed residential subdivisions
that build their portion of the paths and trails called for by the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive
Plan (see Policy 6.6).
· The majority of the proposed dwelling units are served by the town’s path and trail
system, with the developer building all on-site path segments and dedicating all onsite
trail segments – 1-10 points, depending on the length of the path or trail
segment/s.
· no path or trail connection is built or dedicated – 0 points
11.8.6 Design for the Context (0-5 points). Proposed residential subdivisions should provide for a
scale of housing (height, bulk) that is compatible with the surrounding uses. This does not mean that
the density or mix of housing forms must be identical or very similar. It means that the overall
character of the proposed residential subdivision will complement neighboring uses.
· the proposed development is in scale and compatible with the surrounding uses –
1-5 points depending on the effort made to ensure compatibility
· the proposed development is not in scale and not compatible with its context – 0
points
11.8.7 Build Close to Services (0-10 points). Williston encourages new residential development
within walking distance of focal points in the growth center or village. There must be a safe
pedestrian way from the units for which points are awarded to a focal point in the growth center or
the village. This means there must be existing sidewalks and/or a town recreation path or trail, or that
the developer will construct a safe pedestrian way. Distances will be measured along the shortest
pedestrian way from the mid-point among the proposed units to the nearest focal point.
· Proposed units are within 1,310 feet of focal point in the growth center or village –
10 points
· Proposed units are within 2,640 feet of focal point in the growth center or village – 5
points
· All other proposed units – 0 points
What is a Focal Point? Focal points are public gathering places, formal or informal. They are currently identified in the
town’s vision for its growth center, as set forth in the town’s application to the state for growth center designation. Focal
points include the intersection of any of the public streets and Williston Road in the VZD, the Town Hall and the Dorothy
Alling Memorial Library.
11.8.8 Neighborhood Design (0-5 points). This criterion does not include architectural design or the
details of landscape design. Those subjects are addressed after an application for a discretionary
permit is filed. Proposed residential subdivisions will be scored based their use of open space to both
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 12
buffer and integrate the neighborhood, as well to manage stormwater, and on the siting of homes to
encourage walking and social interaction among neighbors.
· Open space is used both creatively and to serve functional needs like buffering and
stormwater management, while homes are sited so as to encourage walking and social
interaction among neighbors – 0-5 points depending on how well this goal is
implemented.
· Permanent protection of open space identified in the Chapter 13 of the 2016-2024
Williston Comprehensive Plan will result in the award of 1-5 additional points on this
criterion, depending on the extent and quality of the open space resource being
protected.
· Open space is not used creatively and/or site planning techniques do not encourage
walking and social interaction – 0 points
11.8.9 Sustainable Transportation. (0-10 points) Developments that will support transportation
sustainability by providing publicly-available facilities that allow for transit use, carpooling, electric
vehicle charging, car-sharing, or secure, covered bicycle storage will receive 1-10 points in addition to
the points available for energy efficiency above.
A minimum of one covered carpool or transit shelter, one carpool parking space, one electric vehicle
charging port and space, one carshare space, or two secure covered bicycle storage lockers per 25
Dwelling Unit equivalents (DUe) in the project is required for points to be scored for any of these
facilities. Developments may also meet one of the scoring criteria elements by showing that the project
will be part of a Transportation Management Association that provides programming and incentives to
the residents of the project and any onsite employees to reduce single-occupant vehicle trips.
· The proposed development will provide five of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 10 points
· The proposed development will provide four of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 8 points
· The proposed development will provide three of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 6 points
· The proposed development will provide two of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 4 points
· The proposed development will provide one of the elements listed in 11.7.8- 2 points
· The proposed development will not provide any sustainable transportation facilities- 0 points
11.9 Evaluation Criteria for Proposed Residential Subdivisions Outside the Sewer Service Area. The
evaluation criteria the DRB will use to evaluate and rank proposed residential subdivisions outside the
sewer service area are summarized and weighted to create a 100-point scoring scale in the growth
management checklists. They are explained in detail below.
11.9.1 Conserve Energy. (0-10 points) All new dwellings must meet the required Vermont
Residential Energy Standards. This criterion encourages additional energy conservation in accord
with Policy 11.4 of the Town Plan. Scoring will be based on the percentage of total dwelling units
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 13
that either meet enhanced energy efficiency standards or that generate renewable energy as part of
the proposed development.
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level and generate at
least 75% of their estimated energy demand through onsite renewable sources or will
store at least four days of typical energy demand on-site – 10 points
· 100% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 6 points
· 50% of all units meet Efficiency Vermont High Performance Level – 4 points
· all units meet Vermont Residential Energy Standards – 0 points
11.9.2 Build Affordable Housing (0-20 points). Consistent with Policy 5.2.1 of the Town Plan, this
criterion provides an advantage to applicants who will build perpetually affordable housing.
“Affordable” includes three levels: what is affordable at 120%, 100%, and at 80% of the median
income. The units affordable at the 80% of median income level are included in the overall
percentage of affordable units.
· 40% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 20 points
· 30% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 20% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 10%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 16 points
· 20% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 10% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 12 points
· 15% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable below 120% of the median income level, and 5% or more of all proposed
dwelling units will be affordable between 80-100% of the median income level, and 5%
or more of all proposed dwelling units will be affordable at the 80% or less than the
median income level – 8 points
· 10% or more of all proposed dwelling units will meet the definition of perpetually
affordable – 4 points
· Less than 10% perpetually affordable units will be provided – 0 points
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 1 - | 14
11.9.3 Provide for Paths and Trails (0-10 points). This criterion favors proposed residential
subdivisions that provide easements for primitive trails or build their portion of the paths called for
by the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan (see Policy 6.6).
· The majority of the proposed dwelling units are served by the town’s path and trail
system, with the developer building all on-site segments – 5-10 points, depending on
the length of the path or trail segment/s.
· no path is built or trail easement is provided – 0 points
11.9.4 Design for the Context (0-10 points) Proposed residential subdivisions should provide for a
scale of housing (height, bulk) that is compatible with the surrounding uses. This does not mean that
the density or mix of housing forms must be identical or very similar. It means that the overall
character of the proposed residential subdivision will complement neighboring uses.
· the proposed development is in scale and compatible with the surrounding uses – 1-
15 points depending on the effort made to ensure compatibility
· the proposed development is not in scale and not compatible with its context – 0
points
11.9.2 Conserve Open Space (0-30 points). This criterion encourages the long-term protection of the
open spaces identified in Chapter 13 of the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan. It awards
points for the protection of lands identified there by dedication or conservation easement.
· the proposed development will protect open space lands identified in Chapter 13 of
the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive Plan or another open space asset acceptable
to the Conservation Commission via dedication to the town or another public agency,
or via a conservation easement – 1-30 points depending on the extent and the
importance of the open space protected
· the proposed development will not provide permanent open space protection – 0
points
11.9.6 Minimize Visual Impact (0-20 points). This criterion encourages “rural” developments that
are sited so as to disappear into the landscape.
· the proposed project will not be visible from public roads, except any new road built
to provide direct access to the site – 20 points
· the proposed project will be minimally visible from public roads, except any road
directly serving the site –1-10 points
· the proposed project will be visible from public roads – 0 points
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 2 - | 1
Chapter 12
Subdivisions Final Plans
This chapter establishes definitions and
additional application requirements that are
specific to the division of land, including
standards for the setting of survey monuments.
Some of these standards also apply to final
plans for other developments.
12.1 Authority – Definitions
12.1.1 Does the town have specific authority to regulate the division of land? Yes. 24 V.S.A §
4418 authorizes Vermont towns to regulate subdivisions.
12.1.2 What is a subdivision? The “division of a parcel into two or more parcels” is land
development, as defined by 24 V.S.A § 4303(10). This definition is repeated in 24 V.S.A § 4418.
WDB 12.1.3 and 12.1.4 clarify this definition.
12.1.3 What is a “parcel?” For the purposes of this bylaw, a ‘parcel’ is any contiguous area of land
that is owned or effectively controlled by the same person, family, partners, or shareholders. The
key to this definition is effective control. How the land is described on the town’s tax map or in the
land records, how the land was assembled from smaller parcels, or how the land is affected by
rights-of-way or easements, is relevant only as provided by WDB 12.1.3.1-3.
12.1.3.1 Split Parcels. Where a parcel is split by a public road right-of-way or a railroad
right-of-way it will be treated as two parcels for the purposes of this bylaw. Easements will
not ordinarily be considered to split a parcel, but the Administrator may determine that an
easement for a high-voltage power line or major pipeline has the same impact on the use of a
parcel as a public road or railroad right-of-way and permit that parcel to be ‘split’ for the
purposes of determining compliance with this bylaw. The Administrator may require that a
survey defining the limit and extent of the split parcel be prepared and recorded in the
town’s land records as part of an application for an administrative permit on split parcels.
The Administrator’s decision is subject to appeal, as provided by WDB 5.4.
12.1.3.2 Approved Lots. Where a parcel consists of more than one approved subdivision lot,
the lots may be sold and/or used separately, consistent with all conditions of approval
imposed on the subdivision and the requirements of this bylaw. An approved subdivision lot
is one that is shown on a recorded plat approved as provided by this bylaw or the town’s
previous subdivision regulations.
12.1.3.3 Homesteads. The Administrator may permit a homestead site that is part of a larger
parcel, that has a surveyed legal description, and that is occupied by an existing dwelling to
be conveyed separately, without being reviewed as a subdivision, but only where that
conveyance will not adversely affect the potential subdivision of the remainder of the
property by impeding access (via road or trail, or for utilities).
12.1.3.4 Non-Conforming Lots. This bylaw includes specific provisions for the use of nonconforming
lots. See WDB 2.4.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 2 - | 2
12.1.4 What is a “division?” A ‘division’ occurs whenever any part of a parcel that does not
qualify for one of the exceptions established by WDB 12.1.3, is sold or otherwise conveyed (for
example, by gift or court order), leased, or developed.
12.2 Permit Requirements. As provided by WDB 4.3.4.1, a discretionary permit is required for most
subdivisions. The only exception to this requirement is for boundary adjustments. See Chapter 6 of this
bylaw for the discretionary permit procedure. See Chapter 10 for the boundary adjustment procedure.
12.3 Final Plans and Plats
12.3.1 Are there standards for the accuracy and contents of subdivision plans? Yes. Final plans
and plats must include everything on the Final Plan Checklist established by WDB 6.9.2. They
must also comply with the requirements of state law, specifically including 26 V.S.A. § 2602 and
27 V.SA. §§ 1401-1406.
12.3.2 Are there examples of the certificates and signature blocks that must appear on the final
plans? Yes.
12.3.1 Certificate of Dedication. All final plans and plats showing any improvements that
will become public must include a Certificate of Dedication, as required by WDB 15.13.
12.3.2 Approval Signature Block. All final plans and plats must include an approval
signature block.
SAMPLE APPROVAL SIGNATURE BLOCK
APROVAL SIGNATURE BLOCK
Upon finding that the final plans complied with all requirements of the Williston Development Bylaw and
all conditions imposed on the approval of Discretionary Permit ___ - ____, the Williston Development
Review Board/Administrator approved the final plans for the (name Subdivision) on the ____ day of
(month), 20 __ .
(presiding member’s signature)
NOTE: This signature block should be prepared for the signature of Administrator on boundary
adjustments and where the DRB has delegated final approval of final plans to the Administrator. For all
subdivisions, it should be prepared for the signature of the presiding member of the DRB.
12.4 Survey Monuments
12.4.1 Where must survey monuments be placed? Survey monuments shall be set at the following
locations:
12.4.1.1 … at each corner and angle point of all lots, blocks and parcels of land shown on
the final plans.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 2 - | 3
12.4.1.2 … at every point where the outer boundary of a subdivision intersects with an
existing or approved road right-of-way; and
12.4.1.3 … at every point of curve, point of tangency, point of reversed curve, point
of compounded curve, and point of intersection on each existing road or trail rightof-
way that is not already a line created by the development.
12.4.1.4 A monument must also be set wherever a meander line used to delineate watershed
protection buffers or other irregular features shown on the approved final plans intersects
any of the lot, block, parcel, or right-of-way boundaries established by the survey.
12.4.1.5 Open space areas required by WDB 31.7 and/or any other area required to be
permanently delineated by this bylaw or conditions of approval imposed by the DRB must
also be monumented but may be allowed to be monumented on a more limited basis as
determined by the DRB, depending on physical features of the site and the nature of the area
being delineated. Vermont state grid coordinates depicted on the final plans may also be
required at critical points along the perimeter of important areas.
12.4.2 What if it is not possible to set one of the required survey monuments? A properlydocumented
reference monument may be set instead. Where the need for a reference monument
was not anticipated in the approved final plans, the surveyor who sets the reference monument
shall record a Certificate of Survey showing the correction to the approved final plans. A copy of
that Certificate of Survey must also be filed with the Administrator. Simply documenting a
reference monument does not necessitate an amendment to the final plans.
12.4.3 When must survey monuments be in place? As many of the required monuments as
possible shall be set before the final plans are recorded. The Administrator may, however, permit
monuments that could be destroyed or inadvertently moved during construction to be set after the
work is complete, but before a certificate of compliance is issued.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 1
Chapter 13
Access - Connectivity
Traffic Studies
This chapter implements policies 6.2 and 6.3 of the
Town Plan. These standards are intended to
maximize the capacity of existing highways;
improve traffic safety; limit the potential for
conflict between vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists;
and reduce congestion, while providing safe access
to private properties. These standards also promote
connectivity for vehicles, cyclists, and pedestrians,
and to provide emergency access, facilitate
movement, and foster a sense of community.
13.1 Basic Requirement - Applicability
13.1.1 What is the basic requirement of this chapter? That all developments and all lots, uses, and
structures within developments have safe, adequate, legal access to a public or private road. The
standards adopted in this chapter define ‘safe’ and ‘adequate.’
13.1.2 Do these standards apply to points of access to state highways? Yes. Access to state
highways is regulated by the Vermont Agency of Transportation (AOT), but 19 V.S.A § 1111 and
24 V.S.A. § 4302 provide a basis for this bylaw to apply to points of access to state highways.
Need to Obtain Access to a State Road? Contact District 5 of the Vermont Agency of Transportation at (802) 655-
1580.
13.1.3 Will I be required to provide my access permits? Yes. Access permits for town roads are
issued by the Williston Department of Public Works. Access to state highways is regulated as
discussed above. Applicants proposing access to state highways will be required to submit a letter
of intent from Vermont AOT as part of their application for a discretionary permit. Applicants
proposing access to private roads or across private property will have to submit evidence that they
have legal rights to that access for the development they propose.
13.1.4 Do these standards apply to points of access to private roads? Yes. Points of access to
private roads are ‘required improvements,’ regulated by this bylaw.
13.2 Access Management. The plans submitted with applications for permits must clearly demonstrate
compliance with these standards.
13.2.1 How may access be provided? The type and number of points of access permitted will
depend on the functional classification of the road being accessed.
13.2.1.1 Arterials and Collectors. Access to arterial and collector roads must be from local
roads, not directly from adjoining properties. The DRB may permit an exception to this
standard where physical barriers, including property ownership or difficult terrain, make
compliance infeasible. Where an exception is permitted, the applicant is responsible for all
improvements needed to ensure that permitting direct access does not result in undue
congestion or safety hazards.
13.2.1.2 Local Roads. Adjoining properties may have direct access to local roads in
compliance with the standards adopted in this chapter and the other requirements of this
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 2
bylaw. The DRB may require that shared driveways be used for access to local roads in
order to reduce the number of points of access.
13.2.1.3 Parking Areas. Parking areas must not rely on adjoining public roads as part of their
internal circulation pattern. Specifically, parking areas on private property (this chapter does
not apply to on-street parking) must be designed so that vehicles do not back directly onto a
public road. Standards for the location, size, and design of parking lots are adopted in
Chapter 14 of this bylaw.
13.2.2 Can I keep all of my existing points of access? No. Multiple points of access to arterials or
collectors and continuous curb cuts along any road must be consolidated to the minimum number
needed to serve the existing and proposed uses on the property as a condition of approval for a
permit. The required consolidation shall include:
13.2.2.1 … eliminating access to arterials and shifting it to a local roads or collectors, and/or
13.2.2.2 … eliminating points of access that do not have adequate corner clearances, as
required by WDB 13.2.4.
13.2.2.3 Exceptions. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard where physical
barriers, including property ownership or difficult terrain, make the consolidation of points
of access infeasible.
13.2.3 Are there design standards for points of access? Yes.
13.2.3.1 Alignment. Proposed points of access shall be aligned at a 90° angle (±5°). The
DRB may permit an exception to this standard where physical barriers, including property
ownership or difficult terrain, make compliance infeasible. Where an exception is permitted,
the applicant is responsible for all improvements needed to ensure that the proposed point of
access does not result in safety hazards.
13.2.3.2 Grade. The grade approaching a proposed point of access to a local road shall be
less than three percent (3%) for at least 50 feet before the intersection. The grade of
proposed approaches to collector and arterial roads shall be as determined by the DRB, with
the advice of the DPW. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard where physical
barriers, including property ownership or difficult terrain, make compliance infeasible.
Where an exception is permitted, the applicant is responsible for all improvements needed to
ensure that the proposed approach does not result in a safety hazard.
13.2.3.3 Sight Distance. Sight lines and sight distance calculations for all proposed access
drives shall be shown on the plans submitted with applications for discretionary permits. The
sight distance required for a point of access varies with conditions. The minimum necessary
shall be as provided by the Vermont AOT’s Access Management Program Guidelines. There
will be no exceptions to this standard. The applicant must provide the level of traffic control
needed to attain compliance.
13.2.3.4 Clearance. Proposed access drives must be placed far enough from existing
driveways and intersections to minimize congestion and safety hazards. The minimum
separation shall be as provided by the Vermont AOT’s Access Management Program
Guidelines. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard to provide access to
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 3
properties that have no reasonable alternative point-of-access. Where an exception is
permitted, the applicant is responsible for any improvements needed to mitigate the
congestion and safety impacts of the proposed point of access.
13.2.3.5 Additional Standards. Additional standards for the design and construction of
residential driveways that serve more than one dwelling are established by WDB 13.2.6. All
other proposed points of access must be designed by a licensed professional engineer in
compliance with the Vermont AOT’s Access Management Program Guidelines, the Uniform
Manual of Traffic Control Devices, and Williston’s Public Works Standards.
13.2.4 Do the sight distance standards adopted in 13.2.3.3 affect land use? Yes. The areas needed
to provide the sight distances required by WDB 13.2.3.3 must be kept open and free of visual
obstructions. There shall be no structures that rise above grade in these areas except for required
regulatory signs and landscaping will be limited to turf or another ground cover and ornamental
plantings that attain a height of no more than 32”. Existing trees may be permitted to remain if they
are pruned to a single stem up to eight (8) feet above grade.
13.2.5 Who must provide turning lanes, medians, and other access management improvements?
Applicants must provide acceleration, deceleration, and turning lanes; medians, and all other
improvements, including signs, signals, and lighting, that are required to provide safe access to
their development. The need for these improvements may be established by the Town Plan;
corridor plans; or traffic studies prepared by the town, the CCMPO, or the Vermont AOT; or by a
traffic study required by WDB 13.8. Chapter 7 establishes procedures that guarantee the
completion of required improvements, including points of access.
13.2.6 What are the additional standards for the construction of residential driveways? These
standards apply to driveways that serve more than one dwelling.
13.2.6.1 Grade. The grade of a residential drive shall not exceed 10%.
13.2.6.2 Width. Residential drives shall be no less than 12 feet in width, and no more than
16. Where the drive travels through brush, woods, or forest, there shall be a cleared area of
four feet on either side of the drive.
13.2.6.3 Length. No private driveway shall be longer than 1,320 feet. The DRB may permit
an exception to this standard where physical barriers, including property ownership or
difficult terrain, make provision of another point of access infeasible. Where an exception is
permitted, the density of development served by the private driveway shall average 1
dwelling per 10 ten acres or less.
13.2.6.4 Construction. Residential drives shall consist of a minimum four-inch finish course
of gravel or, alternatively of asphalt or concrete paving, a minimum eight (8) inch base
course, and a geotextile layer. The first 30 feet back from a paved public road shall be paved.
Specifications for these materials are found in the Public Works Standards. Drainage shall
be provided in the form of a swale, or swale, and culverts. Runoff and erosion control shall
be provided as required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
13.2.6.5 Pull-Outs. A pull-out permitting vehicles to pass shall be provided for every 400
feet of residential drive.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 4
13.2.6.6 Natural Hazards. Residential drives shall not be permitted where they would be
subject to regular seasonal flooding, slope failure, or other natural hazards.
13.2.6.7 Addresses. Where the building and required building numbers are not visible from
the road, dwellings served by a residential driveway must be identified with a freestanding
sign displaying the address number or numbers as required by Williston’s Road Name and
Road Location Addressing Ordinance, which is attached as Appendix D.
13.3 Bicycle and Pedestrian Access. WDB 13.2 sets standards for vehicular access. Developments must
also be safely accessible to bicyclists and pedestrians.
13.3.1 Must all development have bicycle and pedestrian access? Yes. The plans submitted with
applications for discretionary permits must show how bicyclists and pedestrians can safely reach at
least one employee or customer entrance. See also Chapter 14 of this bylaw’s requirements for
bicycle parking. More specific standards for bicycle and pedestrian access may apply in some
zoning districts.
13.3.2 What constitutes “safe” bicycle and pedestrian access? Potential conflicts between
pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicles must be minimized by the use of sidewalks or paths, pavement
markings and textures; signs; and similar techniques approved by the DRB. Certain uses must also
provide safe pedestrian drop-offs, as required by WDB 13.3.3.
13.3.3 Where must a safe pedestrian drop-off be provided?
13.3.3.1 Required. Safe off-street pedestrian drop-offs must be provided for all child care
uses, with the exception of family day care homes in residential zoning districts; for all
places of public assembly; and for all schools. The DRB may permit an exception to this
standard, but only where it finds that safe on-street pedestrian drop-off is possible.
13.3.3.2 At the DRB’s Discretion. The DRB may also require safe pedestrian drop-offs for
hotels and other lodging places, multi-family residences, neighborhood parks, and in
shopping areas where considerable pedestrian traffic is anticipated.
13.4 Access for the Disabled. All development in Williston must be fully accessible, as required by
the Americans with Disabilities Act. Parking for people with disabilities is addressed in Chapter 14 of
this bylaw.
Accessibility? Because the town does not administer a building code its role in ensuring access for people with disabilities is
quite limited. The principal responsibility for this function lies with the Vermont Division of Fire Safety, which enforces a
state building code. The Division’s web site is at: http://www.dps.state.vt.us/fire/
13.5 Multiple Points of Access. These standards limit the number of homes that may be served by a
single point of road access.
13.5.1 How many dwellings may be served by a private driveway? Where a new private driveway
is being established in compliance with WDB 13.2, the maximum number of dwellings it may
serve is limited to five (5). There are two exceptions to this standard.
13.5.1.1 Existing Driveways. Where an existing private driveway serves more than five (5)
parcels, and offers the only access to one or more undeveloped parcels, it may serve one
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 5
dwelling per parcel, but must be upgraded to meet the standards of WDB 13.2.6 before a
sixth dwelling is permitted.
13.5.1.2 Lower Density. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard where doing so
will preserve landscape features and neighborhood character that would be adversely
impacted by requiring construction of a private or public road, where the existing driveway
meets or will be improved to meet the standards of WDB 13.2.6, and where the average
density of the development served will be one unit per 10 acres or less.
13.5.2 How many dwellings may be served by a road that ends in a loop or cul-de-sac? No more
than 40 dwellings may be served by a single point of access. Where an existing dead-end road
already serves 40 dwellings, further development served by that road will be limited to one
dwelling for each lot or parcel that is currently vacant.
13.5.3 Is there a limit on the length of access drives or roads that end in a loop or cul-de-sac?
Yes. See WDB 13.2.6.3 for the length of private driveways. The length of a dead-end road, private
or public, is limited to 2,640 feet. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard, but only
where physical barriers, including property ownership or difficult terrain, make provision of a
second point of access infeasible. Where such an exception is permitted, the density of the
development served shall be limited to one dwelling per 10 acres.
13.5.4 Can access be provided by an emergency access road that does not meet the standards for
a private or public road? Where two points of access are required, both must meet Williston’s
standards for a private or public road, whichever applies. The DRB may permit an exception to this
standard for an emergency access for a nonresidential development, like an industrial plant, where
control of public access is an operational necessity. Any emergency access permitted by the DRB
must be kept passable to ambulances and fire engines at all times. Failure to maintain an
emergency access, including failure to promptly remove snow, will be a violation of this bylaw,
subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
13.6 Drive-Throughs. Consistent with the Town Plan vision of pedestrian-friendly development,
Williston permits drive-through service only for bulky, heavy objects (feed, lumber) and financial
institutions, where drive-through service preserves privacy and where a prohibition would result in
several nonconforming uses.
13.7 Connectivity. Consistent with Policy 6.3 of the Town Plan, developments should have safe,
functional connections with adjoining developments for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
Interconnected street and trail systems, shared points of access, and shared parking will be required
wherever they are not precluded by physical barriers, including property ownership, historic land use
patterns, and difficult terrain.
13.8 Traffic Studies. The town’s review of proposed developments, including determinations about
compliance with this and other chapters of this bylaw, will be based in part on traffic and transportation
studies.
13.8.1 Is it possible to use existing information to evaluate transportation impacts? In many
cases, yes. All proposed developments for which a discretionary permit is required must submit
estimated traffic generation data based on the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers Trip Generation. Beyond that, a traffic study will be required only where the DRB, with
the advice of the DPW, determines that existing studies do not provide sufficient information on
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 3 - | 6
which to base a decision. This determination will be made during pre-application review so that the
traffic study can accompany the application for a discretionary permit.
13.8.2 Are there standards for traffic studies when they are required? Yes. Where a traffic study
is required it must be conducted in accord with the most current edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers’ Transportation Impact Analyses for Site Development: an ITE
Recommended Practice. Further, all traffic studies must be consistent with the assumptions and
modeling used for the Grid Street Evaluation Final Report prepared for the Town of Williston,
October 10, 2006 by RSG, Inc.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 1
Chapter 14
Off-Street Parking
and Loading
This chapter sets standards for off-street
parking and loading. Its intent, consistent with
Policy 4.2.4 and other guidance from the
Town Plan, is to minimize the area devoted to
surface parking while still ensuring that there
is a reasonable supply of parking, including
spaces that can be safely used by those whose
mobility or vision is impaired.
Minimizing the area devoted to surface parking will:
· protect watershed health, which may be adversely impacted by accelerated runoff from new
impervious surfaces;
· conserve energy and make outdoor spaces more useable by moderating microclimatic
extremes on intensively developed sites; and
· make it more pleasant to walk or cycle in Williston by contributing to streetscapes that are
both comfortable and lively.
It is also specifically the intent of these standards to encourage shared parking arrangements, the use of
parking structures, and the use of porous pavements.
14.1 Applicability
14.1.1 Do these standards apply to all development? Yes. The standards adopted in this chapter
apply to all development for which a permit is required by this bylaw. Existing and proposed parking
and loading areas must be clearly shown on the plans submitted with any application for a permit.
14.1.2 Do other requirements of this bylaw apply to off-street parking and loading areas? Yes.
Off-street parking and loading areas must comply with all relevant standards of this bylaw. Some
particularly relevant standards are cited below.
14.1.2.1 Drainage/Stormwater. Chapter 29 of this bylaw sets standards for stormwater
management that apply to off-street parking and loading areas.
14.1.2.2 Landscaping. See Chapter 23 and specifically WDB 23.5 for the landscaping
requirements that apply to off-street parking and loading areas.
14.1.2.3 Snow Removal/Storage. WDB 16.6 sets standards for snow removal and storage that
apply to off-street parking and loading areas.
14.2 Off-Street Parking Requirements
14.2.1 How many off-street parking spaces are permitted for a given use? Table 14.A establishes
the number of off-street vehicle (Column A) and bicycle (Columns B and C) parking spaces that are
required for typical land uses. For uses that are not listed in the table, see WDB 14.2.3. The minimum
number of accessible off-street vehicle parking spaces required is given by Table 14.B. It is important
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 2
to understand that the numbers in Column A of Table 14.A are both minimums (you must provide at
least this many vehicle parking spaces) and maximums (you may not provide more vehicle parking
spaces). The required number of off-street parking spaces may be changed only on the basis of a
shared parking analysis (see WDB 14.2.2) or as provided by WDB 14.2.4 or 14.2.5. Spaces reserved
for electrical vehicle charging, up to 5% of the required parking spaces may be counted as part of
these totals.
14.2.2 Can parking be shared by uses that have different peak hours of operation? Yes. In fact,
this may be required. Retail, office, institutional and entertainment uses are expected to share offstreet
parking spaces wherever possible.
14.2.2.1 Calculations. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application, require that shared
parking calculations be made for any development that includes uses with potentially different
peak periods of parking demand. Shared parking analyses may also be voluntarily submitted
by adjoining land owners. In either case, the analysis shall be conducted using the shared
parking methodology published by the Urban Land Institute.
14.2.2.2 Distance To. Shared off-street parking spaces shall be no more than 600 feet from a
main entrance for customer parking and no more than 1000 feet from an employee entrance
for employee parking.
14.2.2.3 Easement. Shared parking arrangements run with the land and must be honored by
successors in interest. Failure to do so will be a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement
as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6. Where different owners are involved in a shared parking
arrangement, a draft easement providing for shared parking, including the number and location
of the proposed shared spaces, must be submitted for review with the application for a
discretionary permit. The signed easement, which must also specifically indicate how the costs
of maintenance of the shared parking spaces will be shared, must be submitted with the final
plans and recorded before a certificate of compliance may be issued, as provided by WDB 7.3.
14.2.2.4 Accessible Spaces. Given the need for proximity to the use served, the accessible
parking spaces required by Table 14.B may not be shared.
14.2.3 What if a use is not listed in Table 14.A? The required number of off-street parking spaces
shall be determined by the Administrator based on the similarity of the proposed use to one or more
uses listed in Table 14.A and the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s Parking Generation. The
Administrator’s determination of how many spaces will be permitted is subject to appeal using the
procedure for the appeal administrative permits provided by WDB 5.4 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 3
Table 14.A - Minimum/Maximum Off-Street Parking Permitted - Minimum Bicycle Parking Permitted
Column A Column B Column C
Off-Street Motor Total Bicycle Long Term Bicycle
Vehicle Spaces Parking Spaces Parking Spaces
Land Use per 1000 SF gross floor area, unless otherwise specified
Industrial Uses 1.00 5% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Industrial uses are very diverse. Use 1.00 spaces per 1000 SF GFA as a starting point. The actual requirement will be set by the Administrator or DRB.
Residential Uses
One and Two Family Dwellings 2.00 per dwelling none none
Accessory Dwellings Two reserved spaces: See WDB 17.1.23.1.3.5
Multiple-Family Dwellings 1.75 per unit 10% of vehicular 1 per 4 units
Senior Housing (independent living) 1.00 per dwelling 5% of vehicular 1 per 8 units
Senior Housing (assisted living) 0.35 per dwelling 5% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Lodging Uses 1.00 per room 7% of vehicular 50% of required spaces
Conference space and restaurants should be accounted for separately.
Recreational Uses
Health Club 5.00 10% of vehicular 50% of required spaces
Other Recreational Uses Too diverse to list. Will require individual analysis
Theaters, Places of Assembly .25 per seat 7% of vehicular none
Includes churches, live and movie theaters, and similar gathering places. Associated offices and other spaces should be accounted for separately. Church
schools should be accounted for separately.
NOTE: The DRB may permit an exception to the bicycle parking requirements as provided by WDB 14.8.5
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 4
Table 14.A, cont. Off-Street Motor Total Bicycle Long Term Bicycle
Vehicle Spaces Parking Spaces Parking Spaces
Land Use per 1000 SF gross floor area, unless otherwise specified
Educational and Health Care Uses
Child Care Centers, Pre-School .35 per student 10% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Schools, K-8 .35 per student 30% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Schools, 9-12 .35 per student 30% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Community Colleges .35 per student 30% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Libraries 4.25 30% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Hospitals, Clinics, Medical Offices 5.00 7% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Nursing Homes 1.50 5% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Veterinary Clinics 2.00 5% of vehicular 75% of required spaces
Office Uses
Office Building 3.50 7% of vehicular 50% of required spaces
Offices w/ High Turnover 5.00 10% of vehicular 50% of required spaces
Retail Uses
Convenience Stores 4.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Supermarket/Groceries 5.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Drugs 2.50 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Bulky Retail (furniture, lawn and garden) 3.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
General Retail, Shopping Centers 4.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Services
Banks 4.75 7% of vehicular 50% of required spaces
Quality Restaurant 20.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Fast Food Restaurant (no drive-through) 15.00 7% of vehicular 20% of required spaces
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 5
14.2.4 How could I increase the number of permitted off-street parking spaces?
14.2.4.1 Build a Parking Structure. Consistent with Policy 4.2.3 of the Town Plan (which
encourages the reduction of surface parking) developments may increase the number of
permitted off-street parking spaces by 25% by providing a multilevel parking structure. This
incentive is available only where at least 30% of the off-street parking spaces required by
Table 14.A are in the structure/s. All of the additional parking spaces permitted must be in the
structure/s. Note also that there is a building height incentive for the provision of structured
parking in the MUCZD, MURZD and TCZD.
14.2.4.2 Use Porous Pavement. Developments may increase the number of permitted off-street
parking spaces by 15% by using porous pavement for a majority of all vehicular parking spaces
required by Column A of Table 14.A. Porous pavement specifications must be approved by
the Administrator, with the advice of the DPW.
14.2.4.3 Provide Spaces for Alternate Fuel Vehicles and Carpools. Off-street parking spaces
that are dedicated to vehicles that operate primarily on alternative fuels (electric, hydrogen,
natural gas, biodiesel) or that are dedicated to vehicles participating in a carpooling program
may be permitted in addition to the maximum allowed parking or may be integrated into the
total required number of parking spaces. These spaces – which must not make up more than
five percent (5%) of the total number of off-street parking spaces required - must be clearly
identified with a placard reserving their use for vehicles that operate primarily on alternative
fuels or that are participating in a carpooling program.
14.2.5 How could I decrease the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 14.A?
Proposed reductions in the required number of off-street parking spaces must be approved by the
DRB. They are not automatic.
14.2.5.1 Be Close to Public Transit. The DRB may permit a development that is within a 10-
minute walk of a bus stop to reduce the required number of off-street parking spaces by as
much as 20%, but only where the major employer/s in the proposed development commit to
active participation in the Chittenden County Transit Authority’s discount bus pass program.
14.2.5.2 Have On-Street Parking. The DRB may permit a one-to-one (on-street for off-street)
reduction in the required number of off-street parking spaces for on-street parking that is
available within 600 feet of a main entrance of the proposed development. This reduction of
the number of off-street parking spaces may not, however, reduce the number of off-street
parking spaces to less than two per dwelling.
14.2.5.3 Shared Parking. The number of off-street parking spaces required for a particular use
may be reduced by a shared parking study required by WDB 14.2.2.
14.2.6 Can I reduce the area used for parking by using smaller spaces for compact cars? Yes. The
DRB may permit compact car spaces (see Table 14.C for the dimensions) to comprise as many as
25% of the off-street parking spaces required by Table 14.A. These spaces shall be clearly identified
by a sign and/or pavement marking that says “Compact Car Only.”
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 6
14.2.7 Where must off-street parking spaces be located?
14.2.7.1 Ownership. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot or parcel and
under the same ownership as the use they serve, except where a shared parking arrangement
is required or permitted by WDB 14.2.2.
14.2.7.2 Distance: Nonresidential. The off-street parking spaces serving nonresidential
developments must be within 600 feet of a main entrance for uses requiring customer parking
and within 1,000 feet of an employee entrance for employee parking.
14.2.7.3 Distance: Residential. The off-street parking space/s serving a dwelling must be
within 100 feet of the principal entrance to that dwelling. The DRB may allow a longer
distance between parking and a dwelling in mixed-use developments.
14.3 Accessible Parking. Note that these requirements are more demanding in some ways than those of
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
14.3.1 What is the minimum required number of accessible off-street parking spaces? See Table
14.B.
14.3.2 Don’t some uses need more or fewer accessible off-street parking spaces? The DRB may
find that a development needs more or fewer accessible off-street parking spaces than are required
by Table 14.B and modify the requirements of that table accordingly. The DRB’s action must still
be consistent with the ADA. Examples of developments for which a modification may be appropriate
include:
Table 14.B – Required Number of Accessible Off-Street Parking Spaces
Total Number of
Spaces
Minimum Number of
Accessible Spaces
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
greater than 200 spaces
6+
2% of the spaces greater
than 100 rounded to the
nearest whole number
14.3.2.1 Hospitals and Medical Offices: at least 10% of the off-street parking spaces serving
visitors and patients must be accessible. Specialty medical offices serving persons with
mobility impairments may need as many as 20% accessible spaces.
14.3.2.2 Developments with Valet Parking: No accessible off-street spaces are required in
parking areas used for valet parking. An accessible passenger loading zone is required.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 7
14.3.2.3 Industrial Uses. Industrial uses may be permitted to meet the ADA standards – which
are somewhat lower - for the required numbers of accessible off-street parking spaces.
14.3.3 Where should accessible off-street parking spaces be located? Accessible off-street parking
spaces and the routes between those spaces and the buildings or other destinations they serve must
be clearly identified on the plans submitted with applications for permits.
14.3.3.1 Location of Accessible Routes. There must be a clearly marked accessible route that
meets all ADA standards between the accessible off-street parking space required by Table 14.B
and an accessible building entrance or other destination. Where a development has multiple
accessible entrances or destinations, the required accessible off-street parking spaces should be
dispersed and located near each accessible entrance.
14.3.3.2 Design of Accessible Routes. Accessible routes must be as short as reasonably
possible, safe and convenient for people with mobility and visual impairments. Accessible
routes should not cross aisles, driveways, or any other part of the vehicular circulation system
on the site. The DRB may, however, permit an exception to this standard where physical
constraints like difficult terrain or existing development make compliance infeasible.
14.4 Dimensional Standards
14.4.2 What are the minimum required dimensions for accessible off-street parking spaces and
the associated aisles? Accessible off-street parking spaces must be designed to accommodate vans.
They shall be at least nine feet (9’) wide with an adjacent aisle at least eight feet (8’) wide. A sidewalk
may be used as an access aisle for end spaces.
14.4.1 What are the minimum required dimensions of off-street parking spaces? The dimensional
standards for off-street parking spaces appear in Table 14.C.Table 14.C - Minimum Parking Space
Dimensions
Angle of Parking Space Width of
Space
Length of
Space
Width of
Angled
Space
Length of
Angled
Space
Minimum
Back-Up
Length
STANDARD SPACES
Parallel Parking 9.0’ 22.0’ - - -
45° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 12.7’ 20.5’ 15.0’
60° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 10.4’ 21.8’ 18.0’
90° Angle 9.0’ 20.0’ 9.0’ 20.0’ 24.0’
Minimum aisle width (one-way) 10’
Minimum aisle width (two-way) 24’
COMPACT SPACES
Parallel Parking 8.0’ 20.0’ - - -
45° Angle 8.0’ 18.0’ 11.2’ 18.3’ 13.0’
60° Angle 8.0’ 18.0’ 9.2’ 14.8’ 15.0’
90° Angle 8.0’ 18.0’ 8.0’ 18.0’ 20.0’
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 8
14.4.2.1 Shared Aisles. Accessible off-street parking spaces may share an access aisle by using
front-in and back-in parking.
14.4.2.2 Obstructions. Planters, curbs, wheel stops, and similar installations, including cars
overhanging a sidewalk, must not obstruct accessible routes. There shall be no snow storage
along accessible routes.
14.4.2.3 Grade. The aisle serving an accessible off-street parking space must be level with that
space, with a grade that does not exceed 1:50 (2%) in any direction.
14.4.2.4 Curb Ramps. Curb ramps must be located outside the aisle and parking space. To put
it another way, accessible parking spaces and the adjacent aisles must be level and on the same
grade. Grade changes (ramps) must be built into the adjacent sidewalk.
14.4.2.5 Signs/Pavement Markings. Accessible off-street parking spaces must be marked by a
sign showing the standard symbol of accessibility. This sign must be affixed to a post or a
building where it will be clearly visible from a vehicle searching for accessible parking spaces.
Aisles must be marked with contrasting stripes or hatching on the pavement.
14.5 Off-Street Loading
14.5.1 Where are off-street passenger loading areas required? Off-street passenger loading areas
shall be provided as explained below.
14.5.1.1 Institutional and Entertainment Uses. Day care centers, theaters, schools, and other
places for public assembly must provide at least one safe off-street passenger loading area.
The DRB may require additional off-street loading passenger loading areas for institutional
and entertainment uses that have more than one principal entrance.
14.5.1.2 Other Uses. The DRB may require that any other use which adjoins an arterial or
collector road provide a safe, off-street passenger loading area.
14.5.2 Where are off-street freight loading areas required? Safe off-street freight loading areas
must be provided for commercial and industrial development buildings that include more than 10,000
SF GFA. At least one off-street freight loading area of at least 600 square feet shall be provided,
along with one additional off-street freight loading area for each additional 20,000 square feet of
GFA.
14.6 Access to Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. Chapter 13 of this bylaw establishes standards for
all points of access, including those to parking and loading areas.
14.7 Circulation within Off-Street Parking Areas. The pattern of circulation in off-street parking areas
shall provide safe and efficient access to individual parking spaces, protect pedestrians moving through the
parking area, and facilitate safe access to adjoining roads.
14.7.1 Are there minimum aisle widths for parking areas? Yes. The minimum aisle widths are
included in Table 14.C, which also provides dimensional standards for parking spaces.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - | 9
14.7.2 Must directional signs and/or pavement markings be provided in parking areas? Yes.
Directional signs and pavement markings shall be used to guide traffic through parking areas and
structures.
14.7.3 How must pedestrian access around, through, and to parking areas be provided?
14.7.3.1 Around. There shall be safe pedestrian access in the form of sidewalks around all
parking and loading areas. The DRB may permit the use of a recreation path or other pedestrian
way as an alternative to a sidewalk.
14.7.3.2 To. Accessible routes must be provided from parking areas to the building/s of other
destinations they serve. WDB 14.3 provides standards for accessible routes.
14.7.3.3 Through. The DRB will require that safe pedestrian access be provided through large
parking areas.
14.8 Bicycle Parking. Proposed bicycle parking must be shown on the plans submitted with an application
for a permit.
14.8.1 How many bicycle parking spaces are required? Columns B and C of Table 14.A give the
minimum number of required total and long term bicycle parking spaces for typical uses. There is no
maximum. Column B provides the basis for calculating the total number of bicycle parking spaces
that will be required. To express it as a formula:
Total Required Bicycle Parking Spaces = Total Vehicular Parking Spaces Required
(based on Column A) X the Percentage from Column B.
For example, a 40,000 SF industrial building will require 40 vehicular parking spaces (Column A requires
1 per 1,000 GFA) and 2 bicycle parking spaces (Column B requires 5% of the vehicular total).
14.8.2 What is a short-term bicycle parking space? A short term bicycle parking space is a space in
a bicycle rack that is large enough to accommodate a bicycle (approximately two by six feet), permits
the locking of the bicycle frame and one wheel to the rack, and supports the bicycle in a stable
position without damage. The number of short-term bicycle parking spaces that is required is
calculated by subtracting the number of long term bicycle parking space required by Column C of
Table 14.A from the total calculated using Column B. To express it as a formula:
Required Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces = Total Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
– Required Long-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces from Column C
For example, a 100,000 SF GFA retail building needs 400 vehicular parking spaces (Column A requires
1 per 1,000 SF GFA), 28 total parking bicycle parking spaces, 6 long-term bicycle parking spaces (Column
C says that 20% of all bicycle parking spaces must be long-term), and 22 short-term bicycle parking spaces.
14.8.3 Are there design standards for short-term bicycle parking? Yes. Short term bicycle parking
must be as visible, as well lit, and as convenient for cyclists as the vehicular parking on the site is for
drivers.
14.8.3.1 Visibility. Short-term bicycle parking or a directional sign leading to it shall be visible
from the principal entrance of the building it serves. Short term bicycle parking serving
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended 5/1/2018 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 4 - |
10
buildings with multiple entrances shall be dispersed so that it serves every principal entrance.
Short term bicycle parking will ideally be within 50 feet of the building entrance.
14.8.3.2 Security. Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground, allow the bicycle
wheel and frame to be locked to the rack with a U-lock, and be in a well-lit, highly visible
location.
14.8.3.3 Paving. Short-term bicycle parking shall be on a paved surface.
14.8.4 What is a long-term bicycle parking space? A long-term bicycle parking space provides
secure storage in a bicycle locker or a bicycle storage room or enclosure. These facilities must protect
the entire bicycle, including its components and accessories against theft and the weather. They must
also include a clothes storage locker that has a minimum size of 12” wide, 18” deep, and 36” high.
Lockers do not need to be in the same location as the long term bicycle parking space. The required
number of long-term bicycle parking spaces is given as a percent of the required number of total
bicycle parking spaces and is listed in Column C of Table 17.A.
14.8.5 Can the number of required bicycle parking spaces be reduced? The DRB may reduce the
bicycle parking requirements adopted in this chapter where the location and/or nature of the proposed
development make the use of bicycles highly unlikely.
14.9 End-of-Trip Facilities
14.9.1 Why are end-of-trip facilities required? End-of-trip facilities are an important element in long
range strategies to reduce energy consumption and dependence on nonrenewable energy resources.
Few people can ride a bicycle even a modest distance to work if there is not a place to shower and
change.
14.9.2 What end-of-trip facilities are required for developments? End-of-trip facilities include
showers and a changing area. Facilities must be provided on-site or via an agreement with a nearby
(within 600 feet) use. Table 14.D outlines the minimum number of required end-of-trip facilities
based on the number of long-term bicycle parking spaces required.
Table 14.D - Shower and Changing Facilities
Required Long Term
Bike Parking Spaces Minimum Number of Required Shower and Changing Facilities
1-3 1
4- 17 1 per gender
18-30 2 per gender
30+ 3 per gender
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 1
Chapter 15
On-Site Infrastructure
This chapter establishes standards for the provision
of on-site infrastructure, including private and
public roads, utilities, and associated
improvements. These standards are supported by
Chapter 7 of this bylaw, which establishes the
procedures needed to ensure that the improvements
required here are actually built. On-site
infrastructure may also be subject to the continuing
maintenance standards of Chapters 7 and 16.
15.1 Basic Requirement – Applicability
15.1.1 What is the basic requirement of this chapter? The basic requirement of this chapter is that
developments will be served by adequate on-site infrastructure installed by the developer.
15.1.2 What does ‘on-site’ mean? On-site infrastructure is on the land that is proposed for
development or in a public right-of-way immediately adjoining that land. This term may also
include necessary extensions of roads or utilities to a development across other lands.
15.1.3 Do the standards adopted here apply to all development? These standards apply to all
development for which a discretionary permit is required. The plans submitted with applications
for discretionary permits must clearly demonstrate compliance with these standards.
Relationship to Impact Fees. Williston requires development to contribute to the continuing improvement of its
infrastructure in two major ways. The first is through the provision of on-site infrastructure, as required by this bylaw.
While on-site infrastructure may incidentally benefit others, it primarily serves the occupants/users of the development
where it is installed. The second contribution is through the payment of impact fees. Impact fees are used to help cover
the costs of off-site infrastructure, that is to say, of improvements that are, in part, necessitated by a development, but that
serve a larger public and may be located miles away.
15.2 Circulation. Many developments will be served by existing roads, with access to those roads
governed by Chapter 13 of this bylaw. These standards apply where new roads must be built.
15.2.1 Will all roads built to serve new development be public? No. Applicants may be required to
build public or private roads as explained here.
15.2.2 Where will public roads be required? Where a development includes a proposed arterial or
collector road, that road will be public, and designed and built to the appropriate standards of the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official’s (AASHTO) Policy on the
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and Williston’s Public Works Standards.
15.2.3 What about local roads? Are they to be public or private? That depends. Proposed local
roads that serve a single development and/or that will serve 40 or fewer dwellings and/or that
provide no connection to other lands shall be dedicated to public use, but privately maintained by
the owner or an owner’s association, as provided by WDB 7.2. The town may accept some local
roads as provided by WDB 15.2.3.3
15.2.3.1 Very Low-Volume Roads. Where a private road will serve 40 or fewer dwellings or
a projected traffic volume of 400 ADT or less it shall be designed and built to comply with
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 2
the current edition of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Official’s Guide for the Geometric Design of Very Low Volume Local Roads and Williston’s
Public Works Standards. Low-volume private roads that serve residential development with
an average density of one dwelling per 10 acres or less may be unpaved.
15.2.3.2 Other Private Roads. Private roads that will serve more than 40 dwellings or carry
more than 400 ADT traffic must be designed and built to comply with the current edition of
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official’s Policy on the
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and Williston’s Public Works Standards.
15.2.3.3 Town Acceptance of Local Roads. The town may choose to accept a new local road
that provides access to a municipal or other public facility or where the connectivity required
by the Town Plan and Chapter 13 of this bylaw is not provided by an existing road. Where
the town will accept a local road, it must be designed and built to comply with the current
edition of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official’s Policy
on the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and Williston’s Public Works Standards.
15.2.4 Must sidewalks or recreation paths be provided along roads? Sidewalks that are designed
and built to comply with Williston’s Public Works Standards must be provided along both sides of
all proposed roads except:
15.2.4.1 … where the Town Plan calls for the provision of a recreation path along the
proposed road, which must be provided instead; or
15.2.4.2 … where the DRB finds that the type and/or density of development served by the
proposed road does not necessitate a sidewalk or recreation path, or at least a sidewalk or
recreation path on both sides of the road. In making this determination, the DRB shall be
guided by these principles.
· The DRB may limit the requirement for a sidewalk to only one side of a
proposed road in areas of low intensity commercial or industrial development.
Where it does so, it may require the provision of signed and/or striped
crosswalks to properties on the side of the road that has no sidewalk.
· The DRB may modify or eliminate the requirement for a sidewalk where safe
adequate bicycle and pedestrian circulation is provided by an off-street system
of paths.
· Sidewalks will not ordinarily be required in the ARZD due to the low density
of development permitted in that zoning district. Recreation paths and
primitive trails will be required as shown in the Town Plan and may also be
required to create or enhance connectivity in open space developments, as
provided by WDB 31.7.5.
Where can I find the map of proposed trails in the Town Plan? Existing and proposed trails are shown on
Map 11 and Map 17of the Town Plan.
15.2.4.3 Crosswalks. Signed and/or striped crosswalks must be provided at all intersections.
The DRB may also require mid-block crossings to serve specific destinations and additional
measures to ensure the safety of cyclists and pedestrians, including textured crosswalks and
other streetscape design features, signs, and traffic calming. The DRB may permit an
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 3
exception to this standard where an applicant would otherwise be required to install a
crosswalk that does not connect to a pedestrian way on the other side a street.
15.2.5 Are there standards for the drainage of roads? All roads shall be properly drained, as
required by the Public Works Standards and in compliance with Chapter 29 of this bylaw, which
regulates runoff from roads and other impervious surfaces.
15.2.6 Are there standards for signs, street lights, etc? Improvements associated with roads,
including signs required by the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, street lights, and
similar facilities shall be provided as required by the Public Works Standards.
15.2.7 Are street trees required? Street trees must be planted as required by Chapter 26.
15.2.8 What about bus stops? Applicants whose projects will benefit from transit service may be
required to provide or contribute to the provision of bus stop pull-outs, shelters, and signage.
15.3 Neighborhood Parks. Like the other on-site infrastructure required by this chapter, neighborhood
parks are ‘required improvements’ subject to all applicable requirements of Chapter 7 and the
maintenance requirements of Chapter 16.
15.3.1 Are developers required to provide neighborhood parks? Section 2 of the Open Space Plan
provides detailed guidance for the provision of neighborhood parks in residential developments.
The DRB must find that all proposed residential developments comply with that guidance. Note
also that the growth management review standards adopted in Chapter 11 of this bylaw encourage
the provision of neighborhood recreational space.
15.3.2 Are neighborhood parks open space? Neighborhood parks come in different forms,
depending on the character of the neighborhood they serve. Some may be quite urban, including
lots of hard surfaces. They are not automatically included in “open space” where it is required by
this bylaw, but may be included where the DRB finds that they serve open space functions.
15.3.3 When does access to an existing park fulfill the Open Space Plan’s guidance for
neighborhood parks? Section 2 of the Open Space Plan provides that proposed residential
developments may be served by an existing community park rather than providing a new
neighborhood park. This will be permitted where the existing park is within 1,320 feet walking
distance of the majority of dwellings in the proposed residential development, where the walk to
the existing park does not involve crossing an arterial road, and where the proposed development
makes a cash contribution to the continuing development of community parks via an increased
impact fee.
15.3.4 When is a proposed residential development too small to provide a neighborhood park?
The applicant may propose to provide a neighborhood park in a residential development of any
size. Consistent with Section 2 of the Open Space Plan, however, a neighborhood park will not be
required in any proposed residential development that has fewer than 15 dwellings.
Increased Impact Fee. The upcoming revision of the parks and recreation impact fee will require a higher fee from
dwellings in developments that rely on existing parks rather than providing a neighborhood park.
15.3.5 Must neighborhood park space be developed? Consistent with Section 2 of the Open Space
Plan only basic development of neighborhood parks, consisting of grading, the installation of turf
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 4
and other ground covers, and the planting of trees is required. Further development and
maintenance of the park will be the responsibility of the owners’ association. Note, however, that
in order to receive a point award on the growth management review standards of Chapter 11 of this
bylaw, the applicant must provide additional facilities or a park development fund that may be used
by the owners’ association.
15.5 Private Utilities
15.5.1 Must the plans I submit show utilities that are not provided by the town? Yes. Cable
television, electric power, and natural gas may be provided as available and in accord with the
requirements of each service provider. The plans submitted with the application for a discretionary
permit must show where and how these utilities will be installed and clearly demonstrate that they
will not conflict or interfere with the construction and maintenance of roads or the installation and
maintenance of municipal utilities.
15.5.2 Must private utilities be placed underground? Yes. The DRB may permit an exception to
this standard where placing utilities underground is physically infeasible.
15.6 Sewage Disposal: Municipal
15.6.1 Is access to Williston’s municipal sewerage system limited? Yes. All proposed
development must have or obtain an allocation of sewage treatment plant capacity as provided by
Williston’s Sewer Allocation Ordinance and, for residential developments, the growth management
review system established by Chapter 11 of this bylaw. An allocation certificate signed by the
DPW must accompany all applications for permits for development that requires sewage treatment
plant capacity.
15.6.2 Which developments must connect to the town’s sewerage system? Development within
the sewer service area established in the Town Plan and the Sewer Allocation Ordinance must be
connected to the municipal sewerage system via a collection system that includes all necessary
pump stations or pump station improvements and that meets the design and construction standards
established by Williston’s Public Works Standards and state law. The DPW may permit an
exception to this standard where physical barriers, including property ownership or the terrain,
make connection to the municipal sewerage system infeasible and where an on-site wastewater
disposal system that complies with WDB 15.6 exists or can be installed.
What are the boundaries of the Sewer Service Area? See Map 8 of the Town Plan.
15.6.3 Does this mean that existing development may have to connect? Yes. The requirement of
WDB 15.5.2 applies not only to new lots and structures, but also to existing structures that are
within 150 feet of a sewer main that has adequate capacity. Existing structures must connect in
order to obtain an administrative permit to proceed with a change of use or an addition of more
than 600 square feet. The DPW may permit an exception to this standard where physical barriers,
including property ownership or the terrain, make connection to the municipal sewerage system
infeasible and where an on-site wastewater disposal system that complies with WDB 15.8 exists or
can be installed.
15.6.4 Are there any other limitations on municipal sewerage service? Pretreatment of certain
kinds of waste may be required by Williston’s Sewer Use Ordinance. Contact the DPW for more
on this.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 5
15.7 Sewage Disposal: On-Site
15.7.1 What are the standards for the installation of on-site sewage disposal systems? Where a
proposed development will not be served by the town’s sewerage system, plans for an on-site
wastewater disposal system that meets all standards established by the Vermont Department of
Environmental Conservation shall accompany the application for a discretionary or administrative
permit, whichever is required. These plans must be prepared and certified by a licensed designer.
What is a licensed designer? See http://www.anr.state.vt.us/dec/ww/sitetech.htm for an explanation of this state
program.
15.7.2 How does the town know that an on-site sewage disposal system has been installed as
designed? No certificate of compliance shall be issued and no development occupied until as-built
plans for the on-site sewage disposal system have been filed with the Administrator.
15.7.3 Are community wastewater disposal systems permitted? Yes, but only in specific situations,
in the ARZD. See WDB 31.10.
15.8 Solid Waste. Solid waste collection in Williston is provided by the private sector. This bylaw does
include standards intended to ensure that all developments have adequate facilities for the handling and
storage of solid waste before it leaves the site. See Chapter 16.
15.9 Stormwater. Stormwater collection and treatment must be provided in compliance with Chapter 29
of this bylaw.
15.10 Water: Municipal
15.10.1 Are there standards for water systems that will be installed by developers? Yes. Where
municipal water service is available, the applicant shall install a water system that meets the
standards of Williston’s Public Works Standards and state law.
15.10.2 Are there limitations on the extension of municipal water service? Yes. Water service
may be not be extended into the ARZD and may be extended in other zoning districts only where
adequate water pressure can be provided by gravity flow from existing town reservoirs.
15.11 Water: On-Site. This standard is adopted to protect the town and its utility rate payers from the
necessity of extending municipal water service over long distances to serve areas where the
groundwater supply is limited.
15.11.1 Will development that is not served by the municipal water system be permitted? Yes, but
where the use of an on-site water supply is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate that
groundwater sufficient to support the development is available. This must be done by conducting
on-site well tests under the supervision of a registered engineer or a groundwater hydrologist.
15.11.2 How should well tests be conducted? And is this requirement ever waived? Well tests
shall be conducted in accord with the current requirements of the Vermont Water Supply Rule for
long-term yield testing. The DRB may waive the requirement of WDB 15.11.1 for an on-site well
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 6
test where the average density of the proposed development is one dwelling per 10 acres or less and
the geologic mapping available to the town suggests that the groundwater supply will be sufficient
for very low density residential development.
15.11.3 Must wells be tested for water quality? Whenever a well test is required by WDB 15.11.1,
the water yielded shall also be tested for basic drinking water quality parameters and radon.
15.12 Extensions of Service
15.12.1 Are there geographic limits on the extension of town infrastructure? Yes. See WDB 15.6
and WDB 15.10.2. Sewerage may not be extended outside the sewer service area established in the
Town Plan except in response to a public health emergency. Additional water service may not be
extended into the ARZD except again, where necessary to address a public health emergency. Nor
may water service be extended into areas that cannot be served by gravity flow.
15.12.2 Will the town ever participate in extensions of service needed to support development?
The DPW may, with the approval of the Selectboard, choose to provide partial funding for the
extension of town roads or utilities to a development where doing so will help correct a deficiency
in the existing circulation or utilities systems or where the proposed extension will provide capacity
for the anticipated development of other lands.
15.12.3 Can the town recoup the costs it incurs in extending service? Yes, at least in part. Where
the town funds an extension of service that benefits undeveloped properties, it shall collect a
proportional share of the costs it incurred before a permit for the development of those properties is
approved.
15.13 Certificate of Dedication. Infrastructure that will be owned by the Town of Williston shall be
dedicated to the town via a certificate on the cover sheet of the recorded final plans. This certificate shall
be signed and dated in the presence of a notary public by all owners or by a guardian or trustee who is
entitled to sign for the owner/s and shall be acknowledged as the only instrument of conveyance needed
to transfer ownership of the listed facilities to the town.
15.14 Acceptance of Roads. Roads that will be dedicated to and maintained by the town will be accepted
by the Selectboard, but only after the inspections and warranty period required by Chapter 7 of this bylaw
are complete.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 5 - | 7
SAMPLE CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION
We, the undersigned, certify that we are the legal owners of the property described by the recorded plans
on which this certificate appears, and that we hereby dedicate the public roads and pedestrian ways,
including all associated improvements, rights-of-way, and easements; the public utilities, including all
associated improvements and right-of-way; and all other public improvements [these should be
specifically listed] shown on these plans for the (name of development), as it was approved by the
Williston Development Review Board on (date) to the Town of Williston. We understand that our
signatures below result in the transfer of ownership of the lands and facilities described here
unconditionally and forever to the town. We also understand that, while ownership shifts to the town
upon the recording of these plans, we may be responsible for the continuing maintenance of some or all of
these lands and facilities until a warranty period expires.
________________________________________________________________, ____________________
(date)
________________________________________________________________, ____________________
(date)
At Williston, Vermont this _____ th day of _________, A.D. ________, __________________________
(date) (month) (year) (name/s)
personally appeared and acknowledged the dedication made by the above certificate as his/her/their free
and deed.
Before Me: ___________________________
(notary public)
Insert this additional language where needed:
We further dedicate the private roads shown on these plans to public use. It is understood that these roads
will be privately maintained by ourselves or our successors in ownership, but that guaranteed public
access is necessary to provide for emergency services.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 6 - | 1
Chapter 16
Maintenance
This chapter expands on the maintenance
requirement of WDB 7.2. It provides detailed
definitions of the term “maintenance” as it applies
to specific improvements required by this bylaw. It
also requires that applications for discretionary
permits show how important operational aspects of
developments, including snow storage and solid
waste disposal, will be handled.
16.1 Basic Requirement – Applicability
16.1.1 What is the basic requirement of this chapter? The basic requirement of this chapter is that
required improvements must be properly maintained.
16.1.2 Do the standards adopted here apply to all development? The standards adopted here apply
to all developments that include improvements required by this bylaw. The plans submitted with
applications for discretionary permits must clearly demonstrate compliance with these standards.
16.1.3 How can the maintenance standards adopted here be enforced? As stated at WDB 7.2.1,
failure to maintain required improvements is a violation of this bylaw, subject to the as provided by
WDB 7.4-6.
16.2 Community Sewerage Systems. Community sewerage systems are permitted in compliance with
WDB 31.10.2.
16.2.1 Are there specific standards for the continuing maintenance of community sewerage
systems? Yes. The type maintenance that is needed will depend on the type of system that is
installed, but in every case, it must include annual submission of a maintenance contract with a
firm that is acceptable to the Administrator by the owner or owners’ association and annual
submission of an annual report by the maintainer to the Administrator. This report shall list all
preventive maintenance measures taken and all repairs made.
16.2.2 What happens if a community sewerage system is not being maintained? As provided by
WDB 16.1.3, failure to maintain a community sewerage system is a violation of this bylaw.
Additionally, because failure to maintain a community sewerage system is assumed to pose a threat
to public health, the town may - after providing 24 hours’ notice to the owner or owners’
association that it intends to do so - undertake or contract for the necessary maintenance. The town
shall cover its expenses by placing a lien on all properties served by the community sewerage
system it was compelled to maintain.
16.3 Landscaping, Neighborhood and Urban Parks, and Open Space
16.3.1 Are there specific requirements for the continuing maintenance of landscaping? Yes.
Landscaping maintenance includes timely irrigation; the control of invasive species, pests, and
weeds; pruning; mowing; the regular removal of litter; the regular removal and composting of dead
plants, replacement plantings; trimmings and leaves; and all other activities required to maintain
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 6 - | 2
the approved appearance and function of the landscaped area. More detailed landscaping
maintenance standards are adopted in Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
16.3.2 Are there specific requirements for the continuing maintenance of neighborhood and
urban parks? Yes. Parks that will remain in private ownership are subject to the landscaping
maintenance standard of WDB 16.3.1 and the litter removal standards of WDB 16.4. Other features
of parks must be kept in safe, functional working order. Where a public bulletin board is provided,
the owner is responsible for the prompt, timely removal of dated items and ensuring that posted
items do not become litter.
16.3.3 Are there specific requirements for the continuing maintenance of open spaces? Yes.
Open space maintenance includes the regular repair of fences, stiles, private trails, and other
structures; the control of listed weeds; litter removal; and wildfire suppression. Mowing may also
be required in some cases. These maintenance activities must not diminish the open space values
(wetlands, views, etc.) that are being protected. Those who are responsible for the maintenance of
open space should also be aware of WDB 29.9.5, which limits the removal of vegetation from
watershed protection buffers.
16.4 Litter
16.4.1 Is litter removal required? Yes. Regular removal of litter from landscaped and open space
areas, neighborhood and urban parks, parking and loading areas, pedestrian ways, and all other
outdoor spaces is required, as is the regular removal of trash from receptacles provided in
compliance with WDB 16.4.2.
16.4.2 Can I be required to provide trash receptacles? Yes. The DRB may require the provision of
outdoor trash receptacles to serve the users of a development.
16.4.3 Are trash receptacles subject to design review? Yes. Where outdoor trash receptacles will
be provided, the applicant must provide specifications and drawings or photographs demonstrating
that the proposed outdoor trash receptacles will be consistent with the architectural and landscape
design themes of the development.
16.5 Runoff and Erosion Control Measures. Continuing maintenance of runoff and erosion control
measures is required by WDB 29.5.11.
16.6 Snow Removal and Storage
16.6.1 Is snow removal required? Yes. The owner or owner’s association is responsible for the
removal of snow from fire lanes and from roads, sidewalks, trails, and other required improvements
that remain in private ownership. EXCEPTIONS: This standard does not require that snow be
removed from a facility, like a tennis court, that is not used during the winter, nor does it require
that snow be removed from a pedestrian way that is groomed as a ski trail. This standard also does
not prohibit a residential owner’s association from requiring that individuals remove snow from
sidewalks serving their homes.
16.6.2 Is a plan for snow storage required? Yes. Proposed snow storage areas adequate for the use
of the proposed development must be clearly shown on the plans accompanying an application for
a discretionary permit.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 6 - | 3
16.6.3 Are there limitations on where snow may be stored? Yes.
16.6.3.1 Impact on Water Quality. Areas proposed for snow storage must drain to an
approved stormwater system. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard only where
the applicant clearly demonstrates that melt water from a proposed snow storage area that is
not served by an approved stormwater system will receive adequate treatment before
entering a watercourse or reaching the water table. For the purposes of this sub-section,
adequate treatment shall mean that melt water must flow across at least 100 feet of heavily
vegetated land or infiltrate through at least four (4) feet of unconsolidated, Type A or Type B
(highly to moderately permeable) soil before reaching the water table.
16.6.3.2 Impact on Landscaping. Snow may be stored on landscaped areas, but the plans
submitted must demonstrate that the plant materials proposed for snow storage areas comply
with the standards of Chapter 18 of this bylaw, specifically including WDB 23.5.3.
16.6.3.3 Impact on Parking Areas. Proposed snow storage areas may not include or obstruct
access to required parking spaces. This standard does not apply for the first 48 hours after a
snow event, during which time snow may be temporarily stored in parking spaces.
16.6.3.4 Impact on Pedestrian Ways. Snow storage may not obstruct sidewalks or other
pedestrian ways.
16.7 Solid Waste
16.7.1 How do I show that I have made adequate provision for solid waste disposal? Solid waste
containers, including trash receptacles, compactors, dumpsters, and similar installations must be
shown on the plans accompanying an application for a discretionary permit.
16.7.2 Are there standards for the placement and screening of solid waste containers? Yes. Solid
waste disposal containers must be accessible to haulers, but must also be fully screened from public
view. This may be accomplished by architectural and/or landscape design.
16.7.2.1 Access for Haulers. The plans submitted must clearly demonstrate that proposed
solid waste containers will be accessible to haulers. The DRB may require the applicant to
provide a letter from the proposed hauler stating that access is adequate.
16.7.2.2 Preferred Location. The preferred way to screen solid waste containers is by placing
them in the structure they serve, accessible via loading doors, or to use walls that are an
architectural extension of the structure served by the containers.
16.7.2.3 Landscaped Screening. The DRB may permit the placement of solid waste
containers away from a structure. Where it does so, the containers shall be fully screened
from public view by a fence or wall of at least six (6) feet in height. Additional standards for
landscaped screening are adopted in Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
16.7.2.4 Location. Unless placed inside a building, behind a loading door, solid waste
containers must not be located on or along a pedestrian way or at a building’s principal
entrance/s.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 6 - | 4
16.6.2.5 Exception. The location and screening requirements of WDB 16.7.2.1-4 do not
apply to trash receptacles placed on a site for the convenience of employees, shoppers, or the
general public in compliance with WDB 16.4.2-3.
16.6.2.6 Litter. As required by WDB 16.4.1, areas surrounding solid waste containers must
be kept free of litter.
16.6.2.7 Concrete Pad. Solid waste containers shall be placed on a concrete pad.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 1
Chapter 17
Non Residential
Accessory Uses and Structures
Temporary Uses and Structures
This chapter provides standards for some common
nonresidential accessory uses. Customary accessory structures
and uses are permitted in all zoning districts. Residential
accessory uses are addressed in Chapter 20. Temporary uses
and structures are also addressed here because they are often
accessory to another use. These standards apply to all
temporary uses, however, whether they are appurtenant to
another use or not. Remember that compliance with the
standards of this chapter is in addition to all other requirements
of this bylaw.
17.1 Accessory Dwellings
17.1.1 Are accessory dwellings permitted by state law? Yes. Accessory dwellings that are
appurtenant to owner-occupied dwellings are permitted by 24 V.S.A. § 4412(1)(E). See WDB 20.1
for the standards governing accessory dwellings associated with an owner-occupied dwelling.
17.1.2 Are accessory dwellings permitted for any other uses? Yes. Residential uses are permitted
in most of Williston’s commercial zoning districts. In those commercial districts where dwellings
are not permitted and in the industrial zoning districts, one accessory dwelling for the use of the
owner or for use as housing by an employee will be permitted on each lot, provided that the
following standards are met.
17.1.2.1 Owner or Employee Only. To ensure that occupants are aware of any nuisances or
hazards associated with living on commercial or industrial premises, accessory dwellings in
the districts (GZDN, IZDE, IZDW) where dwellings are not otherwise permitted may not be
made available to the general public.
17.1.2.2 Maximum Size. Accessory dwellings may be attached or detached. They are limited
to 1,500 SF in size.
17.1.2.3 Access/Parking. Accessory dwellings must have separate ingress/egress to the
outside and two reserved parking spaces.
17.1.2.4 Fire Code. Accessory dwellings shall have the separations required by the National
Fire Codes from commercial and industrial operations.
National Fire Codes? Williston has not adopted the National Fire Codes. However, those codes are occasionally
referred to in this bylaw in order to establish a detailed standard for specific types of development. Compliance
will generally come as a result of the plan reviews and inspections conducted by the Vermont Division of Fire
Safety, but this bylaw adopts certain critical code requirements in order to have an independent basis for action.
For information on the state’s building inspection program see: http://www.dps.state.vt.us/fire/
17.1.2.5 Home Business. No home business shall be permitted in an accessory dwelling that
is appurtenant to a commercial or industrial use.
17.1.2.6 Permit Required. Where a discretionary permit is required, proposed accessory
dwellings must be included in the plans submitted with the application for that permit. A
discretionary permit is also required for the addition of a new accessory dwelling to an
existing commercial or industrial use.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 2
17.2 Accessory Sales. This bylaw permits the incidental retail sale of convenience items and products
used or produced by the principal use. Sales must take place within the same building or associated set of
buildings as the principal use. The questions answered below are intended to provide specific examples of
accessory sales and standards that will guide the Administrator and DRB in their review of other proposed
accessory sales.
17.2.1 Can I have a gift shop in my bed and breakfast or motel? Yes. Incidental retail sales of
convenience items and local artwork and handicrafts are permitted in lodging places.
17.2.2 Can I sell goods as an accessory use to a warehouse or distribution facility in the
industrial zoning districts? Yes, but only on a limited basis. See WDB 17.2.3.
17.2.3 Are there specific limitations on accessory sales in the industrial zoning districts? Yes.
17.2.3.1 Limited Area. Accessory sales in the industrial zoning districts (GZDS, IZDE,
IZDW) shall not occupy more than 30% of the floor area not to exceed 2,000 sq. ft.,
whichever is less, of the portion of the building occupied by the tenant of the space in which
they are located, except as provided by WDB 17.3.3.
17.2.3.2 Limited Goods. Accessory sales in the industrial zoning districts shall be limited to
goods that are distributed from, produced on, or repaired on-site. To put it another way,
goods may not be brought to the site solely to be sold there.
17.3 Accessory Services. This bylaw permits the provision of on-site services to employees and
customers or clients. The questions answered below are intended to provide specific examples of
accessory services and standards that will guide the Administrator and DRB in their review of other
proposed accessory services.
17.3.1 Can I provide child care for my employees and/or customers? Yes. Child care is a
permitted use in most zoning districts, anyway, but it will always be permitted as an accessory to
commercial, industrial, and institutional uses. Where a discretionary permit is required, proposed
child care facilities must be included in the plans submitted with the application for that permit. A
discretionary permit is also required for the later addition of child care facilities to an existing
commercial, industrial, or institutional use.
17.3.2 Can I provide a cafeteria or other food service for my employees? Yes. An employee
cafeteria or food service may be permitted as an accessory to commercial, industrial, and
institutional uses. Where a discretionary permit is required, proposed food services must be
included in the plans submitted with the application for that permit. A discretionary permit is also
required for the later addition of a food service to an existing commercial, industrial, or
institutional use.
17.3.3 Accessory food and beverage sales with food and beverage manufacturing. In keeping
with Policy 3.3.2 of the Williston Comprehensive Plan calling for an ongoing evaluation and
amendment of industrially-zoned lands and in balance with Objective 3.1 of the Town Plan
encouraging the most intense development in the Growth Center surrounding Taft Corners, some
limited-service eating places are permitted as part of industrial development outside of the Growth
Center. Limited service eating places may be allowed in conjunction with accessory sales for food
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 3
and beverage manufacturers only with the approval of a discretionary permit. The following
standards apply:
17.3.3.1 Limited Area The gross floor area of the eating place, including all food preparation
and storage areas shall be part of and not in addition to the limited area defined in WDB
17.2.31, and shall not occupy more than 30% of the floor area not to exceed 2,000 sq. ft.,
whichever is less, of the portion of the building occupied by the tenant of the space in which
they are located.
17.3.3.2 Additional Outdoor Seating. Where an indoor seating area is allowed under 17.3.3.1,
an outdoor seating area may be approved as part of a discretionary permit, provided that the
outdoor seating area:
17.3.3.2.1 …is no more than 500 square feet in area. This area is in addition to indoor area
as allowed above.
17.3.3.2.2 …is contiguous to the limited service eating place and is contained by a physical
barrier in compliance with applicable state law.
17.3.4 What about mobile food vendors? Mobile food vendors (a.k.a. food carts) may be allowed
as an accessory use on commercial and industrially zoned properties with the approval of a
discretionary permit.
17.3.5 Are there specific limitations on accessory services? Yes.
17.3.5.1 Same Building. Accessory services must be within the same building, or associated
set of buildings as the principal use.
17.3.5.2 Additional Parking. No accessory use shall require the addition of parking beyond
that permitted for the principal use.
17.4 Accessory Structures. Except where specifically exempted or made subject to a different standard,
accessory structures are subject to the same requirements of this bylaw as all other structures. For
accessory structures on residential premises, see Chapter 20 of this bylaw.
17.4.1 Can I build a shed on a vacant residential lot? No. An accessory structure must be accessory
to a primary structure, such as a house. An accessory structured is defined in Chapter 46 of this bylaw.
17.5 Antennae. Local regulation of telecommunications antennae is limited by state and federal law. See
Chapter 21 of this bylaw.
17.6 Energy Generation. On-site energy generation is a permitted accessory use. This includes
cogeneration in the industrial zoning districts, photovoltaic installations and wind turbines in all zoning
districts, and the production of energy from wastes that are otherwise permitted on the site in the
industrial zoning districts and ARZD.
State Pre-Emption. Municipal regulation of energy generation in Vermont is largely pre-empted by the state. See WDB 4.2.1.1.
17.7. Parking. Off-street parking that complies with Chapter 14 of this bylaw is a customary accessory
use in all zoning districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 4
17.8 Scoreboards. Scoreboards are permitted as accessory structures on the same lot as and appurtenant
to athletic fields.
17.8.1 Is a permit required to erect a scoreboard? Yes. An administrative permit must be obtained
for the installation of a scoreboard, including the regular use of a portable scoreboard.
17.8.2 What may be displayed on a scoreboard? The only information that may be displayed or
shown on a scoreboard when a game is not being played is a title stating the name of the facility
(for example, “Allen Brook Park”) and the name of the association, conference, or league that uses
the facility (for example, “Williston Little League”). Where donor plaque display is not provided, a
donor plaque may be attached to the scoreboard, as provided by Chapter 25 of this bylaw.
17.9 Signs. Signs fit the definition of an accessory structure provided in Chapter 46, but they are treated
separately in Chapter 25 of this bylaw.
17.10 Special Events. Williston has a Special Events Ordinance which requires that applications for a
special events permit be reviewed by the Fire and Police Departments. Special events also have temporary
land use consequences and the Administrator must find that a special event complies with the standards
adopted here before forwarding an application for a special events permit to other departments for
approval.
17.10.1 Can I change the access to a site or building during a special event? Special events
must not obstruct or interfere with access to a site or to a structure unless alternative access
is temporarily provided. Temporary access must comply with the National Fire Codes.
17.10.2 Can I hold a special event in a parking area? Possibly. Special events may be
staged on required parking spaces, but must not impede circulation through the remainder of
the parking area.
17.10.3 Will additional parking be required for special events? The Administrator may,
upon finding that attendance at a proposed special event may exceed the parking available
on the site, require the applicant to provide a plan showing where and how overflow parking,
including shuttle service if necessary, will be provided.
17.10.4 Are there requirements for waste management at special events? The
Administrator may, upon finding that attendance at a proposed special event may exceed the
capacity of the restrooms and/or solid waste disposal containers on the site, require the
applicant to provide a plan showing where and how additional waste management facilities
will be provided.
17.10.5 May additional signs be posted for a special event? See Chapter 25 of this bylaw.
17.11 Temporary Real Estate Sales. Temporary real estate sales offices are permitted in residential
developments, but only when housed in an approved dwelling. A separate temporary structure is not
permitted.
17.12 Temporary Signs. See Chapter 25 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 5
17.13 Temporary Structures. Unless specifically exempted, temporary structures are subject to the same
standards as permanent structures.
17.14 Temporary Uses Associated with Construction. Construction can occur in any zoning district.
17.14.1 Do I need a permit to store construction equipment and materials on a job site? You do
not need a separate permit, but construction equipment and materials may not be moved onto a site
until an application for an administrative permit authorizing the work has been approved.
17.14.2 Are there standards for the storage of construction equipment and materials on a job
site? Yes. Storage of construction equipment and/or materials that is not in compliance with the
standards adopted here is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB
7.4-7.6.
17.14.2.1 Removal. Construction equipment and materials must be removed within five (5)
working days after a certificate of compliance is issued.
17.14.2.2 Access. Construction equipment and materials must not be stored so that they
obstruct or interfere with access to a site or to a structure unless alternative access is
temporarily provided. Temporary access must comply with the National Fire Codes.
17.14.2.3 Site Maintenance. Construction equipment and materials must not be stored so that
they obstruct or interfere with site maintenance functions, including the removal of solid
waste and snow storage between October 15 and April 15.
17.14.2.4 Security. Construction equipment and materials must not be stored so that they
constitute an attractive nuisance. The Administrator or the DRB may require that security
fencing or other measures be used to prevent entry onto construction sites or access to stored
equipment and materials.
17.14.2.5 Parking. Construction equipment and materials may be stored in required parking
spaces, but must not impede circulation through the remainder of the parking area. The
Administrator or DRB may require any applicant who proposes to store construction
equipment or materials in a parking area to provide a plan showing where and how overflow
parking will be provided.
17.14.2.6 Landscaping. Construction equipment and materials may be stored in landscaped
areas only where:
· … the landscaped area is not part of a watershed protection buffer or of a
required buffer between residential and other uses. and
· … the landscaped area will be fully restored to its appearance and function
before a certificate of compliance is issued.
17.14.3 Are on-site construction offices permitted? A mobile construction office may be
temporarily placed on a job site, but only after approval of the administrative permit authorizing
the work. The mobile construction office must be removed within five (5) working days after a
certificate of compliance is issued.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 7 - | 6
17.15 Utilities and Telecommunications
17.15.1 Are underground utilities permitted accessory uses? Yes. Underground utilities, including
cable television, electric power, and natural gas distribution lines and the associated surface
installations are permitted accessory uses and structures in all zoning districts.
17.15.2 Are overhead utilities permitted accessory uses and structures? Yes. Overhead utilities,
including cable television and electric power lines are permitted accessory uses in all zoning
districts. Note, however, that overhead utilities are generally not permitted in new developments in
Williston.
17.15.3 Are telecommunications facilities permitted accessory uses and structures? See Chapter
21. Telecommunications facilities that are attached to existing farm structures are permitted
accessory uses, as are the types of antennae listed in WDB 21.2.2. Other new telecommunications
facilities are not accessory uses.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 1
Chapter 18
Compatibility
Potential Hazards
Potential Nuisances
The standards adopted in this chapter help ensure
land use compatibility by adopting standards that
prevent hazards and nuisances. Compatibility is
also a goal of many other requirements of this
bylaw, including the prohibition of certain uses in
certain zoning districts and Chapter 23’s standards
for landscaped buffers.
18.1 Basic Requirement - Applicability
18.1.1 What is the basic requirement of the chapter? The basic requirement of this chapter is that
no development should present a hazard to or constitute a nuisance for the occupants of adjoining
lands.
18.1.2 Does the town have the authority to address existing or continuing nuisances that may not
be “development?” Yes. 24 V.S.A. § 2291(12-17) provide clear authority for the town to define
and regulate nuisances.
18.1.3 Do the standards adopted here apply to all development? Yes. The only exceptions from
these standards are those explicitly noted in this chapter or those permitted by variance.
18.1.4 Can the Administrator refer uses that would otherwise be permitted with only an
administrative permit, but that have the potential to become a nuisance to the DRB? Yes. The
Administrator may refer uses that will generate smoke, odor, or other potential nuisances to the
DRB, which may require that the application for an administrative permit be converted to an
application for a discretionary permit.
18.2 Dangerous Buildings
18.2.1 Does this bylaw regulate dangerous buildings? Yes. Buildings that meet the criteria
established in WDB 18.2.2 are public nuisances. As such, they are violations of this bylaw, subject
to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
18.2.2 What constitutes a dangerous building? The intent here is to define buildings that pose a
hazard to public safety personnel - including fire fighters, emergency medical technicians, police
officers, and others who may be required to enter these buildings if they are flooded or on fire, to
perform a search or rescue, or to enforce the law - as dangerous, and therefore, as public nuisances.
There is no intent to declare a building dangerous on aesthetic grounds, due to a temporary lack of
maintenance, or due to the fact that it is awaiting renovations for which an application for a permit
has been submitted. The criteria the Administrator will use to determine whether a building is
dangerous are listed below. A building need not meet all of these criteria to be considered
dangerous.
18.2.2.1 … the presence of charred or burnt surfaces and/or structural members, like framing
or girders, remaining from an explosion or fire;
18.2.2.2 … the presence of exposed structural members, like framing or girders, that were
not intended to be exposed when the building was built;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 2
18.2.2.3 … the absence of window glass, or the presence of broken windows, and glass litter
on the floors or the surrounding ground;
18.2.2.4 … the presence of a roof, stairs, or a floor that will not reliably support the weight
of a fire fighter, or of open pits, shafts, or wells;
18.2.2.5 … the presence or suspected presence of abandoned hazardous materials or wastes;
and
18.2.2.6 … that the building is open to unauthorized entry via a door, window, or other
opening.
18.2.2.7 The Administrator will consult with the Williston Fire and Police departments and
with the town’s Public Health Officer before determining that a building is dangerous.
18.2.3 Will I get some warning before being required to fix or demolish a dangerous building?
Yes. The town will begin enforcement of these standards for dangerous buildings using the
procedure established at WDB 7.4. This procedure gives a property owner seven days to respond to
a notice of violation.
18.3 Air Quality. Air quality in Williston is regulated by the State of Vermont. The standards adopted
here seek to prevent some common air quality problems by anticipating the impacts of proposed
developments.
Where can I learn about state air quality regulations? The Air Pollution Control Division of the Vermont Department of
Environmental Conservation is on-line at: http://www.anr.state.vt.us/air/
18.3.1 Are there standards for dust suppression? Yes.
18.3.1.1 During Construction. Dust suppression shall be provided at construction sites in
accord with the Public Works Standards.
18.3.1.2 After Construction. Generally sites will be stabilized with buildings, paving, and
landscaping, and produce only incidental dust. Some industrial and mining processes are
expected to produce dust, however, and so are recreational uses that use dirt trails or roads.
These uses are confined to the ARZD and the industrial zoning districts. Within those
districts, the DRB may require applicants to provide dust suppression and/or additional
landscaped buffering to protect adjoining properties and/or prevent dust blowing across
public ways.
18.3.2 What about uses that generate smoke? No development shall generate smoke that could
adversely affect occupants or users of adjoining properties. Where the DRB finds that smoke will
not ordinarily be confined on the property where it is generated or at least within an industrial
zoning district, it may simply prohibit the proposed use. The DRB may also, consistent with state
air pollution laws, require measures that would mitigate the anticipated nuisance.
18.3.3 Are there standards for the placement of exhaust fans, stacks, vents, and similar
equipment? Yes. The plans submitted with applications for administrative or discretionary permits
for uses that will have these types of equipment or installations must demonstrate that proposed
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 3
exhaust vents, stacks, fans, and similar equipment will not direct cooking odors, gases, hot air,
smoke, steam, or vapor onto adjacent properties or public ways.
18.3.4 What if my development will stink? Are there standards for odors? Different people
experience odors in different ways, making regulation difficult. Industrial processes or other uses
that may reasonably be expected to produce odors that some people will find offensive shall be
confined in the Industrial Zoning District West. Where the DRB finds that the anticipated odor will
not or cannot ordinarily be confined on the property where it is generated, or at least within an
industrial zoning district, it may simply prohibit the proposed use. The DRB may also, consistent
with state air pollution laws, require measures that would mitigate the anticipated nuisance.
Do the standards adopted here apply to landfill odor? No. State law protects regional landfills from local regulations
that would interfere with their intended function. See WDB 4.2.5). Do these standards apply to odors generated by
farming operations? No. Accepted agricultural practices are exempted by WDB 4.2.1.2 and protected by Vermont’s
Right-To-Farm law, 12 V.S.A. § 5751. et seq)
18.4 Buffering. See Chapter 23 for this bylaw’s standards for landscaped buffers between uses.
18.5 Hazardous Materials. Hazardous materials will be as defined by the Uniform Fire Code (UFC).
Fire Code Definition. Here are the basic definitions of “hazardous material” from the Uniform Fire Code. More details may be
found in that code. It is important to have a clear understanding of the fire code and of the applicable state and federal regulations
when proposing a use that will involve the storage, handling, or disposal of hazardous materials.
3.3.186.3 Hazardous Material. A chemical or substance that is classified as a physical hazard material or a health hazard material,
whether the chemical or substance is in usable or waste condition. (See also 3.3.186.5, Health Hazard Material, and 3.3.186.10,
Physical Hazard Material.) [5000, 2006]
3.3.186.5 Health Hazard Material. A chemical or substance classified as a toxic, highly toxic, or corrosive material in accordance
with the definitions set forth in this Code. [5000, 2006]
3.3.186.10 Physical Hazard Material. A chemical or substance classified as a combustible liquid, explosive, flammable cryogen,
flammable gas, flammable liquid, flammable solid, organic peroxide, oxidizer, oxidizing cryogen, pyrophoric, unstable
(reactive), or water-reactive material. [5000, 2006]
18.5.1 Will the Williston Fire Department review my plans for a development that involves
hazardous materials? Yes. Proposed developments that may reasonably be expected to involve the
storage, handling, or disposal of hazardous materials will be referred to the Williston Fire
Department for review.
18.5.2 What standards will be used in reviewing my plans for a development that involves
hazardous materials? The town will rely on Chapter 60 of the Uniform Fire Code, which is hereby
adopted by reference. Plans submitted with an application for an administrative or discretionary
permit for a proposed development that involves the storage, handling, or disposal of hazardous
materials must clearly show how that development complies with Chapter 60 and supporting
requirements of the UFC.
18.5.3 Will I be required to submit a Hazardous Materials Management Plan? Possibly. The
DRB, with the advice of the Williston Fire Department, may require submission of a hazardous
materials management plan.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 4
18.5.4 Must I maintain the measures required by Chapter 60 of the Uniform Fire Code? Yes.
Failure to maintain the hazardous materials management measures required by Chapter 60 of the
UFC is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
18.6 Hours of Operation. The DRB may limit the hours of operation of commercial, industrial, and
institutional uses to protect the residents of nearby dwellings and/or or the residents of mixed use
buildings. These limits may set the hours when deliveries and solid waste collection are permitted, as well
as the hours when the use is open.
18.7 Light/Glare. Standards for outdoor lighting are found in Chapter 24 of this bylaw. The standards
adopted here address glare from other sources.
18.7.1 Must welding equipment or other sources of intense light be screened from public view?
Yes. Intense sources of light, like welding equipment, must be fully screened from view from
adjoining properties and public ways by enclosure in a building or by an opaque screening fence or
wall.
18.7.2 What about building materials that shine or reflect? Designers should choose building
materials that do not generate glare. The DRB may require that roof, wall, or other materials be
non-reflective. The DRB may also limit the glass area presented by a building to minimize glare.
WDB 31.9.8.3 provides additional authority to limit the use of reflective materials in the ARZD.
18.8 Litter
18.8.1 Is litter removal a continuing condition of approval? Yes. Litter removal is part of the
continuing maintenance required by Chapter 7 this bylaw.
18.8.2 Must areas where solid waste or other materials that may become windborne be fenced or
screened to suppress blowing litter? Yes. See WDB 18.12.3.
18.9 Livestock. As explained by WDB 4.2.1.2, Vermont municipalities cannot regulate accepted
agricultural practices, including the keeping of livestock. See WDB 20.10 re the keeping of livestock on
residential premises.
18.10 Noise
18.10.1 Doesn’t Williston already have a noise ordinance? Yes. That ordinance, which is attached
as Appendix F, regulates all sources of noise, including existing land uses. These standards do not
take the place of that ordinance. Their purpose is to provide a basis for the DRB’s review of
proposed developments, with the goal of ensuring that new uses will not generate excessive levels
of sound.
18.10.2 What are the limits on the level of sound generated by proposed developments? No
development that can reasonably be expected to generate sound exceeding the maximum levels set
in Table 18.A shall be permitted.
18.10.3 Can I be required to present a study of potential sound levels? Yes. Where there is a
question about compliance with this standard, the DRB may require the applicant to provide
evidence in the form of a report prepared by a qualified firm whose qualifications are acceptable to
the Administrator. Such reports shall show projected noise contours around the proposed source,
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 5
extending as far out as the 50 dBAL10 contour. Such a report may also be required to show the
sound transmission coefficient of the proposed building materials.
18.10.4 Can the DRB require noise mitigation measures? Yes.
18.10.4.1 Mitigation Measures. The DRB may require the construction or installation of
noise mitigation measures including landscaped berms, walls, and the use of sound-proofing
architectural techniques. This requirement may be imposed both on new noise sources and
on proposed developments that will be exposed to noise from existing sources.
18.10.4.2 Operating Hours. The DRB may also limit operating hours of commercial,
industrial, and institutional uses in order to mitigate potential noise conflicts. See also WDB
18.6.
18.10.4.3 Where Uses are Mixed. Compliance with this standard is particularly important in
buildings where different intensities of use will be mixed. As provided in Chapter 22 of this
bylaw, the DRB may require an applicant to demonstrate that night-time interior sound
levels in the residential portions of mixed-use developments will not exceed 40 dBAL10.
Table 18.A - Maximum Anticipated Sound Levels
The maximum sound levels given in this table are measured in A-weighted decibels
(dBA). Maximum sound levels may briefly exceed these levels, but for no more
than 10 minutes out of an hour, making these levels dBAL10. For enforcement
purposes, maximum sound levels are measured on the property line of the receiving
use at the point nearest the use generating the sound.
receiving zoning district maximum sound level dBAL10
ARZD
daytime 60
nighttime 50
Business Park 70
Gateway North 75
Gateway South 70
Industrial East 75
Industrial West 75
Residential and Gateway West
daytime 60
nighttime 50
Mixed Use Commercial 70
Mixed Use Residential
daytime 60
nighttime 50
Taft Corners 65
Village
daytime 60
nighttime 50
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 6
18.11 Outdoor Sales and Storage. Where they are permitted, outdoor sales and storage may take place
only within areas specifically delineated on the approved final plan and in compliance with the standards
for outdoor sales and storage in the applicable zoning district.
18.12 Screening
18.12.1 What must be screened? The plans submitted with applications for administrative or
discretionary permits must clearly show how utility installations, mechanical equipment, solid
waste containers, and the like will be effectively screened from view from neighboring properties
and public ways.
18.12.2 How should ground level screening be provided?
18.12.2.1 Hedge. Screening for utility installations, mechanical equipment, solid waste
containers, and the like must include a dense evergreen hedge and other plant materials that
are at least five (5) feet deep. The DRB may permit an exception to this standard where
space or technical limitations make landscaped screening infeasible. Where the DRB permits
an exception, a screening fence or wall shall be provided, in compliance with WDB
18.12.2.2.
18.12.2.2 Berm, Fence, or Wall. The DRB may require that a berm, fence, or wall be used to
supplement the landscaped screening. Fence or wall materials, patterns, and colors must
match or complement the materials, architectural details, and colors used on buildings on the
site.
18.12.2.3 Blowing Litter. The DRB will require a fence or wall where necessary to trap
blowing litter or other debris.
18.12.3 Must roof-mounted equipment be screened? Yes. Roof-mounted utility installations,
mechanical equipment, and the like must be fully screened from view from neighboring properties
and public views using location on the roof or parapets or other architectural extensions of the
building. This standard does not require that roof-mounted equipment be screened from views from
a taller building or higher ground. For the purposes of this standard, visibility will be determined
from ground level from the centerline of the adjoining public way/s. Note that telecommunications
equipment is generally exempt from this requirement, but see Chapter 21 of this bylaw.
18.13 Vibration
18.13.1 What are the limits on vibrations generated by a proposed development? No use that may
reasonably be expected to generate vibrations that may be sensed at the property line without
instruments shall be permitted. The DRB may permit exceptions to this standard in the industrial
zoning districts, but only where a vibration study, as required by WDB 18.13.2, clearly
demonstrates that there will be no adverse impact on neighboring properties or public ways.
18.13.2 Can I be required to present a study of potential vibrations? Yes. Where there is a
question about compliance with this standard, the DRB may require the applicant to provide
evidence in the form of a report prepared by a qualified firm whose qualifications are acceptable to
the Administrator. Such reports shall show the projected levels of vibration generated by the
proposed development along all property lines.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 8 - | 7
18.14 Water Quality. Water quality in Williston is regulated by the State of Vermont and Chapter 29 of
this bylaw.
Where can I learn about state water quality regulations? Visit the Water Quality Division of Vermont’s Department of
Environmental Quality at http://www.vtwaterquality.org.
18.15 Weeds. The required maintenance of landscaped and open space areas includes the suppression of
invasive species and other weeds. See WDB 7.2.3.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 1
Chapter 19
Density
Transfer of
Development Rights
This chapter provides background
information for the zoning districts created in
this bylaw by explaining how the density or
intensity of development is defined,
measured, and regulated. This chapter also
establishes a voluntary transfer of
development rights program.
19.1 Applicability – Definitions
19.1.1 Do the definitions and standards adopted here apply throughout the town? Yes.
19.1.2 What is “density? Density is the general term used to describe how intensively a parcel of
land is, or may be, used. Density is measured differently for different uses and in different situations.
19.1.3 How is density measured? Per WDB 11.3.2, one dwelling unit is defined as a dwelling unit
containing 2 or more bedrooms. A dwelling containing only one bedroom or less (studio) is counted
as 0.5 of a dwelling unit. The density of residential development in Williston is measured in the
number of dwelling unit equivalents per acre. Acreage encompasses everything within the platted
boundaries of the development. It includes buildings, streets, sidewalks, stormwater detention ponds,
all other improvements, and most types of open space. There are some exceptions, which are
explained in WDB 19.1.3.1 and 2.
What is a dwelling? A dwelling is a building (typically a single-family home) or a separate space within a larger building
(typically an apartment, townhouse, or the like) that contains complete housekeeping facilities for one household.
19.1.3.1 Accessory Dwellings. Accessory dwellings permitted by WDB 20.1 are not counted
as dwellings when calculating density.
19.1.3.2 Acreage Exceptions. There are three exceptions from the acreage used as a basis for
calculating density and one partial exception. These exceptions apply in all zoning districts.
· The acreage on a proposed development site that is included within the
watershed protection buffers required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw will not be
included in the gross acreage of that site for the purposes of calculating the
permitted density.
· The acreage on a proposed development site that has an average slope of 30%
or more will not be included in the gross acreage of that site for the purposes of
calculating the permitted density.
· The acreage on a proposed development site that has an average slope of 15-
30% will be included in the gross acreage of that site, but only at the rate
established for development on slopes in the applicable zoning district. That
rate is one dwelling unit for every 10 acres in the ARZD (see WDB 31.7.2.6)
and one dwelling unit per acre in the RZD and VZD zoning districts (see WDB
39.4.2.2 and WDB 42.4.1).
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 2
19.1.3.3 Rounding. Residential density calculations often result in fractions. For example, a
17-acre parcel in the ARZD is permitted to have 7.62 dwellings. Does that mean it can have
eight? No. Conventional mathematical rounding rules are not used for the density calculations
required by this bylaw. A parcel must contain ALL of the acreage required for an additional
unit. In the ARZD, a parcel has to contain at least 17.69 acres to be permitted eight dwellings.
19.1.4 How is density measured for nonresidential developments? There is no universally useful
measure of the density or intensity of nonresidential developments. The density of nonresidential
developments is limited and determined by the standards of this bylaw. There IS a practical minimum
area for any given nonresidential development, but that area must be determined case-by-case, based
on what is required to comply with the applicable standards. See WDB 19.3.
19.2 Residential Densities. Policies 3.2 and 3.4 of the Town Plan provide background materials that you
might want to read before going on to the rest of this chapter.
19.2.1 What is the purpose of these residential density standards? The definitions and standards
adopted in this chapter are intended to:
· … implement the open space policies adopted in the Town Plan, especially
Policies 3.2 and 3.4 and Chapter 13 – Open Space and Working Landscapes;
· … help implement the affordable housing policies adopted in the Town Plan
(see Chapter 5); and
· … give landowners and developers the flexibility needed to protect open space
while creating compact and amenable neighborhoods.
To achieve these purposes, Williston requires open space residential development, which is defined
in WDB 19.2.2. Because it can be difficult to design an open space development on smaller parcels,
Williston also permits infill development, which is defined at WDB 19.2.3.
19.2.2 What is an open space development? An open space development is a residential subdivision
in which a specified area of open space is protected as a condition of approval. How much open
space is required varies with the zoning district. Open space development is required on parcels larger
than 10.5 acres in the ARZD and RZD. Parcels in the VZD and smaller parcels in the ARZD and
RZD may also be developed using an open space pattern, but where this is proposed, it must be
approved by the DRB during pre-application review.
19.2.3 What is an infill development? Some parcels of land are too small to effectively use for open
space development. Specifically, all residential developments that include 10.5 or fewer acres and
all residential developments within the VZD will be treated as infill developments for the purposes
of this bylaw, except where an exception is permitted by the DRB, as provided in WDB 19.2.2. All
other residential developments must be open space developments.
19.2.4 So, how do I know how many homes I can build on my land? Each residential zoning district
has both a permitted net density and a minimum area per dwelling unit. These standards are shown
in Table 19.A.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 3
19.2.4.1 Net Density. The average density column in Table 19.A tells you the maximum
number of homes that can be built. It applies to both open space and infill developments.
Applicants may make choices that reduce the average density permitted (see, for example,
WDB 15.2.3.1), but the standards of Table 19.A. are the starting point.
For example, if you have a 40-acre parcel in the ARZD that includes no watershed protection buffers and no slopes
of 15% of more, Table 19.A shows that you can build 22 dwelling units. See WDB 19.1.3.2 for an explanation of
how having watershed protection buffers or slopes on your property affects the permitted density.
19.2.4.2 Minimum Area. The minimum area per dwelling unit may be different for open space
and infill developments and is applied in different ways to different types of development. See
WDB 19.2.5
Table 19.A - Permitted Residential Densities
Zoning District
Net*
density
minimum area per dwelling in
an open space development
minimum area per dwelling in
an infill development
ARZD
1 dwelling per 80,000 SF
(.55 DUe/A)
15,000 SF (.344 A) 80,000 SF (1.84 A)
RZD
open space developments:
3.00 DUe/A
developments with
minimum 30% affordable
housing as specified in
WDB 46.3.9 - 5.00 DUe/A
5,445 SF (0.125 A) 14,520 (.33 A)
VZD 2.00 DUe/A 6,534 SF (0.15 A) 6,534 SF (0.15 A)
*The net density given here is for development on slopes of less than 15%. Development on slopes of 15-29% is
permitted only at the lower average densities established in WDB 19.1.3.2. Slopes of 30% of more are not included in
the acreage base for development.
19.2.5 But how can I build that many homes if I am required to protect buffers along streams,
conservation areas, slopes, wetlands, and other resources? This is where the minimum area per
dwelling unit comes in. The combination of an average density with a minimum area per dwelling
unit gives landowners and developers the flexibility to protect open space while meeting the demand
for housing. It will also help make new residential neighborhoods more compact, and thus more
affordable and pedestrian-friendly.
Is this “cluster” development? Yes. The approach the town is taking toward most residential development has been called
“cluster” development. ‘Open space development’ is used in the Town Plan and this bylaw because it emphasizes the goal
of open space protection.
19.2.5.1 Minimum Area, Individual Lots. The minimum area per dwelling unit can be
interpreted as a minimum lot size in developments where buyers will get a lot. No lot can be
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 4
smaller than the minimum area per dwelling unit. Do note, however, that WDB 31.8.3
prohibits developments with uniform lot sizes.
Imagine, for example, a 40-acre parcel in the ARZD. This parcel has no slopes or watershed protection buffers, so
22 dwelling units are permitted. But WDB 31.4.1 requires that 75% remain in open space. Can the owner still plat
22 lots? If he or she is willing (and the site is favorable) to install community sewerage systems for each cluster of
lots (there is generally a limit of seven home sites per cluster), 22 lots could be approved on the 10 acres that are
not set aside as open space. The shape and size of the lots must vary with the terrain, but the smallest lot/s can be
as small as 15,000 SF, allowing some flexibility in the proposed subdivision’s design.
19.2.5.2 Minimum Area Without Lots. Where the proposed development will be an apartment
building or complex that will remain in one ownership or a condominium where the land will
be held in common by the homeowners, the minimum area per dwelling unit determines the
smallest area that can be used for buildings, parking, and other improvements.
Imagine, for example, an 80-acre parcel in the RZD that includes extensive (30 acres) wetlands and a rare plant
community (10 acres). Table 19.A permits 240 dwelling units on that site (80 X 3). But given the natural constraints,
it would be difficult to plat even that many conventional residential lots. Further, unless the wetlands and rare plants
happen to be located in one corner of the parcel, adjacent to another open space) conventional development will
have a fragmenting impact on those resources. Better resource protection and better utilization of land and
infrastructure, can be achieved by shrinking the footprint of the housing. Using the minimum area per unit of 5,445
SF, this bylaw would permit all 240 units to be placed on less than 40 acres. This leaves ample space for a
development that could take the form of flats, town homes, or other attached housing types. Placing 240 units on,
say, 37.5 acres results in roughly the same density as many of Williston’s existing condominium developments:
6.4 DU/A. How does all this really work? Landowners who are unsure about how to comply with the open space
development requirements of this bylaw are encouraged to make an appointment with a staff person at Williston
Planning. You may also want to seek the advice of an experienced design professional.
19.3 Nonresidential Densities
19.3.1 Are minimum lot sizes required for the nonresidential uses that permitted in the ARZD,
RZD, and VZD? Yes.
19.3.1.1 In the ARZD. A minimum lot size of 80,000 SF is required for nonresidential uses in
the ARZD.
19.3.1.2 In the RZD and VZD. A minimum lot size of 20,000 SF is required for nonresidential
uses in the RZD and VZD.
19.3.2 Are there minimum lot sizes for nonresidential development in the other zoning districts?
There is no minimum lot size for nonresidential uses in the other zoning districts. The density or
intensity of nonresidential development that is permitted in those districts will be a function of the
standards of this bylaw, as applicable.
19.4 Mixed-Use Densities. Williston’s Town Plan emphasizes the desirability of mixed-use
development in the growth center, and mixed-use development is permitted, or even required, in
the BPZD, GZDS, GZDW, MUCZD, MURZD, and TCZD. Each zoning district has its own
standards for which uses may be mixed and how. Those standards are summarized in Table 19.B.
Mixed-uses are also permitted in the VZD, in compliance with the standards established in Chapter
42 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 5
19.4.1. Is the mix of uses regulated? The mix of residential and nonresidential space may be limited.
See the first column in Table 19.B for a summary of the standards adopted in the chapters establishing
each zoning district.
19.4.2 How many dwelling units are permitted in a mixed-use development? The net permitted
density of the residential component of a mixed-use development is shown in Table 19.B. That table
also imposes a minimum density of five dwelling units per acre on residential development in most
of the mixed-use zoning districts and shows that the net permitted density may rise to 10 or 15 DU/A
with the transfer of development rights. The transfer of development rights is explained in WDB
19.5.
19.4.3 How much nonresidential development is permitted in a mixed-use development? The
density of the nonresidential component of a mixed-use development will be a function of the limit,
if any, on the mix of uses in the zoning district, the space that remains after the residential component
is established, and the standards of this bylaw.
Table 19.B - Mixed Use Residential Densities
All numbers are DUe/A
zoning
district
residential/commercial mix net
density
density
with TDR
minimum
density*
BPZD Residential uses are permitted, but not required. 7.5 15 5
GZDS Residential uses are permitted, but not required. 7.5
10
5
MUCZD
Residential uses are encouraged but not required.
7.5 15 5
MURZD Must be predominantly** residential. 7.5 15 5
TCZD Residential uses may be required. 7.5 15 5
GZDW Residential uses are permitted, but not required. 7.5 10 5
* Where provided. This does not mean that residential uses have to be built where they are not required. **
‘Predominantly residential’ is defined at WDB 38.1.3.1.
19.5 Transfer of Development Rights
19.5.1 What is the transfer of development rights? A transfer of development rights occurs when
the right to develop on one parcel of land is used on a noncontiguous parcel. The parcels involved
may be in the same or different ownerships.
19.5.2 Is the transfer of development rights permitted in Williston? Yes. Residential development
rights may be voluntarily transferred from lands in the ARZD or from conservation areas shown in
the Open Space Plan in other zoning districts to lands within the growth center. Development rights
may be transferred one-to-one up to the maximum density permitted in the receiving zoning district
by Tables 19.A and 19.B.
19.5.3 Is special permission required for a transfer of development rights? No. Transfers are
permitted within the density limits established in Tables 19.A. and 19.B. The resulting development
must, of course, comply with all requirements of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 1 9 - | 6
19.5.4 What are the mechanics of a transfer of development rights? A transfer of development
rights is a private transaction. While it is enabled and encouraged by this bylaw, the town does not
require TDRs.
19.5.4.1 TDRs at Pre-Application. An applicant who proposes to use TDRs in a development
must make this clear in the pre-application materials.
19.5.4.2 TDR’s and Growth Management. A TDR does not exempt the proposed dwelling
units from growth management review, as required by Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
19.5.4.3 TDR’s at Permit Review. Drafts of the instruments of conveyance for the TDR must
accompany the application for a discretionary permit.
19.5.4.4 TDR’s in Final Plans. The signed instruments of conveyance for the TDR must
accompany the final plans. They must be recorded after approval of the final plans and before
an administrative permit for any work on the site is approved.
Can you give me an example of how the transfer of development rights works? Yes. Suppose that you have a small
farm in the ARZD. You could, if able to comply with all requirements of this bylaw, create 22 home sites on 40 acres. But
really, you only want to build a home for yourself. Can you use the other 21 development rights in another way? Possibly.
Suppose that a developer in the Tafts Corners area wants to build a mixed-used project on 10 acres. Without a transfer of
development rights, Table 19.B says that this project can have 7.5 du/A, or 75 total units. With a transfer, however, it can
have as many as 150 units (15 du/A). The developer could, if you name a reasonable price, purchase your 21 development
rights and build 96 of the 150 units permitted with a TDR. This moves development into the growth center in accord with
town policy, while helping protect the character of rural Williston.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 1
Chapter 20
Residential Improvements
This chapter consolidates the definitions and
standards for minor improvements to
residentially developed property. The
standards adopted here apply to all dwellings
in all zoning districts. Requirements that may
or may not apply, depending on a dwelling’s
location, are cross-referenced.
20.1 Accessory Dwellings. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(1)(E) states that “no bylaw shall have the effect of excluding
as a permitted use one accessory dwelling unit that is located within or appurtenant to an owner-occupied
single-family dwelling.”
20.1.1 What is an accessory dwelling? For the purposes of this chapter, an ‘accessory dwelling’ is
an independent efficiency or one or two bedroom dwelling that is located within or on the same lot
as an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, and that complies with the standards established
below.
20.1.2 Is a permit needed for an accessory dwelling? Yes. An administrative permit is required for
any accessory dwelling.
20.1.3 What standards apply to accessory dwellings? An administrative permit for a proposed
accessory dwelling shall be approved if the Administrator finds that it complies with the following
standards.
20.1.3.1 Owner-Occupied. Either the single-family dwelling or the proposed accessory
dwelling must be owner-occupied.
What Does ‘Owner-Occupied’ Mean? The dwelling or propsoed accessory dwelling must be the principal
residence of at least one of the owners named on the grand list.
20.1.3.2 Floor Area. The proposed accessory dwelling must occupy no more than 30% of the
total floor area of the dwelling to which it is accessory, or where the parcel is larger than onehalf
acre, but too small to subdivide in the zoning district in which it is located, no more than
50% of the total floor area of the dwelling to which it is accessory, with a maximum size for
any accessory dwelling of 1,500 square feet. Applicants must provide a floor and/or site plan
drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this standard.
20.1.3.3 Using an Existing Dwelling as an Accessory to a New Dwelling. These standards
present the possibility that an existing two-bedroom dwelling of 1,500 SF or less could be
used as an accessory dwelling by an owner who proposes to build a new home of up to 3,000
SF. This is not prohibited, but will require a discretionary permit.
20.1.3.4 Shared Driveway. Approval of an accessory dwelling must not result in a new point
of access to a public road. The Administrator may, with the advice of the DPW, waive this
requirement where the terrain or other physical characteristics of the site make it safer for an
accessory dwelling to have a separate point of access.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 2
20.1.3.5 Off-Street Parking. There must be sufficient off-street parking for the proposed
accessory dwelling. One off-street parking space is required for each efficiency or onebedroom
accessory dwelling and two off-street parking spaces are required for each twobedroom
accessory dwelling. Applicants must provide a site plan that is drawn to scale and in
sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this standard.
20.1.3.6 Wastewater. Wastewater treatment capacity for the proposed accessory dwelling is
available as part of an allocation of sewage treatment plant capacity or as part of the capacity
of an existing or proposed on-site wastewater treatment system.
 Where the proposed accessory dwelling would be served by the town‘s
sewerage system, the applicant must submit an allocation form signed by the
DPW.
 Where the proposed accessory dwelling would be served by an on-site
wastewater treatment system the applicant must submit: i) approved final plans
showing that an existing system has sufficient capacity, ii) plans for a new
system prepared by a licensed designer, or iii) a licensed designer’s
certification, based on a field investigation, that an existing system for which
approved final plans are not available, has sufficient capacity for the proposed
accessory dwelling.
What is a Licensed Designer? See http://www.anr.state.vt.us/dec/ww/sitetech.htm for an explanation of
this state program.
20.1.3.7 Dimensional Standards. Addition of the proposed accessory dwelling will not result
in a violation of the applicable dimensional standards of this bylaw. Applicants must provide
a site plan drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this standard.
What is a Dimensional Standard? A dimensional standard controls the location of a structure or use on a lot and/or
the dimensions of a structure. These standards include, but are not limited to, buffers, setbacks, coverage, and clear
vision triangles.
20.1.3.8 In the Village. Detached accessory dwellings in the VZD must comply with the design
standards of the Williston Village Historic District Design Review Guide. Applicants who wish
to place a detached accessory dwelling in the VZD must provide architectural drawings,
including elevations, drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with
this standard.
20.2 Accessory Structures. For the purposes of this chapter, an accessory structure is located on the
same lot or parcel as a dwelling and serves a purpose that supports and is clearly subordinate to the
residential use of the property. Accessory structures that are permitted for dwellings include detached
garages, play structures, and sheds.
20.2.1 Is a permit needed for an accessory structure? Usually. An administrative permit is required
for all accessory structures that are more than 10 feet in height or have a footprint of more than 120
square feet. Smaller structures are NOT exempt from the requirements of this bylaw. Placing a 100
square foot play structure within a side yard setback would be a violation of this bylaw, subject to
enforcement provided by WDB 7.4-7.6, but would not require a permit.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 3
What is a Garage? A garage is a building, or a part of a building, that houses, or at least is designed to house, one or more
motor vehicles, watercraft, snow machines, farm implements, or other vehicles. What is Play Structure? A play structure
is designed for children’s play. Play equipment that does not have a footing or foundation is not a structure. What is a
Shed? This term includes all roofed structures, including tool sheds, greenhouses, etc., that are accessory to a dwelling,
except detached garages and accessory dwellings, which are separately defined.
20.2.2 What standards apply to accessory structures? An administrative permit for a proposed
accessory structure shall be approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the
following standards.
20.2.2.1 Location. Accessory structures must be placed in a side or rear yard, except in the
ARZD, where they may be placed in a front yard, if that front yard is at least twice as deep as
the required setback.
20.2.2.2 Dimensional Standards. Accessory structures must comply with the applicable
dimensional standards of this bylaw. Applicants must provide a site plan drawn to scale and
in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this standard.
20.2.3.3 In the Village. Accessory structures in the VZD must comply with the Williston
Village Historic District Design Review Guide and may be subject to review by the HAAC
and DRB. Applicants who wish to place an accessory structure in the VZD must provide
architectural drawings, including elevations, drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with that standard.
20.3 Additions. An addition is any expansion of an existing structure in any dimension, including height,
width, depth, or length.
20.3.1 Is a permit required for an addition? Yes. An administrative permit is required for all
residential additions.
20.3.2 What standards apply to additions? An administrative permit for a proposed addition shall
be approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the following standards.
20.3.2.1 Dimensional Standards. Additions must comply with the dimensional standards of
this bylaw. Applicants must provide a site plan drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with this standard.
20.3.2.2 Adding Bedrooms. The addition of a bedroom requires additional wastewater
treatment capacity, either as part of an existing or new allocation of sewage treatment plant
capacity, or as part of the existing or proposed capacity of an on-site wastewater treatment
system.
 Where the proposed bedroom/s would be served by the town sewerage system,
the applicant must submit an allocation form approved by the DPW.
 Where the proposed bedroom/s would be served by an on-site wastewater
treatment system the applicant must submit: i) approved final plans showing
that an existing system has sufficient capacity, ii) plans for a new system
prepared by a licensed designer, or iii) a licensed designer’s certification, based
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 4
on a field investigation, that an existing system for which approved final plans
are not available, has sufficient capacity.
20.3.2.3 In the Village. Additions in the VZD must comply with the Williston Village Historic
District Design Review Guide and may be subject to review by the HAAC and DRB.
Applicants who wish to build an addition in the VZD must provide architectural drawings,
including elevations, drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with
this standard.
20.4 Businesses. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(4) states that “No bylaw may infringe upon the right of any resident to
use a minor portion of a dwelling unit for an occupation that is customary in residential areas and that does
not have an adverse effect upon the character of the residential area in which the dwelling is located.”
20.4.1 What is a home business? A home business is any commercial activity conducted in a
one or two family dwelling by the resident/s of that dwelling, whether for profit or not, and
that meets the standards established here. Conducting any other business in a dwelling is a
violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement, as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
20.4.2 Can I park a commercial vehicle at my home? The overnight parking of commercial
vehicles of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or more is a commercial activity, and will be
regulated as such in the MURZD, RZD, and VZD.
20.4.3 Is a permit required to establish a home business? Yes. The type of permit required
varies with the type of business proposed and the type of dwelling.
A discretionary permit is needed for any home business proposed in atwo or multi-family
dwelling that will include the overnight parking of a commercial vehicle or any customer or
client traffic.
A discretionary permit is requiredfor all home businesses that propose to have more than one
non-resident employee on site or generate more than one P.M. peak hour trip. An
administrative permit is required for all other home businesses.
20.4.4 What standards apply to home businesses? The Administrator or the DRB, as
appropriate, shall approve a permit for a home business that complies with the standards of
Appendix G. See also WDB 20.7 re: family child care homes.
20.5 Decks and Patios. A deck is an above-grade outdoor living space that is open to the sky, although it
may be temporarily covered by an awning or partially covered by a pergola. A patio is an at-grade outdoor
living space that is open to the sky. If one of these spaces is covered by a roof, it becomes an addition or, if
detached from the dwelling, an accessory structure.
20.5.1 Is a permit required for a deck or patio? Yes. An administrative permit is required for any
deck or for any patio that covers more than 120 square feet. Smaller patios are NOT exempt from
the requirements of this bylaw. Placing a 100 square foot patio within a side yard setback would be
a violation, subject to enforcement, as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6, but would not require a permit.
20.5.2 What standards apply to decks and patios. An administrative permit for a proposed deck or
patio shall be approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the following standards.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 5
20.5.2.1 Dimensional Standards. Decks and patios must comply with the dimensional
standards of this bylaw. Applicants must provide a site plan drawn to scale and in sufficient
detail to demonstrate compliance with this standard.
20.5.2.2 In the Village. Decks in the VZD must comply with the Williston Village Historic
District Design Review Guide and may be subject to review by the HAAC and DRB.
Applicants who wish to build a deck in the VZD must provide architectural drawings,
including elevations drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with
this standard.
20.6 Driveways. A permit is required for new driveways, or for any change in a driveway’s width or
location. For access to town roads, this permit is obtained from the town. For access to state roads, permits
must be obtained from both the town and the Vermont Agency of Transportation. For more on access to
public roads, see Chapter 13 of this bylaw.
20.7 Family Child Care Homes. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(5) makes family child care homes serving six or fewer
children permitted uses of single-family dwellings. A family child care home that serves six or more
children full-time and four or more part-time is also permitted, but a discretionary permit will be required.
20.7.1 What is a family child care home? A family child care home is a home or facility
where the owner or operator is registered or licensed for child care as required by 33 V.S.A. §
3502(a).
20.8 Residential Care Homes or Group Homes. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(G) specifies that a residential care
home or group home operated under state licensing or registration, and serving not more than eight persons
who have a handicap or disability as defined in 9 V.S.A. § 4501, shall be considered by right to constitute
a permitted single-family residential use of property, except that no such home shall be so considered if it
is located within 1,000 feet of another existing or permitted such home.
20.8 Fences. A fence is a structure that serves as an enclosure, physical or visual barrier, and/or to mark a
boundary. Freestanding walls serving these purposes are fences. Living shrubs, trees, or other vegetation,
including hedges, are not fences.
20.8.1 Is a permit required to erect a fence? Yes, an administrative permit is required to erect a
fence. Before applying for a permit, the town strongly recommends that you talk to neighboring
property owner/s.
Planting a Hedge? If you plan to plant a hedge as a property boundary, the town strongly encourages you to communicate
with your neighbors before planting.
20.8.2 Are there standards for fences? An administrative permit for a proposed fence shall be
approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the following standards.
20.8.2.1 Height. No fence on a residential property may exceed six (6) feet in height above
grade, except as provided in WDB 20.8.2.3 and 20.8.2.4. Front yard fences are limited to 42
inches in height. See WDB 13.2.4 for additional height restrictions at intersections.
20.8.2.2 At Intersections. Fences within clear vision triangles must not obstruct drivers’ vision.
Solid or opaque fences must not exceed 29 inches in height above the grade of the adjoining
road.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 6
20.8.2.3 Privacy Enclosures and Kennels. Privacy enclosures (for example, around an outdoor
spa) and the fencing of kennels may exceed the height limit established in WDB 20.8.2.1,
above, but only within areas outside of the required setbacks for structures. The portion of the
enclosure or fence that is over six (6) feet in height must not be solid. It may be a lattice or
similar decorative work, screen, or wire.
20.8.2.4 Screening and Sound Barriers along Major Roads and Trails. Fences erected as
screens and/or sound barriers along the right-of-way of an arterial or major collector may
exceed six (6) feet in height. The Administrator shall, however, refer all such fences to the
HAAC for review before acting on the application for an administrative permit.
20.8.2.5 Location. No fence shall extend into a public right-of-way or an easement held or
used by the town without the written permission of the DPW, who may prohibit any such
fence, or permit it with conditions that provide for its easy removal and replacement at the
owner’s expense. The DPW’s written approval must be presented with the application for an
administrative permit to erect the fence.
20.8.2.6 Materials/Color. The Administrator may require the submission of material samples
for any proposed fence.
 No fence shall be made of scrap metal.
 No plain galvanized or slatted chain link fencing is permitted on residential
properties. Vinyl-coated black or green chain link fencing is permitted.
 The structural elements of fences must be on the inward side (the side facing
the dwelling to which the fence is accessory), if the adjoining property is in, or
is platted for, residential use.
 Front yard fencing on residential properties must be at least 40% open.
Traditional stone walls are exempt.
 Fencing should be a traditional white or a neutral color that is consistent with
the color of the dwelling to which it is accessory.
20.8.2.7 In the Village. Fences in the VZD must comply with the Williston Village Historic
District Design Review Guide and may be subject to review by the HAAC and DRB.
Applicants who wish to erect a fence in the VZD must provide architectural drawings,
including elevations, drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with
this standard.
20.9 Kennels. A kennel is any space used to confine dogs.
20.9.1 Is a permit needed for a kennel? Yes. An administrative permit is required for a kennel for
the resident’s dogs. Kennels used for commercial purposes, including boarding and breeding, may
be permitted as a home business. See WDB 20.4.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 7
20.9.2 Are there standards for kennels? An administrative permit for a proposed kennel shall be
approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the standards of WDB 20.2 for
accessory structures and of WDB 20.8 for fences.
20.10 Livestock. For the purposes of this chapter livestock includes horses, cattle, sheep, llamas, poultry,
and other animals, other than domestic dogs and cats, kept outdoors for the personal consumption or
enjoyment of the residents of a residential property. The keeping of livestock on residential properties is
not always “agriculture,” as it is exempted by WDB 4.2.1.2.
20.10.1 Is a permit needed to keep livestock on a residential lot? No, but the keeping of livestock
on residential premises is subject to the standards adopted in WDB 20.10.2.
20.10.2 Are there standards for the keeping of livestock on residential lots? While no permit is
required, the town will enforce the following standards on a complaint basis.
20.10.2.1. Minimum Lot Size. The minimum lot size for the keeping of livestock shall be one
acre.
20.10.2.2 Additional Setbacks. In the Village and Residential Zoning Districts, no structure in
which livestock is kept or confined shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. No
bedding or feed shall be stored within seventy-five (75) feet of any property line.
20.10.2.3 Watershed Protection. No structure in which livestock is kept or confined shall be
located within a watershed protection buffer established by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
20.10.2.4 Maintenance. All premises on which livestock is kept shall be maintained so as to
ensure that dust, noise, and odor generated by livestock do not have an adverse impact on
adjoining properties. This includes regular the removal of manure and other wastes, dust
suppression, and insect control.
20.11 Outdoor Lighting. Preventing light trespass and protecting the night sky are important town goals.
See Objective 4.6 of the Town Plan.
International Dark-Sky Association. For information about light pollution, light trespass, and appropriate lighting choices, visit:
http://www.darksky.org/
20.11.1 What is outdoor lighting? Outdoor lighting includes any outdoor illuminating device lamp,
light, reflective surface, luminous tube, or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for
illumination, decoration, or advertisement. On residential properties, such devices include, but are
not limited to path, pool, porch, and yard lights.
20.11.2 Do I have to get a permit to install an outdoor light fixture at my house? No permit is
required for outdoor lighting at one or two family dwellings that meets the standard that is set by
WDB 24.2.3.2 and repeated in WDB 20.11.3. A permit is required for any other outdoor lighting.
20.11.3 Are there standards for outdoor lighting? As provided by WDB 24.2.3.2, no permit is
required for outdoor lights that are installed at one and two family dwellings and that are rated at
1,200 initial lumens or less per lamp, as long as the maximum lumen output per residential unit set
by Table 24.A (5,500 initial lumens) is not exceeded.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 8
20.11.4 Are floodlights permitted? Floodlights rated less than 1,200 initial lumens are permitted by
WDB 20.11.3; however, floodlights or spot lamps must be aimed no higher than 45° above straight
down (half way between straight down and straight to the side) and floodlight lamps must not be
directly visible from adjacent parcels or public ways.
20.11.5 What about holiday lighting? Temporary, seasonal holiday lighting is not subject to review
or compliance with this bylaw, if (and only if) the following conditions are met:
20.11.5.1 Seasonal holiday lighting must not create a hazardous distraction passing cyclists or
drivers
20.11.5.2 Seasonal holiday lighting may be displayed for no more than 60 days surrounding
the event those lights celebrate.
20.12 Outdoor Storage
20.12.1 Is outdoor storage permitted on residential premises? Yes. There are different standards for
outdoor storage in different zoning districts.
20.12.1.1 In the ARZD. Outdoor storage is permitted and must meet the required setbacks in
side and rear yards, but note that Appendix G sets a stricter standard for outdoor storage
associated with home businesses. Note also that this does not include the outdoor storage of
recyclables or solid waste, including compost, the storage of which must be effectively
screened from neighboring properties and public ways.
20.12.1.2 In Other Zoning Districts. Outdoor storage is permitted within the required setbacks
in side and rear when it is effectively screened from neighboring properties. but note that
Appendix F sets a stricter standard for outdoor storage associated with home businesses.
20.12.1.3 During Construction. The temporary storage of construction equipment and
materials is permitted by WDB 17.14.
20.12.2 What constitutes ‘effective screening?’ Effective screening of outdoor storage may be
provided by buildings; by a fence or wall that complies with WDB 20.8; or by landscaping, including
dense hedges or similar planting, or on larger properties by a forested or wooded buffer that complies
with the requirements of Chapter 23 for a Type I buffer. Small (less than one cubic yard) compost
piles will be considered to be effectively screened if they are confined within a composting barrel or
bin.
20.12.3 May I stack firewood outside without providing screening? Yes, an exception to the
standards of WDB 20.12.1 is allowed for firewood. Firewood may be stacked on residential premises
without screening if it is confined to the side or rear yard and within the required setbacks. Firewood
may be stacked within the setback with the permission of the neighboring landowner.
20.13 Pools. A pool is any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over
24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground, and at-grade swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
20.13.1 Is a permit required for a pool? Yes. An administrative permit is required to install a pool.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - | 9
Pool and Spa Safety. The Consumer Products Safety Commission offers information on pool and spa safety at:
http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/chdrown.html.
20.13.1.1 Barrier. Outdoor pools, whether in-ground, above-ground, or at grade, hot tubs, and
spas in which water can be more than two (2) feet in depth must be completely surrounded by
a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the
side of the barrier away from the pool.
 The wall of an above-ground pool may form the required barrier provided that
access to the pool, whether from a deck or via a ladder is gated in compliance
with this standard.
 Gates and doors in such barriers shall always be closed. Release mechanisms
shall be located on the pool side of the gate.
 Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained so that the gate will
positively close and latch when released from an open position of six (6) inches
from the gatepost.
20.14. Portable Structures. Portable structures enclose space, but are designed to be easily moved. They
do not have footings or a foundation. Common examples include “pop-up” carports or canopies and play
structures that are not tied to footings or some other foundation.
20.14.1 Is a Permit Required for a Portable Structure? No permit is required for portable structures,
but they must comply with the standards of WDB 20.14.2, below.
20.14.2 Are there Standards for Portable Structures? While no permit is required, the following
standards will be enforced on a complaint basis.
20.14.2.1 Dimensional Standards. Portable structures are subject to same dimensional
standards as other structures.
20.14.2.2 Portable Toilets. Portable toilets are permitted on residential properties only during
construction/remodeling projects. They must be removed upon completion of the work.
20.15. Recreational Vehicles as Living Quarters. A recreational vehicle is a motor home or a trailer
coach, as defined by state law.
20.15.1 Is a permit required to park an RV on my property? No. Recreational vehicles may be
stored on residential premises without a permit, but see WDB 20.15.2, below.
20.15.2 Is there a limitation on the use of RV’s parked on residential properties? Yes. A
recreational vehicle may be used as guest quarters on a residential property for no more than 17
consecutive days, and for no more than 28 days cumulatively during a calendar year. Recreational
vehicles may be used as temporary living quarters for the resident family during the construction or
remodeling of a dwelling. This use must cease when a certificate of compliance is issued or the work
is completed.
20.16 Remodeling. For the purposes of this chapter, remodeling is a change in the interior or exterior of an
existing dwelling that does not change its exterior dimensions.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - |
10
20.16.1 Is a permit required for remodeling? Possibly.
20.16.1.1 Adding Rooms. A permit is required for remodels that create or eliminate a room.
Addition of a bedroom requires an allocation of sewage treatment plant capacity, approved by
the DPW.
20.16.1.2 Other Interior Changes. New wall coverings, tile, carpet, counters, light fixtures,
plumbing fixtures, trim, and similar interior changes do not require a permit.
20.16.1.3 Exterior Changes. Changes in roofing, siding, trim, windows and other architectural
features and materials require a permit if your home is located in the VZD. See WDB
20.16.2.3, below. Outside the VZD, exterior changes require a permit only if they change the
exterior dimensions of the home or an accessory building.
20.16.2 Are there standards for remodeling? An administrative permit for a proposed remodel shall be
approved where the Administrator finds that it complies with the following standards.
20.16.2.1 Adding Rooms. Williston does not enforce a building code. Interior changes that
add rooms are tracked solely to monitor the creation of additional bedrooms.
20.16.2.2 Adding Bedrooms. The addition of a bedroom requires additional wastewater
treatment capacity, either as part of an existing or new allocation of sewage treatment plant
capacity, or as part of the existing or proposed capacity of an on-site wastewater treatment
system.
 Where the proposed bedroom/s would be served by the town sewerage system, the
applicant must submit an allocation form approved by the DPW.
 Where the proposed bedroom/s would be served by an on-site wastewater treatment
system the applicant must submit: i) approved final plans showing that an existing
system has sufficient capacity, ii) plans for a new system prepared by a licensed
designer, or iii) a licensed designer’s certification, based on a field investigation,
that an existing system for which approved final plans are not available, has
sufficient capacity.
20.16.2.3 In the Village. A permit is required for exterior remodels in the VZD where they
must comply with the Williston Village Historic District Design Review Guide and may be
subject to review by the HAAC and DRB.
20.17 Repair and Maintenance
20.17.1 What is repair and maintenance? Repair and maintenance involves no clearing, grading,
excavation, or fill; no change in the exterior dimensions of a structure, deck, dwelling, fence, patio,
or pool.
20.17.2 Is a permit needed for repair and maintenance? Not if it is truly repair and maintenance.
For example, patching your roof with new flashing or shingles of the same type and color is repair.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 0 - |
11
20.18 Residential Care and Group Homes. 24 V.S.A. § 4412(1)(G) provides that a residential care home
or group home operated under state licensing or registration and serving not more than eight persons who
have a handicap or disability as defined by 9 V.S.A. § 4501, shall be treated as a single-family dwelling,
except where it is within 1,000 feet of another such home.
20.19 Sale of Household Goods
20.19.1 May I have a vehicle for sale on my residential property? Yes. A “for sale” sign may be
placed in the window of one currently registered, noncommercial vehicle that is parked on and owned
by the owner or current occupant of a residential property.
20.19.2 May I have a “garage sale?” Yes. The occasional sale of household goods is permitted,
without a permit, but subject to the following standards.
25.19.2.1 Frequency. Household goods may be offered for sale no more than twice a year.
25.19.2.2 Duration. Household goods may be offered for sale for no more than 72 hours.
25.19.2.3 Signs. The sign permitted by WDB 20.20 may be used to advertise the occasional
sale of household goods. In addition, two directional signs of no more than three (3) square
feet may be posted.
25.19.2.4 Parking. The owner is liable for any traffic hazard created by the sale of household
goods. Before holding such a sale you should be sure that there is ample, safe parking
available. Sales that create a traffic hazard are violations of this bylaw, subject to enforcement
as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
20.20 Signs
20.20.1 Must I have building numbers for my home? Yes. The posting of building numbers is
required by Williston’s Road Name and Road Location Numbering Ordinance, which is attached to
this bylaw as Appendix D. Building number signs may also display the name of the resident family
and have a decorative framework or border. They are limited to three (3) SF.
20.20.2 May other signs be placed or posted on residential properties? Besides political signs,
which are subject to the same standards everywhere in Williston, residential properties are limited to
one sign with an area of no more than four (4) SF. That sign may be used for any noncommercial
message, including, but not limited to, “for sale” or “for rent,” to advertise the sale of household
goods, or to identify a home business.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 1 - | 1
Chapter 21
Telecommunications
Facilities
This chapter establishes standards for the
installation of telecommunications facilities,
including antennae, towers, and associated
equipment. Remember that these facilities are also
subject to all other applicable requirements of this
bylaw.
21.1 Authority - Purpose
21.1.1 What is the legal authority for the adoption of these standards? 24 V.S.A. § 4417(12)
specifically authorizes Vermont towns to regulate the construction, alteration, and development,
decommissioning, and dismantling of wireless telecommunication facilities.
21.1.2 Doesn’t the federal government regulate telecommunications The Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (see 47 USC 332(c)(7)) specifically allows local governments to regulate
telecommunications for aesthetic and safety purposes.
21.1.3 For what purposes is this bylaw regulating telecommunications facilities? The standards
adopted here are designed to ensure that the placement, design, construction, removal, and
modification of wireless communication facilities preserves the character and appearance of
Williston and protects scenic, historic, cultural, and natural resources, while accommodating the
telecommunication needs of the public and businesses. The goal is to minimize the number of
towers while still allowing for adequate coverage. New facilities must co-locate with existing
facilities whenever possible.
21.2 Permit Requirements
21.2.1 Do I need a permit to erect a telecommunication facility? Yes.
21.2.1.1 Discretionary Permits. Any new telecommunication facility that is not exempt from
this bylaw (see WDB 21.2.2, below) must obtain a discretionary permit. Substantial changes
in existing facilities, including any change in the height or location of an existing tower,
must also obtain a discretionary permit.
21.2.1.2 Administrative Permits. Antennae that are co-locating on an existing
telecommunication facility or that are accessory to an existing farm structure need not obtain
a discretionary permit, but must obtain an administrative permit.
21.2.2 Are any telecommunication facilities exempt from the requirement for a permit? Yes.
Telecommunications facilities used solely for amateur (ham) radio activities are exempt from this
bylaw. Antennae for police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency dispatch, citizen’s band radio,
single-use local business radio dispatch, and television antennae for home use are also exempt, if:
21.2.2.1 On-Site. they are located on the site of the business or home being served, and
21.2.2.2 Height. they are no more than thirty-six (36) feet in height, measured from grade.
No other telecommunications facility is exempt, even if that facility would share a tower or other
structure with exempt uses.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 1 - | 2
21.2.3 Do I need to submit anything besides what is required in the discretionary permit
application checklist adopted in Chapter 6? Yes. There is a supplemental application checklist for
telecommunications facilities. You must submit everything required by that checklist.
21.3 Location and Construction
21.3.1 Is co-location of telecommunication facilities required? Yes, this is the heart of Williston’s
regulation of telecommunications, the goal of which is to minimize the number and visual impacts
of towers.
21.3.1.1 Design for Co-Location. Telecommunications facilities must be designed to allow
for the future rearrangement of antennae and to accept antennae mounted at varying heights,
within the overall permitted height. Telecommunications facilities shall also be designed
with the structural and electrical capacity to accommodate both the applicant’s antennae and
any additional antennae that the overall permitted height will allow.
21.3.1.2 Commitment to Share Space. The owner of a telecommunications facility must
permit shared use of that facility where it is technically feasible and the additional user/s
agrees to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. A binding letter of
commitment to share space must accompany the application for a permit for the facility. See
the Telecommunications Application Checklist.
21.3.2 Are there standards for the design and color of telecommunications structures? Yes. The
goal of these standards is to minimize the visual impact of telecommunications facilities.
21.3.2.1 Monopole Construction. Telecommunications towers shall be unstayed monopoles.
The DRB may permit an alternative design where it is clearly demonstrated that site
conditions make this infeasible and the proposed alternative design complies with all
standards of this bylaw.
21.3.2.2 Glare and Color. Exterior materials must be of a type, color, and style that
minimizes glare and contrast with the surrounding environment. The DRB may permit an
exception to this standard only where the Federal Aviation Administration or other state or
federal authorities require a specific material or color scheme for safety purposes.
21.3.3 Is a fall zone for telecommunications towers required? Yes. Telecommunications facilities
must be set back from any property line or any unrelated structure on the same property a distance
that is at least equal to 110% of the facility’s height above grade. This standard does not apply where
an existing structure, such as a barn, silo, church steeple, or utility pole is proposed as a mounting for
a telecommunications facility.
21.3.4 Must telecommunications facilities have security fences? Yes. The outdoor operating area
around a telecommunications tower and its accessory structures and equipment shall have gated
access only, with a security fence that is at least six (6) feet in height. The DRB may permit an
exception to this standard where reasonable security for the facility is provided by another means.
21.3.4.1 Razor Wire. The use of razor wire on fences required by this standard is prohibited.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 1 - | 3
21.3.4.2 Fencing Material. Where a telecommunications facility is located in a developed
area, the DRB may require the use of fencing that is an architectural extension of an
adjoining or nearby building or that is identical or compatible with the exterior materials
used on nearby buildings. The DRB may also require the use of vinyl-coated wire and slats
where chain link fencing is appropriate.
21.3.5 Are signs permitted at telecommunications facilities? No advertising signs are permitted.
An emergency contact sign is required.
21.3.5.1 Emergency Contact. One sign no greater than two (2) square feet stating the name
of the facility’s owner and a 24-hour emergency telephone number shall be posted adjacent
to the gate. A separate administrative permit is not ordinarily required for such a sign: See
WDB 25.4.4.3.
21.3.5.2 Permitted Signs. “No Trespassing” or other warning signs and the federal tower
registration plate may be posted as required to comply with federal regulations. A separate
administrative permit is not ordinarily required for such signs or for the sign required by
WDB 21.3.5.1: See WDB 25.4.4.
21.3.5.3 Prohibited Signs. No other sign or lettering shall be placed on a tower or its
accessory structures or fences.
21.3.6 What standards apply to the construction of access roads or utility lines serving
telecommunications facilities? Telecommunications facilities may require construction or
improvement of access roads and/or the construction or improvement of utility lines. All such work
is subject to requirements of this bylaw that are intended to protect watershed health and the visual
character of the town. See specifically the watershed health standards of Chapter 29.
21.3.7 Do I need to prove that my telecommunication facility will not interfere with public safety
telecommunications? Yes. All applications for new telecommunications facilities shall be
accompanied by an intermodulation study that predicts no likely interference, and certification that
the study has been provided to potentially affected public safety agencies, including the Williston Fire
and Police departments. Before testing or operating new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunications providers shall notify the potentially-affected agencies at least 10 calendar days
in advance of such changes and allow them to monitor interference levels during that testing process.
21.4 Minimizing Visual Impacts
21.4.1 Can telecommunications facilities be illuminated? The standards this bylaw adopts for
outdoor lighting do not preclude beacons or lighting required by the FAA or another federal or
state authority because of a tower’s height.
21.4.2 Must landscaping or screening be provided for telecommunications facilities? Yes.
Telecommunications facilities are subject to the landscaping standards of Chapter 23 of this bylaw
and to the watershed protection standards of Chapter 29. Taken together those standards will ensure
that clearing for the installation of a telecommunications facility is minimized and that landscaped
buffers are provided where necessary. An exception to compliance with the buffering requirements
of Chapter 23 will be automatically permitted where the telecommunications facility is installed on
an existing structure, like a barn, silo, or church steeple.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 1 - | 4
21.4.3 Are there preferred locations for telecommunications facilities? Yes.
21.4.3.1 Watershed Protection Buffers. Telecommunications facilities must not be located
within the watershed protection buffers or special flood hazard areas established by this
bylaw.
21.4.3.2 Open Fields and Meadows. Telecommunications facilities must not be based in
open fields, meadows, or clearings where there will be no visual absorption of the facility.
21.4.3.3 Habitat Conservation Areas. Telecommunications facilities may be permitted in
habitat conservation areas where they can serve as an economically productive use that is
preferable to developments that would disturb more land. A discretionary permit for a
telecommunications facility in a habitat conservation area shall be approved only where the
DRB, with the advice of the Conservation Commission, finds that, in addition to compliance
with the other standards of this bylaw:
· land and habitat disturbance are minimized by the siting and design of the
facility, and
· installation of the facility will result in conservation of the remainder of the
habitat conservation area that is within the same ownership.
21.4.3.4 Woodland and Forest Areas. Telecommunications facilities may be based in
wooded areas that do not fall into one of the other classifications listed here.
21.4.3.5 Developed Areas. Telecommunications facilities may be located in developed areas
where their visual impact is mitigated by landscaped buffers and screening, as required by
Chapter 23, and/or placement near or on existing buildings. The screening requirements of
WDB 18.12 may also apply.
21.4.3.6 View from Public Spaces and Ways. Telecommunications facilities shall not intrude
on the view from identified viewpoints from public parks or ways.
21.4.4 Is the height of telecommunication towers limited? Yes. The height limit for antennae,
towers, and similar facilities shall not exceed:
21.4.4.1 …twenty-five (25) feet above the average height of the trees within fifty (50) feet of
the base of the tower in wooded or forested areas; or
21.4.4.2 … twenty-five (25) feet above the average height of surrounding buildings within
five hundred (500) feet of the base of the tower.
21.5 Temporary Wireless Communication Facilities. Telecommunications facilities that are set up for
temporary use at a special event are exempt from the standards of this chapter, but may be erected only
after the owner has obtained a special events permit as provided by Williston’s Special Events Ordinance.
21.5.1 How long is “temporary?” Such a permit shall be valid for no more than five (5)
consecutive days and for no more than five (5) days in a year.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 1 - | 5
21.5.2 Are there any other restrictions on temporary telecommunications facilities? Yes. The
maximum height of any temporary facility is fifty (50) feet above grade.
21.6 Abandoned Telecommunications Facilities
21.6.1 When is a telecommunication facility considered abandoned? Like any other use, a
telecommunications facility is abandoned if it has ceased operation for 12 or more consecutive
months.
21.6.2 Is removal of an abandoned telecommunications facility required? Yes.
21.6.2.1 Removal. The owner shall remove an abandoned telecommunications facility within
180 days, and reclaim the site. Failure to do so is a violation of this bylaw, subject to
enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
21.6.2.2 Reclamation. Applications for discretionary permits for telecommunications
facilities shall be accompanied by a plan for the decommissioning and removal of the facility
upon its abandonment, at the owner’s expense. Such plans shall include both the removal of
all structures and equipment and reclamation of the site, including re-vegetation consistent
with the surrounding landscape.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 2 - | 1
Chapter 22
Design Review
This chapter establishes a design review
overlay district and some broadly applicable
standards for architectural and site design in
that overlay. Additional, more specific
architectural and site design standards also
apply in many zoning districts. Landscape
design is addressed in Chapter 23.
22.1 Purpose
22.1.1 What is the purpose of the design review districts and standards adopted in this chapter?
Design review is intended to help ensure that new buildings and major additions to existing buildings
along Williston’s major roads make a positive contribution to the visual character of the community,
and thus to its continued success as a place to live, learn, play, work, and conduct business.
22.1.2 Does the town have the authority to regulate design? Yes. 24 V.S.A. 4414(1)(E) authorizes
Vermont municipalities to create design review districts and require a detailed review of the design
features of development within those districts. Policy 4.2 of the Town Plan states:
The Town of Williston will continue to promote commercial site planning and architectural
design that responds to the vision stated in Chapter 2. This will be accomplished via the
existing design review process, with some additions and revisions.
22.1.3 Isn’t design just a matter of preference or taste? No. While most design review standards
cannot be made quantitative like the dimensional standards adopted in this bylaw, the standards
adopted here address definite, easily identified elements of proposed developments and call for levels
of performance with which compliance can be assessed in a way that is consistent and fair.
22.2 Design Review District
22.2.1 What are the boundaries of the design review district? The design review district that is
established in this chapter is not a separate zoning district (the zoning established in Chapters 31-42
of this bylaw applies everywhere in Williston). It is an overlay that includes the BPZD, GZDS,
GZDN, GZDW, MUCZD, MURZD, and TCZD, and all lots in the IZDW that abut Marshall Avenue
or Route 2.
Isn’t there also design review in the Village? Yes, but the VZD is a separate zoning district, in which design review is
established under a different authority in Chapter 42 of this bylaw.
22.2.2 Is all development in the design review district subject to the standards adopted here? No.
The design review standards adopted in this chapter apply broadly: all new commercial, industrial,
and institutional buildings and multiple-family dwellings, and major additions to those buildings are
covered. The design review standards adopted in this chapter do not apply to one and two family
dwellings or to accessory structures that are not visible from a public way.
22.2.3 If these standards only say “should,” do I really have to comply? Yes, to the extent feasible.
The use of ‘should’ and similar formulations of standards in this chapter does not exempt anyone
from compliance. This language is, instead, an acknowledgement of the wide range of building and
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 2 - | 2
site types, and contexts, and of the difficulty of writing design review standards that can address this
diversity. ‘Should’ provides some flexibility for the DRB to accept practical solutions that are in the
spirit of the Town Plan and these standards.
22.3 Architectural Design: Form, Color and Materials. The form (shape), colors, and materials used in
the surrounding buildings are, after signs, the most noticeable feature of a streetscape. How well they are
designed will be a major determinant of the success – both commercially and as a part of the community –
of a development.
22.3.1 Respect the Context. The choice of building form, colors, and materials should be compatible
with the surrounding landscape and built environment. It is especially important that the bulk and
proportions (height, width, depth) not be a radical departure from the context, except in redeveloping
areas where larger buildings are consistent with the Town Plan or an applicable specific plan.
22.3.2 Form Should Follow Function. Building facades should reflect true building form or to say
it another way, the building’s functions. False fronts are generally inappropriate.
22.3.3 Provide Enclosure. Streets and outdoor spaces like urban parks (greens, plazas, squares,
whatever you call them) function best if the surrounding buildings are tall enough to provide a sense
of enclosure. Construction of multiple story buildings is strongly encouraged in some zoning districts
(BPZD, MUCZD, MURZD, TCZD), but this principle applies everywhere.
22.3.4 Size Outdoor Spaces Properly. Urban parks (the generic term for greens, plazas, squares, and
similar outdoor spaces) are not comfortable for users if they are too large. These spaces should be
sized appropriately so that a sense of enclosure is provided by the surrounding buildings and
landscaping.
How Big is Too Big? A rule-of thumb is that the width of an urban park (the distance between the surrounding buildings,
including sidewalks and streets, if any are present, as well as the urban park should be no more than about twice (2X) the
height of the surrounding buildings. So, the maximum width of an urban park where there is a 36-foot height limit should
not be much more than 72 feet. The performance standard adopted above provides designers and the DRB with some
flexibility by not stating a number.
22.3.5 Use a Variety of Colors and Materials, but With Restraint. A variety of colors and materials
with different textures should be used to create visual interest in buildings, but the variation in color
and materials should not be simply for variety’s sake. It should reflect the functions that must be
served. For example, the sign band on a building or group of buildings could be used to introduce a
different color and material. Likewise, different materials could be used to mark entrances, as
required by WDB 22.4.1.
22.3.6 Avoid Dead Walls. Dead walls are prohibited in the most pedestrian-oriented zoning districts
(MUCZD, MURZD, TCZD), but should be avoided in many other situations. At the least
architectural features, including doors, windows, and detailing should offer some horizontal and/or
vertical relief from monotonous walls.
22.3.7 Do Not Use Reflective Materials. Designers should choose building materials that do not
generate glare. The DRB may require that roof, wall, or other materials be non-reflective. The DRB
may also limit the glass area presented by a building to minimize glare. WDB 31.9.8.3 provides
additional authority to limit the use of reflective materials in the ARZD and GZDS.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 2 - | 3
22.4 Architectural Design: Doors and Windows. Doors and windows connect a building to the
community. How they are placed and spaced is an important element of the streetscape.
22.4.1 Mark Building Entrances
22.4.1.1 Entrances and Architecture. Principal building entrances should be marked by
architectural features that make their location readily visible from the parking areas, pedestrian
ways, and streets that serve the building.
22.4.1.2 Entrances and the Site Plan. Way-finding to the principal entrances of the building
should be reinforced by the site plan, including the placement of sidewalks, landscaping,
outdoor lighting, signage, and the location of functional outdoor areas, which may relate to,
but not obscure the entrance.
22.4.1.3 Relationship to the Street. A strong, direct relationship between principal building
entrances and the street is required in some zoning districts. See the BPZD, MUCZD,
MURZD, and TCZD.
22.4.2 Protect Building Entrances
22.4.2.1 From the Climate. Principal building entrances must be provided with permanent
overhead protection from the elements, including ice and snow falling from the roof.
22.4.2.2 From Conflicts. Service areas, including dumpster and utility enclosures, must be
separated from principal building entrances.
Isn’t that obvious? Williston actually has some particularly egregious violations of this standard. People who want
to dine at the Ponderosa walk right by the dumpster enclosure. Depending on where they park, office workers in
Building C of Maple Tree Place must pass between dumpsters and loading doors.
22.4.3 Provide Airlocks. Principal entrances to buildings must incorporate an airlock. This standard
does not apply to entrances for vehicles, to loading doors, or to emergency exits used for that purpose
only. The DRB may permit other exceptions to this standard for minor entrances.
22.4.4 Use Doors and Windows to Provide a Strong, but Compatible Visual Pattern or Rhythm.
The placement and spacing of doors and windows should create a consistent rhythm and the size and
design of doors and windows must be compatible with the building’s overall size and bulk, and with
the pattern of entrances and fenestration of neighboring buildings.
22.4.5 Shield Light Spill from Windows. Where the terrain does not provide it, landscaping shall be
used to screen and diffuse the light emanating from large banks of windows. Compliance with this
standard is especially important for proposed buildings on slopes. For the application of this standard
in the GZDS see WDB 34.8.5.5.
22.5 Architectural Design: Roofs
22.5.1 Use Pitched Roofs. Pitched roofs are preferred over flat, but it is acknowledged that a flat roof
may be most practical for some types of building, especially in the IZDW. Pitched roofs are required
wherever a height incentive is claimed under WDB 37.5.4, 38.5.4, or 41.5.4.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 2 - | 4
22.5.2 Consider Sliding Ice and Snow. Building entrances (see WDB 22.4.2.1), parking areas, and
pedestrian ways must be protected from ice and snow sliding off roofs. This may be accomplished
by a roof plan that directs ice and snow away from these areas and/or by structural protection.
22.5.3 Use Compatible Colors, Forms, and Materials. Roof colors, forms, and materials should be
compatible with the colors, detailing, and materials used on the building and on neighboring
buildings. Variations in roof form should reflect the building’s function, reinforce the architectural
detailing (for example, roof form could be used to help mark entrances, as required by WDB
22.4.1.1), and not be overly complicated.
22.5.4 Hide Roof Drains. Roof drains must be integrated into the design of the facade on which they
are mounted, not added as an afterthought.
22.5.5 Consider the View from Above. There are a few places in Williston’s design review district
where a roof may be viewed from above. New development in those places must provide a rendering
of the view of the roof in its application for a discretionary permit and the DRB may require
modifications of the plans submitted (switching from roof-mounted to ground-mounted mechanical
equipment for example) to minimize the impact on the view.
22.6 Mixed Use Buildings. Williston’s Town Plan encourages mixed-use development, with the goal of
making it possible for people to live near commercial services and places of employment. There is,
however, a higher potential for conflict among uses are mixed, and especially where they are mixed in the
same building.
22.6.1 What must mixed-use developments do to ensure compatibility? First, the plans submitted
for a proposed mixed-use development must clearly demonstrate compliance with the standards
adopted in this chapter. In particular, the applicant should anticipate the need for sound-proofing and
show how that has been provided in compliance with Chapter 18 of this bylaw.
22.6.2 Are there additional standards for buildings that house both residential and commercial
uses? Yes.
22.6.2.1 Entrances
· Different uses may share an entrance, but the principal entrance/s to the
dwellings shall not pass directly by solid waste containers or other equipment
or installations that must be screened or located away from neighboring uses,
as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
· The principal entrance to the dwellings should be from/through a pedestrianscale
space, not directly from a parking lot that is also used for commercial
purposes. This could mean entry from a pedestrian-friendly commercial
streetscape or entry via a private courtyard or similar space.
22.6.2.2 Hours of Operation
· As provided in Chapter 18 of this bylaw, the DRB may impose limits on the
hours of operation of businesses in mixed-use developments to help maintain
use compatibility.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 2 - | 5
· The DRB may also impose limits on the hours during which deliveries may be
accepted and/or trash collection may be scheduled.
22.6.2.3 Outdoor Space. Residents of mixed-use buildings shall have reasonable access to an
outdoor space. This could be in the form of a private courtyard or door yard garden, but can
also be in the form of an urban or neighborhood park that is within a five-minute walk.
22.6.2.4 Signs and Lighting. The location and design of signs and outdoor lighting is even
more important than usual in mixed-use developments. The DRB may impose limits on signs
and outdoor lighting that are more stringent than those established elsewhere in this bylaw to
ensure use compatibility in mixed-use developments.
22.6.2.5 Soundproofing. The DRB will require applicants to demonstrate that night-time
interior sound levels in the residential portions of proposed mixed-use developments will not
exceed 40 dBAL10.
22.6.2.6 Views. Dwellings in proposed mixed-use buildings must be designed to provide their
residents with views to the mountains, nearby open spaces, or attractive streetscapes. Designs
that feature views primarily of rooftops, parking areas, or service spaces will be rejected.
22.7 Outdoor Lighting. Chapter 24 of this bylaw regulates the intensity and type of outdoor illumination
that may be provided. Beyond those standards, design review will consider the choice of luminaires, pole,
pole bases, and other elements of the outdoor lighting system, which should complement and be compatible
with the other design features of the building and the site.
22.8 Signs. Architectural and site design must anticipate the need for signs as required by Chapter 25 of
this bylaw.
22.9 Site Planning. The functional aspects of site planning are covered in other chapters of this bylaw and
additional site design standards apply in many zoning districts.
22.9.1 Respect the Terrain. Consistent with the watershed protection standards of Chapter 29 and
the specific standards adopted in some districts, buildings, parking areas, and other site
improvements should fit the terrain, rather than the land being fit to the building.
22.9.2 Build a Strong Street Line, as Appropriate for the Area. Buildings, not parking areas, should
dominate streetscapes in the commercial and mixed use zoning districts, while an ample green
planting strip and buffer should be provided in the industrial zoning districts.
22.9.3 Leave Front Yards Open. Front yard (along the street) fencing is generally not permitted for
commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-family developments. The DRB may allow an
exception to this standard for industrial developments where it finds that the presence of hazards or
need for security outweigh the aesthetic value of an open streetscape.
22.9.4 Fencing and Screening. Where fencing is provided, it shall be of a type that is compatible
with the surrounding landscape and uses. Traditional fencing patterns, like stone walls or picket
fences, will be preferred. The DRB may permit security fencing of side and back yards where it is
necessary to prevent public access.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 1
Chapter 23
Landscaping
This chapter provides performance standards for the
landscaping of all development for which a discretionary permit
is required, including higher density residential, mixed-use,
commercial, industrial, and institutional developments.
These standards seek to:
▪ protect functional existing vegetation as development occurs;
▪ protect water quality by integrating landscaping with measures to control stormwater
runoff and erosion;
▪ limit runoff and allow for groundwater and wetlands recharge by maintaining
vegetated spaces in developing areas;
▪ protect urban wildlife habitat by requiring species diversity and vertical structure in
most landscaped spaces;
▪ ensure land use compatibility by requiring effective landscaped buffers between
potentially incompatible uses;
▪ create favorable microclimates and reduce energy consumption in developed spaces;
▪ complement other requirements of this bylaw, including the requirements for erosion
and runoff control, watershed protection buffers, the provision of neighborhood parks,
the provision of trails; and site maintenance; and
▪ maintain and enhance the appearance and character of individual developments and the
community.
23.1 Applicability – Landscape Plans
23.1.1 Do these standards apply to my project? These standards apply to all development for
which a permit is required.
23.1.2 How do these requirements interact with other requirements of this bylaw? Virtually every
development in Williston is required to provide open space. Some of that open space must be left
in its existing condition and some of it must be landscaped, as required by this chapter. Both types
of requirements may apply to the same development. Areas in which existing vegetation generally
must be retained are listed below. This chapter applies to all other open areas, including landscaped
buffers and setbacks.
23.1.2.1 Open Fields and Meadows. The annual mowing of open field and meadows may be
required by the DRB to preserve scenic views. Where mowing is required, the DRB may impose a
requirement that mowing take place after June 15 in order to protect nesting birds
23.1.2.2 Open Space Development.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 2
· Residential subdivisions in the ARZD are generally (there is an exception for
parcels under 10.5 acres) required to provide substantial open space, not all of
which will necessarily falls into one of the other categories listed here. This
required open space is generally to be left in the existing vegetation, but
certain exceptions may be required or permitted by Chapter 31, which may
also require the enhancement of existing vegetation.
· Residential subdivisions in the RZD and VZD may be required to provide
substantial open space, not all of which will necessarily fall into one of the
other categories listed here. This required open space is generally to be left in
the existing vegetation, but certain exceptions may be permitted by the DRB.
23.1.2.3 Watershed Protection. Existing riparian and wetlands vegetation is to be retained
within the watershed protection buffers required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
23.1.2.4 Wildlife Habitat. Existing vegetation is to be retained in habitat conservation areas
that are protected from development.
23.1.2.5 Woodland and Forest. Existing woodland and forest vegetation must be retained
outside any clearing limits imposed by the DRB.
23.1.2.6 Forest Management. None of the above preclude pruning, thinning, or the selective
harvest of trees in accordance with a forest management plan.
23.1.3 Must I submit a landscaping plan? Yes. All applications for a discretionary permit must be
accompanied by a landscaping plan, the required contents of which are listed in the Landscaping
Plan Checklist. This requirement does not apply to proposed developments in which no new
landscaping is required by this or other chapters of this bylaw.
23.1.4 Which landscape buffer requirements apply to which parts of my site? Front yard
landscape buffers are measured from the property line adjacent to the street and extend from one
side property line to the other side property line and cover the entire land area between the side
property lines. Front yard landscape buffer requirements and design standards supersede side
landscape buffers where they overlap. Side and rear yard buffers are measured from the side and
rear property lines.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 3
Landscape Buffer Requirement Diagram
23.2 Existing Vegetation
23.2.1 Can I clear an entire site of existing vegetation The clearing of an entire site of more than
one-half (1/2) acre at one time is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by
WDB 7.4-7.6. Vegetation must be removed from larger sites in phases. This may eventually lead to
removal of vegetation from an entire site, but note that WDB 23.2.2 requires functional existing
vegetation to be retained wherever possible.
23.2.2 Can I replace all existing vegetation? Existing vegetation that can effectively serve the
landscaping functions listed in the introduction to this chapter shall be retained to the extent
possible, while accommodating the permitted level of development. An application for a permit
may be rejected solely on the grounds that it fails to retain existing vegetation where that
vegetation can fulfill the functions listed in the introduction to this chapter.
23.2.3 Must I protect existing vegetation during construction? Yes. Existing vegetation that is to
be retained must be protected from damage during construction, as required by the Public Works
Standards. The landscaping plan must include a schedule showing that all measures required to
protect existing vegetation will be put in place before other construction activities begin. This
schedule may apply to the entire site or to sequential phases of construction.
23.3 Landscaped Buffers
23.3.1 Must a development provide landscaped buffers for adjoining uses? Table 23.A shows
where landscaped buffers are required. It also summarizes the principal standards for the design of
those buffers, which are set forth in detail below.
23.3.2 How wide must the required landscaped buffers be? Table 23.A establishes a minimum
width for landscaped buffers of different types in different situations. This minimum width may, in
some cases, be reduced by the inclusion of an earthen berm or screening fence, as provided by
WDB 23.3.3. The types of landscaped buffers are described below. The landscaping plan must
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 4
show the dimensions of the proposed buffer/s, including all crossings and inclusions; a planting
design and schedule appropriate for the proposed buffer type; and one or more typical crosssections.
Plant selection is subject to the requirements of WDB 23.7.
23.3.2.1 Watershed Protection Buffers. A watershed protection buffer required by Chapter
29 may be used as a landscaped buffer required by Table 23.A. Where the watershed
protection buffer consists primarily of marsh or open water, it shall be supplemented by a
Type III or IV landscaped buffer, whichever is most appropriate to the context, of at least
eight (8) feet in width.
DRB Discretion. ‘Context’ simply means the surroundings. Determining what type of landscaped buffer will be
appropriate in a particular context is an important exercise of discretion for the DRB, with the advice of the
advisory boards. The DRB and the advisory boards also have the discretion to determine whether or not a berm
and/or a screening fence are needed in a landscaped buffer, and to review the design of berms and fences.
23.3.2.2 Type I - Existing Vegetation. A landscaped buffer composed primarily of existing
woodland or forest that must be of sufficient height and density to provide an effective visual
buffer. Where this type of buffer is proposed, the landscaping plan shall include
photographic documentation of the buffer’s effectiveness. The landscaping plan shall also
propose supplemental new plantings where the existing vegetation is too thin to be an
effective visual buffer. This type of buffer must be relatively wide to sustain its habitat value
and to function as a woodland or forest that needs only minimal maintenance. Other types of
buffers may be narrower, but are assumed to require regular maintenance.
23.3.2.3 Type II - Dense Plantings. A Type II landscaped buffer must be composed primarily
of continuous dense screening vegetation that will grow to at least six (6) feet in height. The
screening vegetation or hedge must be supplemented, on the exterior side, by a Type III or
IV landscaped buffer, whichever is most appropriate to the context, of at least (8) feet in
width. This type of buffer is most appropriate in re-development projects where space is
limited. The buffer width reduction provided for in WDB 23.3.3 shall be given where the
DRB requires a berm or fence.
23.3.2.4 Type III – Informal Plantings. A Type III landscaped buffer must be composed of a
planted area that includes a ground cover, a partial understory of shrubs and small trees, and
major trees. The minimum density of planting per 100 feet of buffer shall be a full ground
cover, two major trees, three ornamental or understory trees, and any combination of
shrubbery or flower beds that occupies at least 50% of the area at the time of planting. This
type of buffer can be used in many circumstances. The DRB may require an earthen berm, a
screening fence or wall, and/or additional plant materials where the uses being separated are
substantially different in intensity. The buffer width reduction provided for in WDB 23.3.3
shall be given where the DRB requires a berm or fence.
23.3.2.5 Type IV – Formal Plantings. A Type IV landscaped buffer is a park-like landscaped
area that includes a ground cover of turf and major trees. It may also include ornamental
trees, shrubs, flowers, and planters. Plantings are usually evenly distributed, although an
artistic departure from pattern may be permitted. The minimum density of planting per 100
feet of buffer shall be: a full ground cover of turf and three major trees. This type of buffer is
most appropriate between uses of similar intensity or along public ways. It does not include
a berm or a fence.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 5
23.3.3 Will screening berms or fences be required? Can a screening berm or fence be used to
reduce the width of a required buffer? In some cases.
23.3.3.1 Earthen Berms. An earthen berm may be required to increase the effectiveness of a
landscaped buffer for outdoor storage and/or work areas, including areas where trucks or
heavy machinery will be parked. The landscaping plan shall show the contours of the
proposed berm and one or more cross-sections detailing its construction. The required buffer
width may be reduced by the height of the berm, but not by more than 25%.
· Berms should not ordinarily be more than six feet in height. The DRB may,
however, permit a higher berm where physical characteristics of the site, like
grade changes, warrant it.
· No berm shall have a slope greater than 3:1, except where a retaining wall is
used.
· Retaining walls shall be constructed of, or faced with timber, native or cast
stone, or masonry that matches or complements buildings on the site.
· Retaining walls should ordinarily face inward, away from public ways. The
DRB may, however, permit an exception where an outward-facing retaining
wall results in less grading.
· Plans calling for retaining walls that are four feet or more in height shall be
accompanied by engineering specifications demonstrating that the proposed
retaining walls are capable of bearing the anticipated load.
23.3.3.2 Screening Fences. An opaque fence may be required to increase the effectiveness of
a landscaped buffer for outdoor storage and/or work areas, including areas where trucks or
heavy machinery will be parked. The landscaping plan shall show the location of the
screening fence and provide one or more elevations detailing its construction. The buffer’s
width may be reduced by the height of the fence, but not by more than 25%. The height and
design of a screening fence is subject to design review and approval by the DRB. Fence
materials, patterns, and colors should match or complement the materials, architectural
details, and colors used on buildings on the site.
23.3.4 Are any impervious surfaces permitted in landscaped buffers? Yes.
23.3.4.1 Crossings. Landscaped buffers may be crossed by driveways, roads, sidewalks,
trails, and utility lines, including necessary risers and boxes, serving the development. The
width of these crossings will necessarily vary with the scale and nature of the development,
but should be minimized.
23.3.4.2 Sidewalks/Trails. Sidewalks and trails may run within and parallel to a landscaped
buffer. The width of the sidewalk or trail shall not, however, be counted as part of the width
of the buffer.
23.3.4.3 Light Standards. The bases of standards for approved outdoor lighting may be
placed in a landscaped buffer.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 6
23.3.4.4 Miscellaneous. The base of a permitted free-standing or directional sign may be
placed in a landscaped buffer. Landscaped buffers may also include retaining walls, planters,
minor impervious surfaces that are part of runoff and erosion control works; and sculptures
or other works of art.
23.3.5 Do landscaped buffer requirements eliminate setback requirements? Where they are
required, they eliminate side and rear setbacks, but do not eliminate front setbacks. Landscaped
buffers replace rear and side yard requirements for uses other than one and two family dwellings.
Front setback requirements vary with the type of street and may be found in the chapters
establishing the individual zoning districts.
23.3.6 Should landscaped buffers be used as part of development’s stormwater management
system? Required landscaped buffers must function as part of the development’s stormwater
management system wherever feasible. See WDB 29.5 and other provisions of Chapter 29 of this
bylaw concerning the role of vegetation in stormwater management.
23.4 Landscaped Screening Utility installations, mechanical equipment, solid waste containers, and the
like must be fully screened from view from neighboring properties and public ways.
23.4.1. How should screening be provided? Screening for utility installations, mechanical
equipment, solid waste containers, and the like must include a dense evergreen hedge and other
plant materials that are at least five (5) feet deep. The DRB may permit an exception to this
standard where space constraints prevent provision of an adequate hedge. Where such an exception
is made, screening must be accomplished using a fence or wall that complies with WDB 23.4.2.
23.4.2 Will more screening ever be required? Possibly. The DRB may require that a berm, fence,
or wall be used supplement the landscaped screening. Fence or wall materials, patterns, and colors
must match or complement the materials, architectural details, and colors used on buildings on the
site.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 7
Table 23.A - Landscaped Buffer Matrix
--------------------------------- Minimum Buffer Width ---------------------------
use providing buffer adjoining use Type I(1) Type II(2) Type III(3) Type IV(3)
open space residential, ARZD Any other use Open space developments must provide ample buffers. See Chapters 31and 39 of this bylaw.
other residential subdivisions, agriculture/conserved lands 50 feet not permitted 36 feet not permitted
one and two family dwellings open space residential 50 feet not permitted 9 feet not permitted
other residential subdivisions 50 feet not permitted 9 feet 9 feet
higher density residential 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 23 feet
mixed use, including residential 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
retail/service commercial 50 feet 13 feet 27 feet 36 feet
heavy commercial/industrial (4) 50 feet 13 feet 36 feet not permitted
public ways See the dimensional standards for your zoning district. See also Chapter 26 - Street Trees.
higher density residential agriculture/conserved lands 50 feet not permitted 36 feet not permitted
in the MDRZD or VZD open space residential 50 feet not permitted 9 feet not permitted
other residential subdivisions 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
higher density residential 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
mixed use, including residential 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
retail/service commercial 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
heavy commercial/industrial (4) 50 feet 13 feet 36 feet 36 feet
public way See the dimensional standards for your zoning district. See also Chapter 26 - Street Trees.
mixed use agriculture/conserved lands 50 feet not permitted 36 feet not permitted
including residential open space residential 50 feet not permitted 23 feet not permitted
other residential subdivisions 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
higher density residential 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
mixed use, including residential 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 8
Table 23.A, continued --------------------------------- Minimum Buffer Width ---------------------------
neighbor Type I(1) Type II(2) Type III(3) Type IV(3)
retail/service commercial 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
heavy commercial/industrial (4) 50 feet 13 feet 27 feet 36 feet
public way See the dimensional standards for your zoning district. See also Chapter 26 - Street Trees.
retail/service commercial Agriculture/conserved lands 50 feet not permitted 36 feet not permitted
open space residential 50 feet not permitted 23 feet not permitted
other residential subdivisions 50 feet 13 feet 27 feet 36 feet
higher density residential 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
mixed use, including residential 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
retail/service commercial 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
heavy commercial/industrial (4) 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
public way See the dimensional standards for your zoning district. See also Chapter 26 - Street Trees.
heavy commercial/industrial Agriculture/conserved lands 50 feet not permitted 36 feet not permitted
open space residential Open space developments must provide ample buffers. See Chapters 31and 39 of this bylaw.
other residential subdivisions 50 feet 23 feet 36 feet 48 feet
higher density residential 50 feet 23 feet 27 feet 36 feet
mixed use, including residential 50 feet 23 feet 27 feet 36 feet
retail/service commercial 50 feet 13 feet 23 feet 27 feet
heavy commercial/industrial (4) 50 feet 13 feet 9 feet 23 feet
public way See the dimensional standards for your zoning district. See also Chapter 26 - Street Trees.
(1) Minimum 50 feet width for Type I is based on typical tree height and reflects the protection of habitat values and low maintenance needs of remnant woodland or forest.
(2) Type II buffer heights are based on the width of a hedge plus an 8-foot planting strip. Type II is permitted only where space limitations preclude use of the other types.
(3) Type III and IV buffer heights are based on the maximum building height, or fractions thereof.
(4) All outdoor storage and work areas are to be treated as heavy commercial/industrial.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 9
23.5 Landscaping Parking Lots Parking lots are subject to the same buffering requirements as the
uses they serve. These standards call for additional landscaping within larger parking lots.
23.5.1 Is landscaping required within parking areas? Yes.
23.5.1.1 5% Landscaping. Parking areas that include more than 24 spaces shall be broken up
by landscaped islands or medians that occupy a minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking
area.
23.5.1.2 Rank Length No single rank of parking spaces shall include more than 24 spaces
without being broken up by one or more landscaped islands or medians.
23.5.1.3 Shade Trees. Parking lot landscaping shall include large high branching deciduous
shade trees that will help keep paved surfaces cool by creating a canopy that is as continuous
as possible over the parking area.
23.5.1.4 Soil Volume. Landscaped islands and medians must have an uncompacted soil
volume sufficient to support long-term health of the proposed plant materials. The DRB may
require the use of porous pavement and/or structural soils to help ensure the success of
plantings.
23.5.2 Should parking lot landscaping be integrated into the stormwater system? Yes. Wherever
feasible, parking lot landscaping should be designed to function as part of the stormwater
management system required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
23.5.3 What about snow storage and landscaping? Aren’t they incompatible? Landscaping and
snow storage can co-exist. Salt-tolerant plant materials must used in and around parking areas and
in the snow storage areas required by WDB 16.6. Plant materials selected for these areas must also
have a growth form that is not subject to, or that resists, the physical damage that can be caused by
snow moving equipment and the stacking of snow. See WDB 16.6 for more on snow storage.
23.6 Landscaping Setbacks from Roads
23.6.1 Is landscaping required along public and private roads? Almost always. Chapter 26 of
this bylaw requires street trees along both sides of new roads, public or private, and along the
existing road frontage of redevelopment projects. A landscaped front setback area is also
required in most zoning districts.
23.6.2 Are there additional landscaping requirements in the VZD? Landscaping must be
consistent with the historic character of the Village. See Chapter 42 of this bylaw.
23.7 Plant Materials
23.7.1 What criteria should be used in selecting plant materials? Plant materials should include a
variety of species (see WDB 23.7.3), that are:
· native to Vermont, where possible;
· exhibit Vermont fall foliage, where possible;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 10
· well-adapted (hardy) for the site;
· suitable for the functions the landscaping must perform; and
· that provide color throughout the growing season and into winter.
· Salt-tolerant species must be used near roads, parking areas, and pedestrian ways.
Which tree should I use? A useful guide to the selection of trees that appropriate for different functions
and sites is the Vermont Tree Selection Guide, a copy of which is available for review at Williston Planning.
23.7.2 Are the plants that may be used limited? Yes. The species listed in Table 23.B must not be
used.
Table 23.B – Prohibited Species
Common Name(s) Scientific Name
TREES
Norway Maple Acer platanoides
Amur Maple Acer ginnala
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
Black Locust Robinia pseudoacacia
SHRUBS
Japanese barberry Berberis thunbergii
Common Barberry Berberis vulgaris
Bush Honeysuckles (many varieties) Lonicera, spp.
Russian Olive Elaeagnus angustifolia
Autumn Olive Elaeagnus umbellate
Multiflora Rose Rosa multiflora
Common Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
Glossy Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula
Burning Bush Euonymous alata
HERBACEOUS
Celandine Chelidonium majus
Oriental Bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus
Flowering Rush Butomus umbellatus
Common Reed Phragmites australis
Goutweed Aegopodium podagraria
Garlic Mustard Allaria petiolata
Purple Loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
Pale Swallow-wort Vincetoxicum hirundinaria
Japanese knotweed Polygonum cuspidatum
Wild Chervil Anthriscus sylvestris
Yellow-flag iris Iris pseudacorus
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 11
23.7.3 What does a ‘variety’ of species mean? Species diversity must be maintained to ensure that
landscaping continues to function when one or more plant species are affected by a pest or disease.
No more than 15% of the plants (excepting turf grass and other ground covers) used on a site may
be from the same genus.
23.7.3.1 Green Ash. The use of green ash - which currently accounts for over 40% of all new
tree plantings in Williston – in required plantings is banned. The DRB may permit an
exception to this prohibition to support a particular landscape design concept.
23.7.3.2 Departures. The DRB may approve departures from this standard to support a
particular landscape design concept.
23.7.4 Are there specifications for plant materials and their installation? Yes.
23.7.4.1 American Standard. Plant materials shall conform to ANSI Z60.1 the American
Standard for Nursery Stock.
23.7.4.2 Size of Materials. The minimum size of new plant materials installed in required
plantings shall be as follows:
· large trees – 2 ½ inch caliper
· medium and small trees – 2 inch caliper
· shrubs, ornamentals – 2 gallon
Departures from these standards may be proposed, and approved by the DRB, for mass
plantings.
23.7.4.3. Soil Volume. The landscaping plan must demonstrate that there is an un-compacted
soil volume sufficient to support the long-term health of all plant materials. This standard is
especially important in urban parks and plazas, and in narrow planting strips. The DRB may
require the use of porous pavement and/or structural soils under adjoining paved surfaces to
help ensure the success of plantings.
Soil Volume? Recommended un-compacted soil volumes for trees are listed in Recommended Trees for Vermont
Communities.
Structural Soil? Structural soil is designed to provide adequate support for paved surfaces like parking lots and
sidewalks, while also serving as a suitable medium, for tree growth and health. Specifications for structural soil
are included in the Public Works Standards. For more information about structural soil, visit the Cornell
University web site: http://www.hort.cornell.edu/department/faculty/bassuk/uhi/
23.7.4.4 In Snow Storage Areas. Salt-tolerant plant materials must used in and around paved
areas and in the snow storage areas required by WDB 16.6. Plant materials selected for these
areas must also have a growth form that is not subject to, or that resists, the physical damage
that can be caused by snow moving equipment and the stacking of snow.
23.8 Landscaping Installation and Maintenance
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 3 - | 12
23.8.1 Are there requirements for the installation of landscaping? Yes
23.8.1.1 Supervision. Installation of landscaping in development containing more than
20,000 square feet of landscaping must be supervised by a landscape architect, a certified
arborist, or a certified horticulturist.
23.8.1.2 ANSI Standard. Trees and shrubs shall be installed in compliance with the current
edition of ANSI A290 – Best Management Practices – Tree Planting,
23.8.1.3 Distance from Curb. No tree may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees – 3 feet; medium trees – 4 feet; large trees – 5 feet (tree species are
identified as small, medium or large in Recommended Trees for Vermont Communities).
23.8.1.4 Other Utilities. Tree location must be coordinated with the location of light
standards and other overhead utilities.
23.8.1.5 Inspection. Landscaping is subject to the inspection requirements of WDB 7.1.7.
23.8.2 Are there landscaping maintenance requirements? Yes. Landscaping is a ‘required
improvement,’ as defined in Chapter 7 of this bylaw, subject to all requirements that chapter
imposes. See also the maintenance requirements of WDB 16.3.1.
23.8.3 Must new landscaping be watered? Landscaping plans required by WDB 23.1.3 shall
include provisions for the timely irrigation whenever it will be necessary to support newly-installed
plant materials. ‘Timely’ irrigation is once a week in any week during the growing season when
natural precipitation has totaled less than one (1) inch.
23.8.4 Must a maintenance manual be provided? Where there will be more than 20,000 square
feet of landscaping, the landscaping plan shall include a maintenance manual.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 1
Chapter 24
Outdoor Lighting
This chapter establishes standards for outdoor
illumination.
24.1 Scope and Purpose
24.1.1 What is “outdoor lighting”? Outdoor lighting includes any outdoor illuminating device, lamp,
light, reflective surface, luminous tube, or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for
illumination, decoration, or as part of a sign.
24.1.2 What is the purpose of these standards? The purpose of this chapter is to allow for outdoor
lighting that enhances the safety, security, and nighttime use of property while minimizing the
obtrusive effects of outdoor lighting on neighboring parcels, public ways, and the night sky. These
standards seek to direct appropriate amounts of light to where it is needed, when it is needed; to
increase the use of energy-efficient light sources; and to reduce the waste of light and glare from
overlighting and poorly shielded or inappropriately directed lighting fixtures.
Lighting Terminology
A fixture is the assembly that houses a lamp or lamps. It may include mounting brackets; a ballast; lamp socket; a
reflector, mirror, or refractor; lens, and/or a shield.
A lamp is the component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. One example is an incandescent light bulb.
A luminaire is a complete lighting system, including the lamp or lamps and fixture.
A lumen is a unit used to measure the amount of light emitted by lamps. For example, a basic 60-watt incandescent
bulb and a 15-watt compact florescent bulb both emit approximately 900 lumens when new. For the purposes of this
bylaw, the lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by the manufacturer.
A foot-candle is a unit of light intensity equal to one lumen per square foot. Foot-candles can be measured using a light
meter. Unless otherwise specified in this bylaw, foot-candles shall be measured horizontally at grade level.
A pole is a more or less vertical support that holds a luminaire at a specified mounting height.
24.2 Applicability
24.2.1 Does my outdoor lighting have to meet the requirements of this chapter? Yes. Unless it is
specifically exempted by WDB 24.2.3, new and replacement outdoor lighting must comply with the
standards of this chapter.
+
Fixture
=
Lamp Luminaire
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 2
24.2.2 Do I have to get a permit to install outdoor lighting? An administrative permit is required to
install outdoor lighting that is not exempted by WDB 24.2.3. The installation of outdoor lighting
without a permit is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement, as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
Outdoor lighting must also be shown on applications for discretionary permits, as required by WDB
24.3.
24.2.3 Are there types of outdoor lighting for which no permit is required? Yes.
24.2.3.1 Emergency Lighting. No permit is required for temporary emergency lighting used
by the fire, police, and public works departments or other emergency service agencies.
24.2.3.2 Residential Lighting. No permit is required for outdoor lights that are installed at one
and two family dwellings and that are rated at 1,200 initial lumens or less per lamp, as long as
the maximum lumen output per dwelling set by Table 24.A (5,500 initial lumens) is not
exceeded. Floodlights rated less than 1,200 initial lumens are included in this exception;
however, all floodlights must adhere to the installation guidelines of WDB 24.5.1.
What does 1,200 initial lumens actually mean? 1,200 lumens initial output is approximately equivalent to one
75-watt incandescent bulb or one 20-watt compact fluorescent bulb.
24.2.3.3 Holiday Lighting. Temporary, seasonal holiday lighting is not subject to review or
compliance with this chapter, if (and only if) the following conditions are met:
· Seasonal holiday lighting must not constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance to
neighboring properties.
· Seasonal holiday lighting may be displayed for no more than 60 days.
24.2.4 Are some types of outdoor lighting prohibited? Yes.
24.2.4.1 Uplighting. Lighting directed upwards (above horizontal) to illuminate flags, buildings,
signs or landscaping is prohibited. The only exception to this standard is that one U.S. flag per
parcel may be uplit with luminaires of less than 2,500 lumens total (all lamps).
24.2.4.2 Laser and Search Lights. Laser-source lights and search lights, sweeping or stationary,
are prohibited for all but emergency purposes.
24.2.4.3 Moving Lights. Flashing, flickering, moving, or otherwise animated lighting (other
than seasonal holiday lighting meeting the requirements of WDB 24.2.3.3) is prohibited.
24.2.4.4 Mercury Vapor. The use of mercury vapor lighting is prohibited.
24.2.4.5 Bands of Light. Lighting fixtures containing lighting elements that form a band of light
are not allowed. The use of internally illuminated bands of color and/or light on building
exteriors is prohibited.
24.2.5 Must existing outdoor lighting be brought into compliance when I apply for a permit? Yes.
Existing outdoor lighting that does not comply with the standards established in this chapter has a
right to continue as a nonconforming use. As provided by WDB 2.8, however, the DRB may
condition approval of a permit required by this bylaw on the removal of nonconforming outdoor
lighting.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 3
24.3 Lighting Plans
24.3.1 What must be submitted with my Discretionary Permit, Administrative Permit, or Sign
Permit application in order to approve my outdoor lighting? The lighting plans called for by the
Discretionary Permit Checklist must include a lighting plan that presents the information listed
here. Applications for administrative permits, including sign permits, that propose outdoor lighting
must include as much of the information listed here as is necessary to demonstrate compliance with
the standards of this chapter.
24.3.1.1 Lighting Levels. All applications must show the total lumens per acre or lumens per
dwelling in all areas that will be illuminated, including both existing and proposed outdoor
lighting. Lighting plans that are part of applications for discretionary permits must include a
point-by-point analysis of anticipated illumination levels in all areas that would be illuminated.
This lighting grid must be based on the proposed luminaires and their mounting heights. The
proposed maximum, minimum, and average illumination levels, and uniformity ratios shall be
calculated for each area proposed to be illuminated.
24.3.1.2 Lighting Locations. The lighting plan must outline the area(s) to be illuminated (thus
documenting the basis of the calculations called for by WDB 24.3.1.1), and show the locations
and mounting heights of all proposed luminaires.
24.3.1.3 Lighting Specifications. The lighting plan include the manufacturer’s specifications
for all proposed luminaires, There must be sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with
the standards of this chapter, including shielding details and initial lumen outputs.
24.3.2 May the Administrator refer lighting plans that accompany applications for administrative
permits to the HAAC for review? Yes. Where the proposed lighting has not been reviewed as part
of an application for a discretionary permit, the Administrator may refer that proposed lighting to the
HAAC for a review of its impacts on neighboring properties, public ways, and the night sky before
taking action on the application for an administrative permit.
24.4 Lamp and Fixture Types - Shielding
24.4.1 What types of lamps are allowed for outdoor lighting in Williston? The types of lamp
allowed include incandescent, compact fluorescent, metal halide, light-emitting diode (LED), and
high and low pressure sodium. As per WDB 24.2.4.4, the use of mercury vapor lamps is prohibited.
The use of other types of lamps may be approved by the DRB where it finds that they will comply
with the standards established in this chapter.
24.4.2 What types of lighting fixtures are allowed? Except where specifically exempted in this
bylaw, all lighting fixtures must be fully shielded. This means that the fixture is constructed so that
all the light emitted by the lamp (including indirect reflection off reflectors) is projected below
horizontal. Only low lumen lighting (less than 1,200 lumens per lamp) may be unshielded and Table
24.A sets a stringent limit on the total amount of light that can be generated by unshielded fixtures.
Where can I find fully shielded lighting fixtures? The International Dark-Sky Association (www.darksky.org) maintains
lists of manufacturers and distributors of fully-shielded lighting fixtures.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 4
24.5 Lighting Zones and Cumulative Light Output
24.5.1 Are there different lighting standards for different parts of Williston? Yes. This chapter
establishes somewhat different lighting standards for each of the four Lighting Zones listed below.
24.5.1.1 Lighting Zoning 1, which consists of the Agricultural/Rural Zoning District (ARZD);
24.5.1.2 Lighting Zone 2, which consists of the Residential Zoning District (RZD);
24.5.1.3 Lighting Zone 3, which consists of the Village Zoning District (VZD); and
24.5.1.4 Lighting Zone 4 – which encompasses all other zoning districts established in this
bylaw.
24.5.2 Are there limits on the total amount of outdoor light any one parcel can generate? Yes
Maximum light outputs, as measured in initial lumens per acre of surface to be lit or lumens per
residential unit, are specified in Table 24.A.
24.5.2.1 Nonresidential All non-residential uses of lighting must adhere to the lumen/acre
maxima of Table 24.A
24.5.2.2 Residential uses are allowed up to 5,500 lumens/residential unit, or the lumen/acre
maximum, whichever is less. Of the total allowable lumen output per parcel, only that portion
specified in the third column of Table 24.A may originate from luminaires that do not have fully
shielded fixtures.
Table 24.A Maximum Total Lumen Output from Outdoor Lighting
Lighting Zone Maximum Allowable Total
Lumen Output
Maximum Allowable
Unshielded Lumens
1 – ARZD
50,000 lumens/acre or 5,500
lumens/residential unit 4,000 lumens/acre of surface
to be lit
2 – RZD
100,000 lumens/acre or 5,500
lumens/residential unit 10,000 lumens/acre of surface
to be lit
3 – VC
100,000 lumens/acre or 5,500
lumens/residential unit 10,000 lumens/acre of surface
to be lit
4 - All Other
200,000 lumens/acre or 5,500
lumens/residential unit 10,000 lumens/acre of surface
to be lit
24.5.3 Are there any types of lighting that are exempt from total lumen/acre maximums? Yes.
Outdoor recreational facility lighting, temporary lighting for special events, and seasonal holiday
lighting are exempt from lumen/acre maxima, but this chapter establishes specific requirements for
those types of lighting.
24.5.4 Are there limits to how long my outdoor lights can be on? Yes, this is another way of limiting
light output. Unless otherwise specified in this bylaw - the hours of illumination for some specific
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 5
uses are addressed in WDB 24.7 - businesses must turn off outdoor lights, including those illuminating
signs, within one half hour after the close of business or 10:00PM whichever is later. Outdoor lights
may be turned on one half hour prior to opening. There are some exceptions to this standard.
24.5.4.1 Event Lighting. Recreational or social events requiring outdoor lighting may utilize
exterior lighting during the event or activity, but it must be turned off after the event ends.
24.5.4.2 Motion-Activated Lighting. Motion-activated lighting is allowed to be on at all times,
provided the lights are programmed to turn off no more than five (5) minutes following the
last detectable motion.
24.6 Luminaire Orientation and Mounting Height
24.6.1 Are there limitations on how and where I can place or orient outdoor lighting on my
property? Yes.
24.6.1.1 Shielding Must be Maintained. Luminaires must be installed so that the full shielding
of the fixture is maintained. A fixture cannot be angled so that light is directed above
horizontal.
24.6.1.2 Interior Orientation is Required. Light from outdoor luminaires may not be directed
beyond the parcel boundaries onto adjacent properties or public ways.
24.6.13 Floodlights. Floodlights or spot lamps must be aimed no higher than 45 degrees above
straight down (half way between straight down and straight to the side). Floodlight lamps may
not be directly visible from adjacent parcels or public ways.
24.6.2 Are there limitations on the mounting height of outdoor lighting? Yes. The mounting height
of outdoor lighting fixtures may not exceed 25 feet above finished grade. Except outdoor lighting
fixtures mounted on the façade of buildings described in WDB 24.7.4 may not exceed 15 feet above
finished grade, from which the DRB may allow an exception to this standard where the pole and
luminaire assemblies are more than 250’ from the nearest parcel boundary, even in the case of an
exception; however, no fixture may be mounted at a height greater than that of the tallest building
on the site.
* The average illumination of ground level areas shall be measured horizontally at grade level and computed only over the
area designated as being illuminated in the security plan. Average illumination shall not exceed maximums listed in Table
3 for each lighting zone.
** The average illumination level of vertical surfaces shall be measured at a height of 5 feet above grade and computed
over the area of surface designated to be illuminated in the security plan. Average illumination shall not exceed maximums
listed in Table 3 for each lighting zone.
24.7 Specific Outdoor Lighting Standards
24.7.1 Are there specific standards for the lighting of convenience store and gas station
canopies? Yes.
24.7.1.1 Lighting Level. Areas around pump islands and under canopies shall be illuminated
so that the minimum light level at finished grade is at least 1.0 foot-candle, but no more than
5.5 footcandles. Areas on the apron away from the canopy shall be considered parking lots,
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 6
and must meet the lighting standards for parking lots set by WDB 24.7.3. Where there are no
gasoline pumps, the entire apron shall be treated as a parking lot.
24.7.1.2 Canopy Lighting. No light fixtures shall be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy,
which shall be opaque and not illuminated. Lighting under canopies shall utilize flat lenses
and be fully recessed into the lower surface of the canopy or otherwise fully shielded.
24.7.1.3 Light Output. All lighting around pump islands and under canopies shall be included
in the total lumen/acre output cap set by Table 24.A.
24.7.1.4 Fleet Fueling Facilities. Fleet fueling facilities should provide motion sensitive
canopy and/or pump island lighting that does not exceed 5.5 footcandles, while otherwise
maintaining the same light level as a parking lot after business hours (see WDB 24.7.3.4).
24.7.2. Are there specific standards for the lighting of outdoor recreational facilities? Yes. A
variety of outdoor recreation facilities may be illuminated to allow nighttime use, including tennis
courts, ball fields, driving ranges, swimming pools, outdoor skating rinks, and ski areas. The
regulations in this section are intended to allow the necessary illumination of such facilities while
minimizing adverse impacts such as glare, skyglow, and light trespass on nearby properties.
24.7.2.1 Lighting Levels. The lighting plan for an outdoor recreation facility must demonstrate
that only the minimum level of illumination required for the proposed activity or activities will
be provided. The DRB may independently determine the minimum illumination level required
for any activity and impose that level as a condition of approval.
24.7.2.2 Internal Orientation. Fixtures must be mounted and aimed so that their beams fall
within the primary playing area and its immediate surroundings. the visibility of light sources
from nearby properties and public ways must be minimized. No direct illumination may be
aimed off the site.
24.7.2.3 Hours of Illumination. Lights on outdoor recreational facilities shall be turned off
except when the facilities are in use or being maintained.
24.7.3 Parking Lot Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting
necessary to ensure adequate vision and safety, and to prevent glare or direct illumination onto
adjacent properties or public ways.
24.7.3.1 Lighting Levels. Illumination levels in parking areas must meet the requirements set
forth for each Lighting Zone in Table 24.B. Parking areas in the ARZD shall not be illuminated
unless the DRB finds that specific conditions exist which make that illumination necessary. In
such cases, the lighting shall meet the standards for parking areas in the RZD.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 7
Table 24.B. Maximum Average Illumination and Uniformity Ratios Required for Parking Lots
in each Lighting Zone
* Average illumination shall be measured horizontally at grade level, computed over the area of the parking lot.
^ Uniformity ratio is a measure of the consistency of light levels across a given area. It is expressed as maximum
: minimum illumination levels.
24.7.3.2 Shielding. All lighting serving parking lots must be fully shielded. The DRB may
permit a limited exception to this standard in the VZD, as provided by WDB 24.7.3.3.
24.7.3.3 In the VZD. Alternatives to fully shielded lighting fixtures may be permitted in the
VZD in order to accommodate fixtures of a particular “period” design or architectural style,
but those alternatives must comply with this standard.
· If alternative fixtures are not fully shielded, the maximum initial lumens
generated by each fixture shall not exceed 1,200 (equivalent to a 75-watt
incandescent bulb).
· The mounting height of such fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet.
24.7.3.4 Hours of Illumination. Parking area illumination must be reduced by at least 75%
within ½ hour of the close of the business(es) the parking area serves. This reduced lighting
level can be achieved by turning off at least 75% of the parking lot lighting fixtures or by
dimming lighting levels by 75%. This standard does not require that lighting levels be reduced
below 0.2 footcandles as measured horizontally at finished grade level.
24.7.4 Building Façade Lighting. The lighting of building facades shall be designed to accentuate
the architectural features of the building and the building entry or entries. Lighting fixtures must be
located, aimed and shielded so that the light is directed downward towards the ground and not onto
adjacent roads, sidewalks or properties. Lighting fixtures on building facades shall not be mounted
at a height exceeding 15 feet above average finished grade.
24.7.5 Pedestrian Ways. The lighting standards for pedestrian ways will generally be the same as for
parking lots. The DRB may, however, permit elevated lighting levels to highlight the entrances to
buildings or particular pedestrian spaces. The DRB may also permit elevated lighting levels in areas,
like passenger loading areas, where pedestrians and cars will be in close proximity.
24.7.6 Security Lighting. All night lighting for security surveillance will be minimized. The use of
motion-activated lights and alarms will be encouraged as an alternative. All applications for
discretionary permits that propose security lighting shall include a security plan which delineates the
Lighting
Zone
Average
Illumination* shall
not exceed:
Uniformity
Ratio^ shall not
exceed
Maximum
Illumination of any
point shall not
exceed
ARZD Parking lot
illumination
discouraged
Parking lot
illumination
discouraged
Parking lot
illumination
discouraged
RZD 1.0 footcandles 20:1 5.0 footcandles
VC 1.0 footcandles 20:1 5.0 footcandles
All Other 1.2 footcandles 20:1 5.0 footcandles
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 4 - | 8
area/s to be illuminated for security purposes and outlines the need for and purposes of the security
lighting.
24.7.6.1 Referral. The Administrator may refer security lighting plans to the Williston Police
Department for comment.
24.7.6.2 Light Levels. Security lighting must not exceed the light levels established in Table
24.C.
24.7.6.3 Standards. Security lighting is subject to all standards, including shielding, light
orientation, etc. established in this chapter.
Table 24.C. Maximum average illumination levels for security lighting on horizontal (grade level)
and vertical surfaces
Lighting
Zone
Average* Horizontal
Illumination Level at Grade
Average** Vertical
Illumination at 5’ Above Grade
ARZD Discouraged Discouraged
RZD Shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles Shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles
VC Shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles Shall not exceed 1.0 footcandles
All Other Shall not exceed 1.5 footcandles Shall not exceed 1.5 footcandles
* The average illumination of ground level areas shall be measured horizontally at grade level and computed only over the
area designated as being illuminated in the security plan. Average illumination shall not exceed maximums listed in Table
3 for each lighting zone.
** The average illumination level of vertical surfaces shall be measured at a height of 5 feet above grade and computed
over the area of surface designated to be illuminated in the security plan. Average illumination shall not exceed maximums
listed in Table 3 for each lighting zone.
24.7.6.4 Perimeter Lighting. Security lighting designed to illuminate a perimeter of a property
(such as along a fence) must include motion sensors designed to stay off unless triggered by
an intruder located within 5 feet of the perimeter. Pole-mounted security lighting must be
installed no more than 10 feet from the perimeter of the designated area being illuminated, and
poles cannot be located outside the parcel boundaries.
24.7.7 Sign Illumination. See Chapter 25 of this bylaw.
24.7.8 Street Lighting. Street lights must comply with the Williston Public Works Standards.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 1
Chapter 25
Signs and
Public Art
This chapter establishes standards for signs. It
begins with a statement of purposes and
principles for sign regulation in Williston. A
list prohibited types of signs and an
explanation of permit requirements, including
the requirement for master sign plans,
follows. Standards for the permitted type,
number, size, and illumination of permanent
signs in each zoning district are presented in a
table and WDB 25.6 and 25.7. WDB 25.8
addresses temporary signs. The chapter ends
with standards for continuing use of
nonconforming signs and definitions of
‘community information center’ and ‘public
art.’
25.1 Purpose – Principles –Authority
25.1.1 What role do signs play in Williston’s landscape? Williston permits signs that serve the
public by identifying local businesses, providing directions, making people aware of regulations and
possible safety hazards, making people aware of community events and political messages, and
assisting town residents in the occasional sale or lease of homes and household goods.
What is a sign? For the purposes of this bylaw, a “sign” is anything that is intended to attract attention that is not
specifically excluded from this definition. This includes what people typically think of as signs, ranging from small “No
Parking” signs to large billboards. It also includes other attention getting devices or displays, including vending machines
that are visible from a public way; pennants and pinwheels that bear no message; and similar devices or displays.
Community information centers and public art, both of which are defined later in this chapter, are excluded. So are
scoreboards installed as provided by WDB 17.8.
25.1.2 What principles guide sign regulation in Williston?
25.1.2.1 Signs are Important. Signs that effectively serve the purposes listed above are an
important feature of the town’s landscape. They help people navigate through the community
and make people aware of local businesses, homes for sale or rent, the sale of household goods,
and community events. They also help make people aware of regulations and safety hazards
and provide a means of political expression.
25.1.2.2 Freedom of Speech. Federal courts have made it clear that signs are a legitimate
medium for political expression. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by these
standards may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial
copy. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial
message over any other non-commercial message. This provision prevails over
any more specific provision to the contrary.
25.1.2.3 Signs Have Impacts. Despite their importance in the town’s life, signs that are too
numerous, too large, poorly placed, improperly illuminated, or out of scale or character with
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 2
their surroundings will seriously detract from Williston’s landscape and economy. They can
block or diminish scenic views, obstruct views at driveways and intersections; distract
motorists; block pedestrian ways; hide architectural or landscape details that contribute to the
character of buildings, neighborhoods, and the town; create light trespass and pollution; and
project a sense of clutter and haste that is not consistent with either a healthy economy or a
healthy community life.
25.1.2.4 A Positive Contribution. Well-designed signs in the right locations can make a
positive contribution to Williston’s landscape, economy, and community life. Compliance
with these standards will ensure that they do so.
25.1.2.5 Location Matters. Different types, numbers, and sizes of signs are appropriate in
different parts of Williston and the standards adopted here vary accordingly.
25.1.2.6 Signs Require the Same Level of Planning and Design as Buildings. The need for
signs must be anticipated at the beginning of every project. A master sign plan is required for
all developments that could have multiple occupancies. Whether a master sign plan is required
or not, all new buildings and major additions to existing buildings must be designed with a
sign band or other definite locations for the placement of permitted signs. An application for
a discretionary permit is not complete if it fails to show how signs will be placed or posted.
Placement of Signs v Design of Signs. To be clear, WDB 25.1.2.6 does not require applicants to include a specific
number, type, or size of signs, or the design of individual signs in applications for discretionary permits. It simply
requires that the applicant show where signs may be placed on the site or on proposed buildings or additions. The
individual signs that fill those “blanks” will be separately permitted.
25.1.3 Under what authority does the town regulate signs? 25 V.S.A. § 2291(7) gives Vermont
municipalities the authority to:
To regulate or prohibit the erection, size, structure, contents and location of signs, posters or displays on or above
any public highway, sidewalk, lane or alleyway of the municipality and to regulate the use, size, structure, contents
and location of signs on private buildings or structures.
Note also that signs are “structures” within the meaning of 25 V.S.A. § 4411, which provides the
general authority for local zoning.
25.2 Sign Regulation by Zoning District. Because signs must be consistent with the purpose of each
zoning district, the type, number, height, and size of signs allowed varies among the districts. See Table
25.A for specific requirements for signs in each zoning district. Signs in VZD must also comply with the
Williston Village Historic District Design Review Guide. WDB 25.6 provides an explanation of Table 25.A.
25.3 Prohibited Signs. Some types of signs simply may not be placed or posted in Williston. Those types
of signs are listed below. Also, any sign that does not comply with the standards established in this chapter,
with any other requirement of this bylaw, or with an applicable, approved master sign plan is prohibited.
The placement or posting of a prohibited sign is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided
in WDB 7.4-7.6.
25.3.1 Are animated signs permitted? No. Animated, blinking, flashing, and moving signs or signs
that appear to move are prohibited. This includes any sign that interferes with, imitates, or resembles
an official traffic control sign, signal, or device, or attempts or appears to direct the movement of
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 3
traffic with motion or the appearance of motion. Holiday displays that comply with WDB 25.4.2.11
are exempt from this prohibition.
25.3.2 Are illuminated signs permitted? Illuminated signs are permitted in compliance with WDB
25.6.7 and Chapter 24 of the bylaw, but three types of illuminated signs are simply prohibited.
25.3.2.1 Beacons. The use of spotlights, searchlights, beacons, or similar lights that are
projected toward the sky to attract attention is prohibited.
25.3.2.2 Glaring. Any sign with lighting that interferes with the safe operation of motor
vehicles or bicycles or that unnecessarily trespasses on neighboring properties is prohibited.
25.3.2.3 Internally Illuminated. With the exception of the limited use of illuminated window
signs, internally illuminated signs are prohibited. This prohibition includes “LED
readerboard” signs that are often used to display changeable copy like announcements and
gasoline prices.
25.3.3 Are off-premises signs permitted? An off-premise sign is a sign that advertises a commercial
enterprise or event that is placed on a parcel of land that is not the same parcel where the enterprise
or event is located. Off-premises signs are generally prohibited, but there are three minor exceptions
to this standard.
25.3.3.1 Directional Signs. Off-premises directional signs may be permitted where a special
event is permitted under the provisions of the Special Events Ordinance as described in
Appendix E.
25.3.3.2 Product Advertising. Product advertising signs are “off-premise” signs and, thus,
prohibited. A limited exception for product advertising using temporary signs is provided by
WDB 25.8.
25.3.3.3 Off-premise agricultural signs. Signs placed in in the ARZD, VZD and RZD
advertising the sale of agricultural products in the ARZD, VZD and RZD. While state law
generally prohibits off-site signage, 24 V.S.A Section 494 (12) provides an exception as
follows:
Directional signs, subject to regulations adopted by the Federal Highway Administration, with
a total surface area not to exceed six square feet providing directions to places of business
offering for sale agricultural products harvested or produced on the premises where the sale
is taking place, or to farmers' markets that are members of the Vermont farmers market
association selling Vermont agricultural products.
Signs advertising farms, farmstands, and farmer’s markets that are members of the Vermont
farmers market association and that are located in the RZD, VZD and ARZD may be placed
off-premise, only in the ARZD, VZD and RZD, under the following conditions:
 Only one off-premise agricultural sign may be placed on any one parcel of land.
 Off-premise agricultural signs may not exceed four feet in height
 Off-premise agricultural signs may not exceed six feet in area and may be doublesided.
 Off premise agricultural signs must not be permanently anchored to the ground
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 4
 Off premise agricultural signs may not be placed more than 10 days prior to the
commencement of the sales activity they advertise and must be removed no more than
10 days following the cessation of such activity.
 Off premise agricultural signs must be set back a minimum of five feet from the edge
of any public or private right-of-way.
 No permit is required for the placing of such signs, but the property owner where the
sign is placed must give his or her permission for the sign.
25.3.4 Is product advertising permitted? Only in the limited way permitted by WDB 25.8.
25.3.5 Are pennants and similar attention-getting displays permitted? No. Pennants, strings of
flags, and other serial signs are prohibited.
25.3.6 May I place a sign in the public right-of-way? No sign shall be placed in a public right-ofway
except for the official signs permitted by WDB 25.4.4.8. Any other sign placed in a public rightof-
way is subject to immediate removal by the town or state and the enforcement procedures of WDB
7.4-7.6.
25.3.7 May I hang a sign on a lamp post or other streetscape feature? Complying official and
regulatory signs may be attached to light standards, bridges, and other functional features of the
streetscape, public or private, but only where doing so is consistent with WDB 25.3.6.
25.3.8 Are roof signs permitted? No sign shall be mounted on the roof of a building. Further, no sign
that is attached to a building may extend above the roofline. The DRB may permit an exception to
this prohibition for signs mounted on the sloping sides of gambrel or mansard roofs. Where such an
exception is allowed the resulting sign/s will be treated as wall signs, and as part of the development’s
overall sign area.
What is the roofline? For the purposes of sign regulation, this bylaw defines the “roofline” as the lowest point defined by
the eaves or, where there are no eaves or similar overhangs, the top of the wall.
25.3.9 May I hang a sign on a tree? No. Signs may not be painted on or attached to cliffs, boulders,
trees, or any other naturally occurring feature of the landscape. The administrator may, however,
permit an exception to this standard for building numbers and/or home business signs when no
reasonable alternative exists or the placement of a freestanding sign would result in the unnecessary
clearing of trees.
25.3.10 May I place as sign on an antenna or tower? No. Signs may not be attached to antennae or
towers that are regulated by Chapter 21 of this bylaw. See WDB 21.3.5.3.
25.3.11 May I use a parked vehicle to advertise my business? The use of an unregistered vehicle or
trailer as a sign is prohibited. The use of signs affixed to registered vehicles or trailers is also
prohibited. This prohibition is not intended prevent a business from painting vehicles that are
routinely used in the conduct of that business, but the administrator may require that existing parking
areas where such vehicles are routinely parked be brought into compliance with the landscaped buffer
requirements for parking areas that are adopted in this bylaw.
25.3.12 Unsafe Signs. The following types of signs are unsafe, by definition, and constitute a
violation of this bylaw that must be removed upon receipt of a notice of violation sent under the
authority of WDB 7.4:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 5
25.3.12.1 … any sign that interferes with drivers’ or cyclists clear and unobstructed view of
official traffic control signs and approaching or merging traffic;
25.3.12.2 … any sign that prevents drivers or cyclists from seeing approved signs on
neighboring properties;
25.3.12.3. … any sign with lighting that interferes with the safe operation of motor vehicles
or bicycles or that unnecessarily trespasses on neighboring properties; and
25.3.12.4 … any sign that obstructs a pedestrian way. At least 70% of the width of the
pedestrian way must be left open to passage when placing portable sign approved in
compliance with WDB 25.7.2.3.
25.3.12.5 Any sign that is determined to be structurally unsound or to present a hazard of
electrical shock will also be considered unsafe and subject to immediate repair or removal.
The Administrator will use the most recent edition of the Uniform or International Sign Code
as the basis for the enforcement of this standard.
25.4 Permit Requirements for Signs
25.4.1 Is a permit required for a sign? Usually, but it depends on the type of sign. WDB 25.4.4
exempts some types of signs from the need for a permit, but NOT from compliance with this bylaw.
An administrative permit is required for the placement or posting of all other signs.
25.4.2 Is there a special application form for sign permits? Yes. Applicants must use the Sign
Permit Application and Sign Permit Checklist provided by the town in preparing their applications.
25.4.3 Is there a fee for the placement or posting of a sign? The application fee set by the
Selectboard must accompany all applications for permits for signs.
25.4.4 What type of signs may be placed or posted without a permit? No review is required for the
placement or posting of non-illuminated signs of the types listed below or for the routine maintenance
and repair of existing signs. This exemption from the requirement for a permit does not, however,
exempt any sign from compliance with all other requirements of this chapter and this bylaw. Exempt
signs do not count as part of the total number or area of signs permitted by this chapter.
25.4.4.1 Building Numbers. No permit is required for building numbers required by
Williston’s Road Name and Road Location Numbering Ordinance. The relevant portions of
that ordinance appear as Appendix F of this bylaw. The placement of building numbers must
comply with the standards set by Table 25.A.
25.4.4.2 Changes in Copy. No permit is required for changes in copy that use the originally
approved font, size, and color of lettering or for copy changes to approved kiosks, bulletin
boards, or other community information centers on which the messages posted are expected
to change on a regular basis.
25.4.4.3 Directional Signs. No permit is required for the placement or posting of up to 4
directional signs that have an area of less than two (2) SF each and do not include a logo larger
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 6
than one-half (0.5) SF or a commercial message. See WDB 25.7.9 for additional restrictions
on directional signs.
25.4.2.4 Donor or Recognition Plaques. No permit is required for the placement or posting of
a donor or recognition plaque not exceeding two (2) SF on a permitted structure or sign.
25.4.4.5 Flags. No permit is required for the display of flags provided that:
 Each flag does not exceed 25 SF in size, and
 no more than four (4) are flown at any one time.
Proposed freestanding flagpoles must be included on the plans submitted for permit
approval.
25.4.4.6 Holidays.
 No permit is required for seasonal holiday displays that include no commercial
message or logo, that are not permanently attached to the ground or a structure,
that are removed after 30 days, that are comprised of parts which do not
individually exceed four (4) SF each.
 Signs that are temporarily displayed on town property for Williston’s
Independence Day (4th of July) celebration need not obtain a permit.
25.4.4.7 Memorial Signs. No permit is necessary for cornerstones or similar displays of the
names of buildings and their date of erection or for messages in memory of individuals or
groups that do not exceed six (6) SF in size, that are cut into a stone or masonry surface or that
are cast in bronze or a similar material, and that permanently affixed to an approved building.
25.4.4.8 Regulatory Signs. No permit is required for the placement or posting of a regulatory
sign placed by the town or the state. Regulatory signs may be placed in the public right-ofway
in accord with the Uniform Manual for Traffic Control Devices.
25.4.4.9 Special Events. An additional permit is not required for the placement or
posting of signs that are approved by a special events permit. The Administrator may
place limitations on the number and location of these signs, and these signs may only
be displayed for a maximum of 30 days. These signs are not allowed to be placed in
the public right of way.
25.4.4.10 Temporary Signs. There are different standards for temporary window signs and all
other temporary signs.
 No permit is necessary for the posting of temporary window signs that do not,
cumulatively, exceed 25% of the total window area, that are each less than four
(4) SF each in size, and that are removed or changed within 30 days of their
posting.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 7
 No permit is required for the placement or posting of other temporary signs that
have an area of six (6) square feet or less and are displayed for a maximum of
90 days per calendar year. The number of allowed temporary signs, whether or
not they are exempt from the requirement of having to file an Administrative
Permit, is regulated by WDB 25.8.3 Portable signs that are used on a regular
basis in the same location are not temporary signs. See WDB 25.7.2.3.
 Grand Opening Banner. Any business opening in a new location may place one
banner on the property where the business is situated for a period of up to 30
days, provided that the size of the banner does not exceed 24 square feet.
 See WDB 25.8 for additional restrictions on temporary signs.
25.4.5 What type of permit is required for signs that are not exempt? You must have an
administrative permit to place or post any sign that is not explicitly made exempt by WDB 25.4.4.
Some common questions about permit requirements for signs are clarified below.
25.4.5.1 Temporary Signs. A permit is required for the placement or posting of temporary
signs that are over six (6) SF in size or, in windows, over four (4) SF in size. This includes
temporary signs advertising a business while a permanent sign is being prepared.
25.4.5.2 Illuminated Signs. With the exception of regulatory signs posted by a public agency,
the placement or posting of illuminated signs is never exempt from the requirement for a
permit.
25.4.5.3 Master Sign Plans. Posting a sign in compliance with an approved master sign plan
requires an administrative permit, except for the posting of temporary signs approved by an
approved Master Sign Plan.
25.4.6 Are there signs for which discretionary review is required? Yes.
25.4.6.1 In the VZD. A Certificate of Appropriateness is required for the placement or posting of any
non-exempt sign in the Village Zoning District.
25.4.4.2 Developments with Multiple Occupancies. While the sign itself will not require a
discretionary permit, the placement or posting of a new sign in an existing development that has, or
reasonably could have, multiple occupancies will not be permitted until a master sign plan has been
approved for that development, as provided by WDB 25.5. The administrator may permit the
temporary placement or posting of a single sign of no more than 16 SF in size for a new tenant
pending the approval of a master sign plan, with no such permit running for more than 180 days.
Failure to obtain approval of a master sign plan within 180 days will void that permit and immediate
removal of the sign will be required. The replacement of an existing sign with a sign of the same size
or smaller in the same location will not trigger the requirement for a master sign plan.
25.5 Master Sign Plans
25.5.1 Are master sign plans required for new developments? A proposed master sign plan must be
submitted with the application for a discretionary permit for any development that will, or may
reasonably be expected to, have multiple occupancies.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 8
25.5.2 Are master sign plans required for existing developments? A proposed master sign plan must
be submitted and approved by the DRB before any new sign for which a permit is required may be
posted in any existing development that has, or may reasonably be expected to have, multiple
occupancies.
25.5.3 What should be included in a proposed master sign plan? Everything required by the Master
Sign Plan Checklist. Master sign plans must anticipate all permanent and temporary signs, including
seasonal banners and portable signs like sandwich boards, except for signs that are exempt under
WDB 25.4
25.5.4 How are master sign plans reviewed? Review of a proposed master sign plan will ordinarily
be combined with the review of an application for a discretionary permit. Existing uses may,
however, need to secure approval of a master sign plan to permit new signs. In such cases, the DRB
will review the proposed master sign plan following the procedure for the review of an application
for a discretionary permit.
25.5.5 Can a master sign plan permit more or larger signs on my property? Possibly. An applicant
may propose, and the DRB may approve, a master sign plan that permits some variation from these
standards. Where such a variation is permitted, the DRB must make a specific written finding that
the variation is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the purpose and principles for sign
regulation established in this chapter. While a Master Sign Plan that includes more or larger signs
than are allowed by these standards can be approved by the DRB, signs proposed under a Master
Sign Plan must adhere to all other standards of this chapter, including but not limited to maximum
height, setbacks, and illumination.
25.6 Basic Sign Standards. Basic standards for the permitted types of signs are set in Table 25.A.
Additional explanations and more detailed standards are provided here and in WDB 25.7.
25.6.1 Is the number of signs that may be placed or posted on a site limited? Yes. See Table 25.A
for limitations on the number of permanent signs. In some cases, that table specifies the maximum
number of signs permitted on a lot. In other cases, it specifies a number of signs permitted per point
of access or a number of signs permitted per building entrance or occupancy. No maximum number
is specified for permanent wall or window signs, the extent of which is limited by the total sign area
requirement of Table 25.A.
25.6.1.1 Signs Per Building. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “building entrance”
includes only principal entrances to a building or to parts of a building that has multiple
occupancies. It does not include emergency exits, loading doors, or any entrance to which
public access is restricted.
25.6.1.2 Signs Per Point of Access. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “point of access”
includes only widely spaced principal entrances from a road or path to a development. It does
not include emergency or service drives, nor does it include points-of-access that are less than
330 feet apart.
25.6.2 Is the total area of signs that may be placed or posted on a property limited? Yes. The
combined area of all signs, excluding the signs that are exempted by WDB 25.4 and special events
signs, must fall within the total sign area indicated for the zoning district in Table 25.A.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 9
25.6.3 Is the area of individual signs limited? Yes. Table 25.A sets maximum areas for most
individual signs.
25.6.4 How is sign area measured? The area of a sign is measured in square feet (SF) as the area
within the smallest regular geometric shape - circle, rectangle, square, or triangle - that can be drawn
around the copy of the sign, including logos, graphics, and all other contents, and the background on
which that copy is displayed. The area of a freestanding, projecting, or suspended size is measured
for one face of the sign only. This means that if, for example, a freestanding sign can have an area of
16 SF, it can have two faces, one facing each direction, that are 16 SF each.
25.6.5 Are the dimensions of signs limited? Yes.
25.6.5.1 Height: Freestanding. Table 25.A limits the height of freestanding signs. The height
of a freestanding sign is measured from the highest point of the sign structure to the average
grade of the ground on which the sign is based.
25.6.5.2 Height: Other Signs: Signs that are attached to a building may not extend above the
roofline of that building.
25.6.5.3 Width. The total width of that portion of a sign structure that is more than three (3)
feet tall shall not be more than double the width of the sign itself.
25.6.6 Must sign structures conform to a construction code? Sign structures must comply with the
requirements of the most recent edition of the Uniform or International Sign Code.
25.6.7 Are there standards for the illumination of signs? Yes. In addition to the standards adopted
here, the lighting of signs must comply with the standards of Chapter 25 of this bylaw. Note
specifically that signs may not be uplit. External illumination must be directed downward onto the
face of the sign.
25.6.7.1 Internal Illumination. With the exception of the illuminated window signs permitted by
WDB 25.7.7, the internal illumination of signs is not permitted
25.6.7.2 External Illumination. External light sources must be fully shielded so as to direct light
only onto the sign face.
25.6.7.3 Backlit Illumination. Backlit signs must take the form of individually illuminated channel
letters or symbols. Again, the light sources must be fully shielded so as to direct light only into
the channels.
25.6.7.4 Time Illuminated. Signs associated with a specific use may be illuminated only from one
hour before that use opens until one hour after it closes. Other signs may be illuminated between
7:00 AM and 11 P.M.
25.7 Standards by Sign Type. The standards adopted here are in addition to those of Table 25.A and apply
where the type of sign for which the standard is set is permitted in the zoning district.
25.7.1 What are the standards for signs on awnings? The lowest point on any awning must be at
least 7 feet, 6 inches above the sidewalk or other surface above which it extends. Temporary signs
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - |
10
hung from awnings must maintain this clearance. Awning signs count toward the total number and
area of signs allowed.
25.7.2 What are the standards for freestanding signs? Freestanding signs are placed or posted on
their own structures. They are not attached to a building or any other structure and may be portable.
Different types of freestanding signs may be described in different ways, such as ground signs,
monument signs, pole signs, portable signs, etc., but they are all subject to the same standards, except
where this bylaw explicitly provides otherwise. Freestanding signs count toward the total number
and area of signs allowed.
25.7.2.1 Landscaping. Except as provided by Table 25.A for the VZD and for portable signs
regulated by 25.7.2.3, the base of all permanent freestanding signs shall be landscaped with
perennial and/or annual plantings. This landscaping shall be part of the landscaping plan
required by Chapter 23 – Landscaping, and is subject to all standards adopted in that chapter.
25.7.2.2 Type/Design. The DRB may require that a specific type of freestanding sign be used
in the village or – at the time it is reviewing a proposed master sign plan - in any development,
in accord with the principles of WDB 25.1.
25.7.2.3 Portable Signs. Portable signs, such as sandwich board signs, are designed for easy
placement, but given their usual use, they are considered permanent and included in the total
sign number and area.
 Portable signs may not exceed 12 SF on each face and must be removed when
the business they advertise is closed.
 Sandwich boards may take up no more than 30% of a pedestrian walkway and
may not be placed in a public right-of-way. Sandwich boards must be brought
inside when the business with which they are associated is closed.
25.7.2.4 Vending Machines. Outdoor vending machines and other sales displays function as and
are regulated as freestanding signs.
25.7.3 What are the standards for projecting signs? A projecting sign extends outward from the
wall of a building. It may be perpendicular to the building wall or at an angle, but its message is
intended to be read primarily by people approaching from one or both sides. Projecting signs count
toward the total number and area of signs allowed.
25.7.3.1 Distance from Building. No projecting sign may extended more than four (4) feet
beyond the building wall from which it projects.
25.7.3.2 Clearance above Grade. The lowest point on a projecting sign must be at least 7 feet,
6 inches above grade.
25.7.4 What are the standards for suspended signs? A suspended sign is hung under the ceiling of
an arcade or other overhanging structure, more or less perpendicular to the building. Its message is
intended to be read primarily by people approaching along the arcade. Suspended signs count toward
the total number and area of signs allowed.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - |
11
25.7.4.1 Clearance above Grade. The lowest point on a suspended sign must be at least 7 feet,
6 inches above the floor of the arcade, porch, or other pedestrian way over which it hangs.
25.7.4.2 Under a Ceiling Only. A suspended sign may not project outward beyond the ceiling
of the arcade, porch, or other pedestrian space in which it hangs.
25.7.5 What are the standards for wall signs? A wall sign is painted on or attached to a wall and
runs parallel to that wall. Its message is intended to be read primarily by people facing the building.
Wall signs count toward the total number and area allowed.
25.7.5.1 Newer Buildings. Wall signs must be placed within the sign band or other space
specifically designated for signs.
25.7.5.2 All Buildings. Wall signs must be placed so as not to block emergency exits, fire
escapes, or windows, or to obscure architectural features.
25.7.6 What are the standards for window signs? Window signs may be posted within the glass
area of a window. Table 25.A sets a limit on how much of each window signs may cover. That
total area includes both permanent and temporary window signs.
25.7.7 May some window signs be illuminated? Yes, but only in the commercial and mixed use
zoning districts. Illuminated window signs may be illuminated by LED, neon or another noble
gas, or any other form of illumination approved by the administrator. Only one illuminated
window sign per window, not to exceed two (2) per business establishment is permitted. No
illuminated window sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
25.7.8 What are the standards for directory signs? Directory signs are used when more than one
business shares a site or structure. A directory sign may be of any of the sign types allowed in the
zoning district in which it is located and must adhere to the size limit for an individual sign. One
directory sign is allowed at each point of access from a collector or arterial. Directory signs must be
approved as part of a master sign plan, as provided by WDB 25.5 and may be exempted from the
total area or number of signs allowed by the DRB in order to encourage good attention to wayfinding.
25.7.9 What are the standards for directional signs? Directional signs may be of any permitted type.
They convey directions (RESTROOMS →), regulations (NO PARKING), and similar information.
No permit is required for the placement or posting of up to 4 directional signs that have an area of
less than two (2) square feet and do not include a logo larger than one-half (0.5) SF or a commercial
message. These smaller directional signs are not counted against the permitted number or area of
signs, but must comply with the individual sign standards of Table 25.A. More than four (4) smaller
directional signs may be allowed by an administrative permit at the discretion of the Administrator.
Larger directional signs or directional signs featuring a larger logo or other commercial message may
be placed or posted only with an administrative permit. Larger directional signs are included in the
total number and area of signs allowed.
25.7.10 What are the standards for banners? Banners are signs whose message is painted or printed
on a flexible material. They are regulated as freestanding, suspended, or wall signs depending on
how they are used. Banners are generally temporary, but their regular use (on lamppost standards,
for example) may be approved as part of a master sign plan.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - |
12
25.7.11 What are the standards for recognition and donor signs? Recognition and donor signs do
not count against the overall permitted number or area of signs, but must comply with the individual
sign standards of Table 25.A.
25.8 Temporary Signs. Temporary signs usually announce events, like elections, meetings, or sales that
have a limited duration, but may be used for any lawful message. Portable signs that are used on a regular
basis in roughly the same location are not temporary signs.
25.8.1 Is a permit required to post a temporary sign? Maybe. As provided by WDB 25.4.4.10, no
permit is required for the placement or posting of a temporary sign that has an area of six (6) SF or
less. Also, temporary signs associated with events requiring a special event permit are regulated
through that permit, and do not need an administrative permit. An administrative permit is required
for the placement or posting of any other temporary sign.
25.8.2 What are the standards for the dimensions, height, and location of temporary signs?
25.8.2.1 How Table 25.A Applies. Temporary signs may be any of the types allowed in the
zoning district in which they are located and while they do not – with the exception of
temporary window signs - count toward the total number or area of signs permitted, they must
comply with the limits that Table 25.A places on individual signs of their type. Temporary
window signs are counted as part of the total area of window signs permitted.
25.8.2.2 Product Advertising. Temporary signs, including temporary window signs, may
provide information regarding product names, logos, prices, and names and/or logos of
financial sponsors. This information may comprise no more than 50% of the total area of each
temporary sign.
25.8.2.3 A Reminder. Temporary signs may never be placed in a public right-of-way or
otherwise violate the prohibitions of WDB 25.3.
25.8.2.4 Held Signs. Signs held or waved by a person are temporary signs, subject to all
requirements of this bylaw.
25.8.3 What are the standards for the number of temporary signs? Temporary signs that are not
associated with a special event permit are limited to:
 One (1) sign per public road frontage for parcels with fewer than ten (10) commercial
occupancies, credit will be given for no more than two (2) road frontages OR
 Two (2) signs per public road frontage for parcels with ten (10) or more commercial
occupancies, credit will be given for no more than two (2) road frontages.
25.8.4 What are the standards for the duration of temporary signs? Temporary signs as permitted
by 25.8.3 may be posted for no more 90 days in any one calendar year. Signs that will be posted for
more than 90 days (a subdivision sale sign, for example) are considered permanent and may be
placed or posted only with a permit.
Event? An event may include an election, a fund-raising campaign, a game, a meeting, or any other activity that has a
definitely limited duration.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - |
13
25.9 Abandoned and Nonconforming Signs
25.9.1 What is an abandoned sign? A sign is ‘abandoned’ when the use with which it was associated
ceases to exist.
25.9.2 Must abandoned signs be removed? Yes. An abandoned sign must be removed within 90
days after the use with which it was associated ceases to exist.
25.9.3 What is a nonconforming sign? A nonconforming sign is an existing sign that would not be
permitted if submitted for approval under this bylaw.
25.9.4 May nonconforming signs be maintained and repaired? Yes. Routine maintenance and
repair of nonconforming signs is permitted.
25.9.5 When must nonconforming signs be replaced with conforming signs? A nonconforming
sign may be used indefinitely, but must be removed, as required here, when circumstances change.
25.9.5.1 When Abandoned. As provided by WDB 25.9.1, any sign, conforming or not, must
be removed within 90 days of when the use it identified ceases. New signs must comply with
this bylaw.
25.9.5.2 Before a New Sign. No permit may be issued for a new permanent sign on a lot where
there is a nonconforming sign.
25.9.5.3 When Damaged. A nonconforming sign must be removed or brought into compliance
with this bylaw if it is damaged or destroyed and the cost of replacement or repair is 51% or
more of the sign’s value at the time it was damaged or destroyed.
25.9.5.4 Change in Use. A nonconforming sign must be removed and, if replaced, replaced
with a conforming sign when the use of the lot on which it is located changes.
25.9.6 Can a nonconforming sign be relocated? Yes, but only if the move is involuntary.
Involuntary relocation may be caused by street widening or another town, state, federal, or utility
action that is beyond the control of the sign’s owner.
25.9.7 Can a nonconforming sign be altered? Yes, but only if the change brings the sign into,
or at least closer to, compliance with this bylaw. A nonconforming sign that will not be brought
into full compliance may be altered only if its degree of nonconformity is reduced by at least
25%. Signs that are nonconforming due to their internal illumination must be brought into full
compliance with the sign illumination requirements of this chapter when they are altered in any
way that requires a permit. This means that a permit to change the panel or copy on an internallyilluminated
sign will not be issued unless the internal illumination of the sign is eliminated. By
January 1, 2025, all internally illuminated signs must either be removed, discontinued, or brought
into compliance with the town’s regulations for the illumination of signs.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - |
14
What does that mean? The degree of nonconformity is the extent to which a use is nonconforming. So, a sign that is
20 feet high instead of the permitted 12 feet, would have to be lowered by at least two feet (25% of 8 feet) for an
alteration to be permitted.
25.10 Community Information Centers
25.10.1 What is a community information center? Permanent community information centers that
allow the posting of information may be placed at municipal buildings and schools or on privately
owned properties such as a green, park, or plaza, or other publicly visible locations. They do not
count against the number or area of signs permitted by the bylaw if they bear only a small - maximum
one SF - logo of the development, business, or institution.
25.10.2 Are there standards for community information centers? Yes. Community information
centers may be provided in the form of bulletin boards, kiosks, or similar installations that are
installed in accord with the standards this bylaw sets for accessory structures.
25.11 Public Art
25.11.1 What is public art? Public art includes sculptures, monuments, murals, and other objects
of art that are not enclosed in a building or other structure and that will be visible from a public
way. Public art may also be incorporated into functional objects like fountains, benches, lamp
posts, and other streetscape features. Public art is often used to commemorate a person or event,
but may also serve no purpose other than public enjoyment. While public art can and should help
attract people to a place, it bears no commercial message, explicit or implicit.
25.11.2 Is public art regulated by the bylaw? It is not the intent of this bylaw to limit freedom
of expression, but the town does need an opportunity to enforce the distinction between public
art and signs. The town also needs to ensure that proposed public art does not constitute a hazard
to drivers, cyclists, or pedestrians. For this reason, proposed public art must be included in all
applications for discretionary permits and an administrative permit will be required for the
addition of public art to an approved development.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 15
VZD MURZD
for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB 42.A. for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB
38.1.3.2 and 38.1.3.3.
5% 8%
Awnings not permitted permitted only as approved in a master sign plan.
Building Numbers
maximum number 1 1
maximum size 2 SF 2 SF
maximum height as for freestanding signs as for freestanding signs
Directional permitted permitted
maximum number see WDB 25.7.9 see WDB 25.7.9
maximum size 2 SF 2 SF
maximum height 8 ft 8 ft
Freestanding permitted permitted
maximum number 1 permanent 1 per permanent per point of access
maximum height 8 ft 8 ft
maximum size 16 SF 24 SF
setback* 5 feet 5 feet
landscaping
Projecting not permitted permitted
maximum number 1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.3
maximum size 6 SF
Recognition permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4 permitted, WDB 25.4.2.4
Regulatory permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8 permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8
Special Events
Suspended permitted permitted
maximum number 1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.4 1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.4
maximum size 3 SF 3 SF
Wall permitted permitted
maximum number limited by maximum area limited by maximum area
maximum size 16 SF 32 SF
Window
Table 25.A Basic Standards for Permanent Signs for Nonresidential Uses. For temporary signs see WDB 25.4.4.10. For signs associated with residential uses, see WDB 20.20.
2 SF 2 SF
8 ft 8 ft
permitted permitted
as for freestanding signs as for freestanding signs
permitted permitted
see WDB 25.7.9 see WDB 25.7.9
permitted only as approved in a master not permitted
The building numbers required by Williston's Road Name and Road Location Numbering Ordinance are permitted in all zoning districts.
1 1
2 SF
10 feet 10 feet
base of permanent freestanding signs must
be landscaped as required by WDB 25.7.2.1
base of permanent freestanding signs must
be landscaped as required by WDB 25.7.2.1
2 SF
ARRZD RZD
for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB
31.1.3 and 31.A
base of permanent freestanding signs must be
landscaped as required by WDB 25.7.2.1
1 permanent 1 permanent
8 ft. 8 ft
16 SF 16 SF
for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB
39.1.3.2
5% 5%
Maximum Sign Area as a Percentage of the Area of the Street-Facing Wall of the Structure
24 SF 24 SF
10% coverage of the glass area facing
public ways, including both permanent
and temporary window signs
not permitted 10% coverage of the glass area facing public
ways, including both permanent and
temporary window signs
permanent freestanding signs will be
placed in greenbelt, additional landscaping
optional
permitted only as approved by a special events permit, see WDB 25.4.4.9
not permitted not permitted
permitted permitted
limited by maximum area limited by maximum area
not permitted not permitted
permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4 permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4
permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8 permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8
20% coverage of the glass area facing public
ways, inclduing both permanent and temporary
window signs.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: October 15 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 5 - | 16
Table 25.A, continued
Awnings permitted only as approved in a master sign pplaenrm. itted only as approved in a master sign plan.
Building Numbers
maximum number
maximum size
maximum height
Directional
maximum number
maximum size
maximum height
Freestanding
maximum number
maximum height
maximum size
setback*
landscaping
Projecting
maximum number 1
maximum size 12 SF
Recognition permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4 permitted, WDB 25.4.2.4
Regulatory
Special Events
Suspended
maximum number
maximum size
Wall
maximum number
maximum size
Window
* A greater setback may be required for signs near driveways and intersections. Signs may not be placed in a clear vision triangle.
for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB 33.A, 34.A, 37.A and 41.A
permitted permitted
see WDB 25.7.9 see WDB 25.7.9
2 SF 2 SF
The building numbers required by Williston's Road Name and Road Location Numbering Ordinance are permitted in all zoning districts.
1 1
4 SF 4 SF
as for freestanding signs as for freestanding signs
IZDE, IZDW all other commercial zoning districts
for nonresidential uses permitted by WDB
8% 8%
Maximum Sign Area as a Percentage of the Area of the Street-Facing Wall of the Structure
12 ft 12 ft
32 SF 32 SF
5 feet 5 feet
8 ft 8 ft
permitted permitted
1 per point of access 1 per point of access
permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4 permitted, see WDB 25.4.2.4
permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8 permitted, see WDB 25.4.4.8
permitted only as approved by a special events permit, see WDB 25.4.4.9
permitted permitted
base of permanent freestanding signs must
be landscaped as required by WDB 25.7.2.1
base of permanent freestanding signs must
be landscaped as required by WDB 25.7.2.1
permitted permitted
1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.3
12 SF
24 SF 24 SF
20% coverage of the glass area facing
public ways, including both permanent
and temporary window signs
25% coverage of the glass area facing public
ways, including both permanent and
temporary window signs
1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.4 1 per building entrance, as per WDB 25.7.4
3 SF 3 SF
limited by maximum area limited by maximum area
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 6 - | 1
Chapter 26
Street Trees
Street trees are required along most new roads and for many
re-development projects. This chapter sets standards for their
installation.
26.1 Purpose - Applicability
26.1.1 What is the purpose of these standards? Street trees provide urban forestry benefits
including improved air quality, reduced energy costs due to shading and cooling, traffic calming,
reduced stormwater runoff and soil erosion, enhanced wildlife habitat, and increased property
values. Beyond promoting these benefits, these standards will:
· increase and maintain species diversity in Williston’s street tree population;
· ensure that the trees selected are appropriate to site conditions, taking into
account soil type, drainage, rooting space, salt exposure, and the location of
utilities;
· ensure that the installation of street trees is done in a manner that ensures their
long-term health;
· provide for the maintenance of street trees following their installation;
· protect existing street trees as development occurs; and
· maintain and enhance the appearance and character of neighborhoods and the
community.
26.1.2 Must street trees be provided in my project? Probably. These standards apply to all
development for which a discretionary permit is required. Street trees are required along both sides
of new roads, public or private. They are also required along the existing road frontage of redevelopment
projects. There are two possible exceptions to this requirement.
26.1.2.1 Existing Woods. The DRB may waive this chapter’s requirement for street trees
where a road passes through existing woods and for open space developments in which
formal planting plans are inappropriate.
26.1.2.2 Scenic Vistas. The DRB may also, with the advice of the Conservation
Commission, waive the requirement for street trees to preserve a scenic vista.
26.1.3 How do these requirements interact with other requirements of this bylaw? Street tree
plantings may be considered a Type IV Buffer as described in WDB 23.3 and may, therefore, fulfill
a portion of a development’s overall landscaping requirements. Street trees must be shown on the
landscaping plan required in WDB 23.1.3 and on the runoff and erosion control plans required by
WDB 29.4.1.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 6 - | 2
26.2 Planting Strip Design
26.2.1 Are there standards for design of the planting strip in which trees are to be installed? Yes.
The following standards must be met when planning for installation of new street trees. Sample
cross sections of planting strips are provided in the Public Works Standards.
26.2.1.1 Location of Planting Strip. Along public roads, the planting strip will be in the
right-of-way, as shown in the Public Works Standards. Along private roads, the planting
strip shall parallel the road. The DRB, with the advice of the DPW, may permit or require an
exception to this standard where the terrain, the location of utilities, or other physical
constraints necessitate a separation of the road and the planting strip.
26.2.1.2 Planting Strip Width/Depth. Street trees shall be planted in a planting strip that is at
least eight (8) feet in width and has at least three (3) feet of un-compacted soil depth.
Planting strips shall be continuous wherever possible. Tree pits or wells are allowed only in
areas of intensive commercial and mixed use development where the Town Plan encourages
wide sidewalks or where there is no reasonable alternative. Standards for the use of tree pits
appear in WDB 26.3.
Vermont Tree Selection Guide is a publication of the Vermont Urban and Community Forestry Program that
provides town guidance in selecting appropriate street and landscape trees. Copies of the guide can be reviewed
at Williston Planning.
26.2.1.3 Spacing: Residential Developments. In residential developments, street trees are to
be planted so that there is at least one tree on the frontage of each lot, or at least one tree
every 40 feet along the road, whichever results in the greater number of trees.
26.2.1.4 Spacing: Other Developments. In nonresidential developments, street trees must be
planted at least every 40 feet along the road.
26.2.1.5 Distance from Curb. No tree may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees – 3 feet; medium trees – 4 feet; large trees – 5 feet (tree species are
identified as small, medium or large in Vermont Tree Selection Guide).
26.2.1.6 Utilities. No street tree shall be planted under or within 20 lateral feet of any
overhead utility wire, or over or within eight (8) lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. No trees shall be planted without prior
notification of Dig Safe.
26.2.1.7 Corners and Intersections. No trees shall be planted within the clear vision triangles
required by this bylaw.
26.3 Tree Pit Design
26.3.1 Are there standards for design of the tree pits? Yes. As provided by WDB 26.2, tree pits or
wells may be used in areas of intensive commercial or mixed use development or where a continuous
planting strip is not feasible. Tree pits or wells can be placed at grade or incorporated into raised
planters, See the Public Works Standards for typical installations.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 6 - | 3
26.3.2 How much soil must be provided in tree pits or wells? Individual trees must be planted in at
least the minimum volume of un-compacted soil called for in Recommended Trees for Vermont
Communities. Where possible, individual tree pits or wells must also be connected to a continuous
channel of structural soil under the adjoining pavement.
26.3.3 What is structural soil? Are there any exceptions to its use? Structural soil is designed to
provide adequate support for paved surfaces like parking lots and sidewalks, while also serving as a
suitable medium, for tree growth and health. Specifications for structural soil are included in the
Public Works Standards. An exception to the requirement for the use of structural soils may be
permitted where all of the surrounding paved surfaces are porous.
Structural Soils. For more information, see the structural Soil specifications on the Cornell University web site
(http://www.hort.cornell.edu/department/faculty/bassuk/uhi/).
26.3.4 Are there standards for tree grates? Yes. Where tree pits or wells are placed at grade, tree
grates shall be provided as specified in the Public Works Standards. Tree grates must be installed
flush with the adjoining surface so as to not limit accessibility or create a safety hazard.
26.4 Street Tree Selection
26.4.1 Are there requirements for tree selection in terms of species, size, quality and diversity?
Yes, the following standards must be met when selecting street trees for installation.
26.4.1.1 Permitted Species. Street trees will ordinarily be hardwood shade trees, selected
from those listed in Recommended Trees for Vermont Communities. The DRB may approve
smaller ornamental trees for use near intersections or at other locations where a large tree is
inappropriate. Coniferous trees should be avoided, but may be permitted by the DRB where
they support a particular design theme or contribute to required buffering or screening.
26.4.1.2 Prohibited Species. The following tree species are not permitted as street trees due
to their invasive tendencies: Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia), Amur Maple (Acer
ginnala), Norway Maple (Acer platanoides), Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima) and Amur
Corktree (Phellodendron amurense). The use of Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica) is not
permitted without an exception from the DRB due to an existing overabundance of this
species in Williston.
26.4.1.3 Species Selection. The following factors should be taken into consideration when
selecting appropriate tree species for individual sites: available soil volume or rooting space;
exposure to salt; soil type, pH, and drainage; and the distance to intersections and utilities.
26.4.1.4 Species Diversity. If more than 35 street trees are required, no more than 15% shall
be from the same genus. If fewer than 35 street trees are required, no more than 5 trees shall
be of the same genus.
26.4.1.5 Size of Stock. Street trees shall be of the following minimum sizes at the time of
planting: large trees- 2 ½” caliper; medium and small trees- 2” caliper.
26.4.1.6 Quality of Stock. All trees to be planted shall be well rooted, balled and burlapped
or containerized nursery-grown stock, free of injury, harmful insects, and disease. All trees
to be planted shall conform to the ANSI Z60.1 American Standard for Nursery Stock.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 6 - | 4
26.5 Street Tree Installation and Maintenance
26.5.1 Are there requirements for the installation of street trees? Yes. Street trees shall be planted
in accordance with the ANSI A300 Best Management Practices for Tree Planting. Planting
specifications are also provided in the Public Works Standards.
26.5.1.1 Supervision. If more than 10 street trees are required in a development, installation
must be supervised by a Certified Arborist. The Certified Arborist will provide a report,
including a completed Street Tree Post-Construction Checklist, to Williston Planning
verifying that trees have been installed correctly and as specified on the approved
landscaping plan.
26.51.2 Inspection. Installed street trees are subject to the inspection requirements of 7.1.7.
26.5.2 Are there landscaping maintenance requirements? Yes. Street trees are a ‘required
improvement,’ as defined in Chapter 7 of this bylaw, subject to all requirements that chapter
imposes. Street trees must be maintained (including irrigation) by the developer for a period of
three years following their installation. During this three-year period, any trees determined by the
DPW to be dead, dying, or in poor health shall be replaced by the applicant/owner at his/her
expense.
26.6 Protection of Existing Street Trees
26.6.1 Must I retain existing street trees? Yes. Existing street trees shall be retained wherever
possible.
26.6.1.1 Protection during Construction. Existing street trees must be protected from damage
during construction, as required by the Public Works Standards. The landscaping plan
required by WDB 23.1.3 must show all proposed tree protection measures and include a
schedule showing that these measures will be put into place before other construction
activities begin. This information must also be shown on a runoff and erosion control plan,
where one is required by WDB 29.4.1.
26.6.1.2 Documentation. The condition of existing street trees shall be documented with
photographs before an administrative permit is approved and construction begins. The
number of photographs the applicant must provide will be determined by the Administrator.
26.6.2 Can I transplant an existing street tree to a new location? Existing street trees may be
transplanted to new locations if they cannot be retained in their current location(s). Transplantation
of existing street trees shall be carried out when the trees are dormant (early spring or fall) and
must be supervised by a Certified Arborist. Transplanted street trees are subject to the same twoyear
maintenance period described for new street trees in WDB 26.5.2.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 1
Chapter 27
Conservation Areas
This chapter establishes standards that protect and
preserve significant natural, scenic, and fragile
areas.
27.1 Purpose – Authority
27.1.1 What are Conservation Areas? There are seven distinct Conservation Areas in Williston: 1)
significant wildlife habitat areas; 2) areas containing uncommon, rare, threatened, or endangered
species; 3) unique natural communities; 4) farmlands of local importance, 5) scenic viewsheds, 6)
special flood hazard areas (see WDB Chapter 28), and 7) streams, wetlands, lakes, and ponds (see
WDB Chapter 29).
27.1.2 What is the purpose of these standards? The protection of Conservation Areas will provide
significant benefits for soil conservation, water quality, groundwater recharge, biological diversity,
and the visual character that defines Williston. These standards will prevent incompatible
development from impairing the ecological functions of these areas and reducing the benefits they
naturally provide to humans and wildlife. This chapter establishes permit requirements and
development standards designed to minimize and avoid undo adverse impacts to these resources.
Development may be acceptable in Conservation Areas to the extent that it is compatible with the
goal of protecting the physical features, ecological functions, and biodiversity they provide.
27.1.3 Under what authority does the town adopt these standards? These standards are adopted
under the authority of 24 V.S.A. § 4302(c)(5), § 4382(a)(5), § 4411(b)(3)(F), and § 4418(1)(D),
which allow for the protection and preservation of significant natural, scenic, and fragile areas.
27.2 Applicability
27.2.1 What activities are subject to these standards? These standards apply to any development
that is located within the boundaries of one or more designated Conservation Areas and for which a
permit is required by this bylaw. The Administrator may refer any projects that require a permit to
the Conservation Commission for review and comment under these standards.
27.3 Permitted Uses and Exemptions
27.3.1 What uses are permitted in Conservation Areas? The allowed land uses are as provided for
in the underlying zoning district, but are subject to review procedures and development standards
provided in this chapter.
27.3.2 What activities are exempt from these standards? All development activities identified
as exempt under WDB Chapter 4 are exempt from review requirements and standards of this
chapter. Additional exemptions specific to each type of Conservation Area are presented in
WDB 27.5 - 27.9 below.
27.4 General Standards. These general standards apply to all Conservation Areas. Additional standards
specific to each type of Conservation Area are presented in WDB 27.5 - 27.9.
27.4.1 Do the general standards of this bylaw apply to development in Conservation Areas?
Yes. Development in Conservation Areas must, unless specifically exempted, comply with all
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 2
standards established in Chapters 13-29. In addition, development in Conservation Areas must
comply with all standards specific to the underlying zoning district where the property is
located. Where the standards adopted in this chapter and other standards established by this
bylaw differ, the most restrictive standard applies.
27.4.2 Landowners Right. Conservation Areas must be protected to the extent consistent with the
landowner’s right to beneficial use of his or her property. This means that if a property has only
Conservation Areas or has no other lands physically suitable for development, the Conservation
Commission and the DRB will work with that landowner to either effect a transfer of development
rights, as provided by Chapter 19 of this bylaw, or to reconfigure the development and/or designate
open space in a way that minimizes consumption of lands that should be protected.
27.4.3 Designate Open Space. Open space designation may be required for any development for
which a discretionary permit is required. Open space shall be designated and configured so that the
open space encompasses, to the maximum extent possible, Conservation Areas that are contiguous
to Conservation Areas on adjoining properties, and serves to limit encroachment into the
Conservation Area. Open space must be permanently protected using any of the three methods
listed in WDB 31.7.6.
27.4.4 Avoid Undue Adverse Impact. Alternative site designs may be required, alternative locations
for the development may be required, and the minimum amount of land required to be set aside as
open space may be increased, if necessary to avoid undue adverse impacts to Conservation Areas.
27.5 Significant Wildlife Habitat Areas (SWHA)
27.5.1 What are Significant Wildlife Habitat Areas (SWHA)? Those natural features that
contribute to the survival and/or reproduction of the wildlife of Williston and surrounding
communities. This shall include: (1) core habitat; and (2) wildlife connectivity corridors.
27.5.2 What is Core Habitat? A combination of several different wildlife habitat types combined to
form a unit of relatively continuous wildlife habitat. Areas characterized as Core Habitat generally
consist of relatively large forested areas that might contain a combination of early succession
habitats; forested riparian areas; wetlands and vernal pools; deer wintering areas (i.e. deeryards);
mast stands; ledge, talus, or cliff habitats; and habitat identified by the Vermont Department of Fish
and Wildlife as either significant wildlife habitat or necessary wildlife habitat in accordance with
10 V.S.A. Sec. 6086(a)(8)(A).
27.5.3 What is a Wildlife Connectivity Corridor? A route that permits the direct travel or spread of
animals or plants from one area or region to another, either by the gradual spread of a species’
population along the route or by the movement of individual members of the species. Generally,
such areas are characterized by undeveloped forested and riparian corridors, including forest cover
reaching to road rights-of-way, which serve to link large tracks of unfragmented core habitat. In
Williston, the corridor was designed to accommodate bobcat, fisher, mink, four-toed salamander,
wood frog, smooth green snake, and wood turtle.
27.5.4 What are the boundaries of the SWHAs? The boundaries of SWHAs are shown on the
official map titled “Significant Wildlife Habitat Areas,” which is available for review at the
Williston Planning and Zoning Office.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 3
27.5.5 What is the purpose of protecting Significant Wildlife Habitat Areas? This section
establishes development standards designed to: guide development in a manner that maintains large
blocks of forest and areas of contiguous habitat; protect distinct types of habitat required for
specific wildlife species; and, ensure the continued movement of wildlife species between
unfragmented blocks of forest and core habitat within the town and surrounding region.
27.5.6 What uses are exempted from these standards? Site work, structures, and/or impervious
surfaces shall not encroach upon designated SWHAs except:
27.5.6.1 Expansion of Existing Structures. The expansion of an existing structure provided
that the expansion, or the cumulative total of multiple expansions, does not exceed a total
footprint of 100% of the footprint of the existing structure.
27.5.6.2 Accessory Structures. Accessory structures to an existing permitted structure or
use shall be permitted within 150 feet of such existing permitted structure or use or placed
on existing maintained lawns or impervious surfaces, or within building envelopes and
roads and driveways, whichever is greater.
27.5.6.3 Fences. Construction of fences (i) used within cleared areas, or that enclose
existing cleared areas (e.g., clearings for lawns and gardens immediately surrounding
existing structures), provided the clearing occurred prior to [effective date of this provision]
or (ii) lower than 4-1/2 feet and that have at least 16 inches of clearance between the lowest
horizontal part of the fence and the ground, or (iii) that have minimum 16” x 16” gaps.
27.5.6.4 Alternative Energy. Any alternative and renewable energy installations.
27.5.6.5 Low Impact Clearing, Thinning, Grading, and Excavation. Low impact means less
than 1/2 acre.
27.5.6.6 Documentation of No Undue Adverse Effect. Other activities not listed here may
be exempted from these standards if a Habitat Disturbance Assessment in conformance to
WDB 27.5.7 indicates that the proposed site work, new structures, or impervious surfaces
will, because of mitigating factors, not result in undue adverse impact on the significant
wildlife habitat area.
27.5.7 Review Procedures.
27.5.7.1 Who determines if my project will impact a SWHA? All development located
within the SWHA, which is not exempted by section 27.5.6 or WDB Chapter 4, will require
a Habitat Disturbance Assessment (HDA) to be prepared by a qualified wildlife biologist or
other professional accepted by the town prior to Discretionary Permit or Administrative
Permit review.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 4
27.5.7.2 What must be included in a Habitat Disturbance Assessment? A permit
application shall not be considered complete until the HDA has been submitted along with
other required application materials. The Williston Conservation Commission shall review
each HDA and make recommendations to the DRB or Administrator. Unless waived by the
DRB or the Administrator, the HDA shall include the following:
· Habitat Inventory: An inventory of existing (pre-development) wildlife habitat found
on the parcel of land where the development is proposed, including the presence of
significant wildlife habitat, the specific types of habitat found on the parcel and their
relative importance to the various wildlife species that rely on that habitat for one or
more life-cycle function;
· Habitat Assessment: An assessment of the relationship of the habitat found on the on
the parcel of land where the development is proposed relative to other significant
wildlife habitat present in the town (e.g., does habitat found on the parcel provide for
connectivity between core habitat blocks; is the parcel located contiguous to other
significant wildlife habitat, or part of a core habitat block);
· Site Design: Identification of the distance of all proposed development activities,
including designated homesites and associated clearing, driveways and infrastructure
(e.g., septic systems) and areas of disturbance, from the significant habitat and, if
significant habitat is proposed to be disturbed, the total area of disturbance and the
total area of the remaining (undisturbed) habitat;
· Impact Assessment: An assessment of the likely impact of the proposed
development, including associated activities (e.g., introduction of domestic pets,
operation of vehicles and equipment, exterior lighting, introduction of non-native
species for landscaping) on the ecological function of the significant wildlife habitat
found on the site. This shall include an assessment of whether travel between areas
of core habitat will be disrupted; and
· Recommendations: Specific measures that would avoid or minimize the proposed
development’s impact on the habitat, including alternative site designs considered for
the project, alternative locations for the development on the parcel, and possible
mitigation.
27.5.8 SWHA General Standards. All development within SWHAs shall be designed to:
27.5.8.1 Minimize the fragmentation of forest cover and other relevant habitat
characteristics. All development in SWHAs shall be designed so that lots and building sites
are located to avoid, to the greatest extent practicable given site conditions and development
options on the site, impacts to significant wildlife habitat. Therefore, if a site on a parcel is
capable of meeting all the standards of this section, then that site will be given precedence
over other sites that do not conform.
27.5.8.2 Cluster development. Lots and building sites should be clustered to minimize
impacts to, and avoid encroachment and associated fragmentation of, SWHAs.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 5
27.5.9 Core Habitat Standards. All development within an area identified as Core Habitat shall
be designed to:
27.5.9.1 Minimize the encroachment of development into core habitat. Site disturbances,
the placement of buildings, and the extension of roads, driveways and utilities shall be
located as close to existing roads as is practical, given development options for the site, to
avoid encroachment into core habitat.
27.5.10 Habitat Connectivity Corridor Standards. All development within an area identified as
a Habitat Connectivity Corridor shall be designed to:
27.5.10.1 Minimize disruption and fragmentation of the identified corridor. Ensure that the
development will not prevent the continued use by wildlife species identified as being
dependent on the corridor (bobcat, fisher, mink, four-toed salamander, wood frog, smooth
green snake, and wood turtle) to travel between areas of core habitat.
27.5.10.2 Avoid Barriers. Avoid any placement of fences, walls, or substantial changes in
grade that would disrupt the movement of wildlife within the corridor.
27.5.10.3 Mitigate impacts. If the requirements of 27.5.10.1 cannot be met, then the
applicant shall mitigate impacts by restoring or enhancing woody vegetation cover in
portions of the mapped corridor that have been previously disturbed by clearing or similar
disturbance. Restoration and enhancement proposals must be approved by the Administrator,
and the restored or enhanced acreage must be included in a designated open space area as
described in 27.4.3.
27.6 Uncommon, Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Species (URTES) and Communities
27.6.1 What are Uncommon Species? These vulnerable species are at moderate risk of
extinction\extirpation due to restricted range, relatively few populations or occurrences (often 80 or
fewer), recent and widespread declines, or other factors.
27.6.2 What are Rare Species? These imperiled species are at high risk of extinction or extirpation
due to very restricted range, very few populations (often 20 or fewer), steep declines, or other
factors. Rare species face threats from development of their habitat, harassment, collection, and
suppression of natural processes, such as fire.
27.6.3 What are Threatened, and Endangered Species? Endangered and threatened species are
defined by both state and federal law. State law defines endangered species as a species listed on
the state endangered species list under 10 V.S.A. Chapter 123 section 5401 or determined to be an
endangered species under the federal Endangered Species Act. The term generally refers to species
whose continued existence as a viable component of the state's wild fauna or flora is in jeopardy.
Threatened species are defined in 10 V.S.A. Chap. 123 section 5402 as a species whose numbers
are significantly declining because of loss of habitat or human disturbance, and unless protected
will become an endangered species.
27.6.4 Are URTES located on my property? Known locations of URTES are shown on the official
map titled “Uncommon, Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Species and Communities,” which is
available for review at the Williston Planning and Zoning Office. The location of URTES may also
be identified by the Vermont Fish and Wildlife Department or through site investigation.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 6
27.6.5 What is the purpose of protecting URTES? These standards are designed to maintain,
restore, provide stewardship for, and conserve habitats and natural communities that support
URTES.
27.6.6 Review Procedures
27.6.6.1 Who determines if my project will impact a URTES? All development located
within a designated URTES habitat and which is not exempted by WDB Chapter 4 will
require a written opinion issued by the Vermont Fish and Wildlife Department (VFWD)
confirming the presence or absence of URTES. The applicant must provide the VFWD
with a map and site plan showing the location of the URTES in relation to the proposed
development.
27.6.6.2 What if a URTES is present? If a URTES is present, the applicant must obtain a
written opinion from the VFWD indicating what measures must be taken to assure that
the proposed development will not result in undue adverse impact the URTES.
Recommendations from the VFWD may require additional work from the applicant. The
presence of an Endangered or Threatened species may require an Endangered and
Threatened Species Permit from the State of Vermont.
27.7 Unique Natural Communities (UNC)
27.7.1 What are Unique Natural Communities? These communities are composed of a unique
natural assembly of physical and biological conditions that occur together to form a functionally
distinct portion of the landscape. These special features could include bogs, cliffs, vernal pools, or
special kinds of forest.
27.7.2 What are the boundaries of Unique Natural Communities? The boundaries of Unique
Natural Communities are shown on the official map titled “Unique Natural Communities,” which is
available for review at the Williston Planning and Zoning Office.
27.7.3 What is the purpose of protecting Unique Natural Communities? The purpose is to protect
unique natural communities that enhance the diversity and beauty of Williston’s landscape.
27.7.4 Review Requirements
27.7.4.1 Who determines if my project will impact a Unique Natural Community? Many of
Williston’s UNCs have been inventoried by the town and so the significant resources have
been documented. For all development proposed within the UNC and which is not exempted
by WDB Chapter 4, the impact to the UNC shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator
or the DRB. Prior to Discretionary Permit or Administrative Permit review, the
Administrator may request recommendations from the Williston Conservation Commission
who will identify the significant resources in the targeted UNC and make recommendations
to assure that the proposed development will not conflict with the UNCs special features.
The significant resources in each UNC are provided in the table 27.A below:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 7
Table 27.A
Unique Natural Community Significant Resources to Protect
Bur Oak Knoll uncommon Bur Oak natural community
Johnson Falls wildlife habitat, water quality
Gramma Ridge forested uplands, vernal pools, wildlife habitat
Glacial Spillway wildlife habitat, water quality
Brownell Mountain forested uplands, wildlife habitat
Mud Pond wildlife habitat, water quality, forested uplands
Lower Allen Brook Watershed water quality, riparian forests, wildlife habitat
Winooski River Floodplain water quality, riparian forests, wildlife habitat
Red Maple/Blueberry Swamp wildlife habitat, water quality
Allen Brook Tributary Confluence wildlife habitat, water quality
Hemlock woodland/wetland wildlife habitat, water quality
Upper Lake Iroquois Watershed wildlife habitat, water quality
Former Burnett Property forested uplands, wildlife habitat
27.8 Farmlands of Local Importance.
27.8.1 What are Farmlands of Local Importance? Farmlands of Local Importance are classified
by the Land Evaluation/Site Assessment (LESA) system. All properties that received a LESA
Farmland Score are Farmlands of Local Importance. The LESA system is a framework for
combining multiple factors into an integrated assessment of the importance of a particular site for
continued agricultural use. Such factors as soil quality, agricultural productivity, development
pressure, and measures of other public values are combined into a single score that allows the town
to identify and protect important agricultural land and plan growth accordingly.
27.8.2 Is my property considered a Farmland of Local Importance? Farmlands of Local
Importance are shown on the official map titled “1988 LESA Farmland,” which is available for
review at the Williston Planning and Zoning Office.
27.8.3 What is the purpose of protecting important farmlands? Williston has lost a sizeable area
of productive farmland to development. The purpose is to preserve to the greatest extent
practicable the working landscapes support locally grown products and that many residents and
visitors see as the classic image of Vermont.
27.8.4 What uses are exempted from these standards? Site work, structures, and/or impervious
surfaces shall not encroach upon designated Farmlands of Local Importance except:
The State of Vermont uses a definition of agricultural lands that is based solely in the important
farmlands definitions adopted by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (see 10 V.SA. §
6001(15)). Those definitions, which include “prime farmland” and “farmlands of statewide
importance,” reflect the inherent characteristics and management of a parcel, but ignore its
context. Their use in Williston has been counterproductive, making it more difficult to promote a
compact pattern of development because the state is “protecting” isolated parcels of productive
soils that are surrounded by development and urban infrastructure. Williston focuses its farmland
protection efforts on working farms (which may include soils that are not as productive) rather
than on soil bodies.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 8
27.8.4.1 Growth Center. All lands that are included in Williston’s designated growth
center.
27.8.4.2 Residential Improvements. All residential improvements listed in WDB
Chapter 20.
27.8.5 Review Procedures.
27.8.5.1 Who determines if my project will impact a Farmland of Local Importance? For
all development proposed within a Farmland of Local Importance and which is not exempted
by section 27.8.4 or WDB Chapter 4, the impact to the farmland shall be determined by the
Zoning Administrator or the DRB. Prior to Discretionary Permit or Administrative Permit
review, the Administrator may request recommendations from the Williston Conservation
Commission.
27.8.6 Farmland of Local Importance Protection Standards
27.8.6.1 Minimize the encroachment of development into Farmlands of Local Importance.
Site disturbances, the placement of buildings, and the extension of roads, driveways and
utilities shall be located as close to existing roads as is practical, given development options
for the site, to avoid encroachment into the important farmland. Development should be
situated on the least productive soils.
27.8.6.2 Cluster development. Lots and building sites should be clustered to minimize
impacts to, and avoid encroachment and associated fragmentation of, important farmlands.
27.9 Scenic Viewshed
27.9.1 What is a Scenic Viewshed? Williston’s scenic viewshed includes the open fields and
meadows, wooded slopes and ridgelines, and scenic viewpoints that make up the visual character
of the town. Each viewshed category is described below. These categories are further broken down
into "primary" and "secondary" designations. Places where different components overlap are
judged to be more significant.
· Vantage Point. It is via accessible vantage points that a typical citizen "takes in" visual
information about the landscape. For most people, these vantage points are found largely
along the public roads daily travelled. Vantage points are public viewing points from roads
and other places throughout town that provide access to views of high quality. The lands
comprising these views have been analyzed and evaluated with respect to four major
components, foreground, middleground, background and focal points.
· Foreground. These lands, generally consisting of cleared land adjacent to public roads,
serve essentially as the community's "window" into the landscape. Since they provide
access to the rest of the landscape they are the most important component of a scenic
landscape (without them even the best middleground or background is lost to the viewer).
They are most effective when they are framed by a woodland or hedgerow edge that creates
a distinct first layer of a multi-layered view. In certain high quality short-range views, they
can also consist of wooded land. Yet, because they tend to be visually uncluttered,
prominent and easily accessed, they also are highly vulnerable to degradation by
development.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 7 - | 9
· Middleground. These lands are generally a more complex composition of layered wooded
and open lands and man-made features. Because of their inherent complexity they are able
to absorb only limited and well-sited development without damaging their basic character.
Middlegrounds often are important in the visual transition between foreground and
background.
· Background. These lands now predominantly consist of forested hillsides that rise up
behind the middleground. To the east and west the far horizon lines are the Green
Mountains and the Adirondacks, seen from many vantage points in the town. With
discretionary clearing of building sites, hillsides below the horizon may sometimes absorb a
limited amount of development (soils and slopes permitting) without significant intrusion.
At other times any development irrevocably compromises the view. The horizon line itself,
due to its highly contrasted nature, is very sensitive to intrusion by man-made development.
Publicly acceptable encroachments are generally limited to certain public structures such as
church steeples and the rooflines of government buildings or the collective composition of
a settlement.
· Focal Points. Most high quality views feature some kind of accent or focal point within the
composition. The focal point draws the eye. These are typically provided by prominent
man-made features such as farmstead clusters or church steeples or unique natural features
such as rock outcroppings, great trees, or mountain peaks. Because the strength of focal
points lie in their contrast to the surrounding landscape, they need to be protected from
competing elements (i.e., adjacent buildings or trees should not obliterate a village church
steeple).
27.9.2 What are the boundaries of the Scenic Viewshed? The boundaries of the Scenic Viewshed
are shown on the official map titled “Visual Assessment,” which is available for review at the
Williston Planning and Zoning Office.
27.9.3 What is the purpose of protecting the Scenic Viewshed? The purpose is to maintain the
visual character of Williston.
27.9.4 What uses are exempted from these standards? Site work, structures, and/or impervious
surfaces shall not encroach upon the designated Scenic Viewshed except:
27.9.4.1 Growth Center. All lands that are included in Williston’s designated
growth center.
27.9.4.2 Residential Improvements. All residential improvements listed in WDB
Chapter 20.
27.9.5 Review Requirements
27.9.5.1 Who determines if my project will impact a Scenic Viewshed? For all development proposed
within a Scenic Viewshed and which is not exempted by section 27.9.4 or WDB Chapter 4, the impact to
the viewshed shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator or the DRB. Prior to Discretionary Permit
or Administrative Permit review, the Administrator may request recommendations from the Williston
Conservation Commission.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 1
Chapter 28
Special Flood Hazard Areas
This chapter establishes standards for development
in Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs). It should
be understood that these standards have very
limited applicability. Because the watershed
protection buffers required by Chapter 29 of this
bylaw essentially prohibit new structures in
SFHAs, these standards will apply primarily to
existing nonconforming uses.
28.1 Authority – Purpose - Boundaries
28.1.1 What is the legal authority for regulation of Special Flood Hazard Areas? These standards
are adopted to effect the purposes of 10 V.S.A. Chapter 32, and as specifically authorized by 24
V.S.A. § 4424.
28.1.2 What is the purpose of these regulations for Special Flood Hazard Areas? These standards
for SFHA’s are adopted to:
· minimize and prevent the loss of life and property, the disruption of
commerce, the impairment of the tax base, and the extraordinary public
expenditures and demands on public services that result from flooding and
flood-related hazards;
· ensure that the design and construction of development in SFHA’s are
accomplished in a manner that minimizes or eliminates the potential for flood
loss or damage to life and property; and
· ensure that the state, municipalities, and individuals are eligible for federal
flood insurance and other federal disaster recovery and hazard mitigation
funds.
28.1.3 What are the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas? The SFHA’s include all
lands within the Town of Williston identified as SFHA’s on the most current flood insurance maps
and studies published by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), or its successor, and as
provided by the Secretary of the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources pursuant to 10 V.S.A.
Chapter 32 § 753. These maps are adopted by reference as part of this bylaw.
28.1.4 Who determines if a property is located within a Special Flood Hazard Area? The location
of the boundary shall be determined by the Administrator based upon the most current information
provided by the NFIP listed in WDB 28.1.3.
281.4 What if I believe my property has been incorrectly shown in a Special Flood Hazard Area?
A property owner who believes that their property has been incorrectly shown in a SFHA may
submit a request for a Letter of Map Amendment to FEMA in order to request a change in the
SFHA classification for their property.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 2
Where I can see a map of the SFHAs? The most current National Flood Insurance Program maps are available for
review at Williston Planning, in the Town Hall Annex at 7900 Williston Road.
28.2 Definitions Specific to this Chapter
28.2.1 What is a Special Flood Hazard Area? Special Flood Hazard Areas include the area of
floodplain that is subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In
some cases, the NFIP has determined base flood elevations for watercourses and further classified
the SFHA into areas of Regulatory Floodway and Floodway Fringe, as described in WDB 28.2.2
and 28.2.3. In other cases, the NFIP has not yet classified the SFHA.
28.2.2 What is the Regulatory Floodway? The Regulatory Floodway includes the channel of a
river or stream and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood - the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year -
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.
28.2.3 What is the Floodway Fringe? The Floodway Fringe is the area of SFHA outside of the
Regulatory Floodway, in areas where the Regulatory Floodway has been designated.
28.3 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6 of this bylaw. All development
within SFHA’s with the exception of accessory structures, decks, patios, pools, and improvements that
do not constitute a substantial improvement of existing dwellings will require a discretionary permit
before an administrative permit can be approved.
What is a Substantial Improvement? A ‘substantial improvement’ of an existing residential structure means any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement, the cost of which over three years or improvements by way of a
common plan of development, equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the original structure before the start of
construction.
28.3.1 Can an administrative permit be issued immediately once a discretionary permit has been
approved or if no discretionary permit is necessary? No.
28.3.1.1 Referral to State. The town must submit a copy of the application for an
administrative permit for development within an SFHA to the Regional Floodplain Manager
at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources in accordance with 24 V.S.A. § 4424. A permit
may be issued only following the receipt of comments from the Agency or the passage of 30
days from the date the application was mailed to the Agency, whichever comes first.
28.3.1.2 Other Permits. The Administrator will not approve an administrative permit for
development within an SFHA before determining that any state and/or federal permits which
may be required have been issued.
28.3.1.3 Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse. Applications for the alteration or
relocation of watercourses must be referred to the State National Floodplain Insurance
Program Coordinator at the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, as provided in WDB
28.3.1.1, and to the River Management Section of that same agency, and to the Army Corps
of Engineers. Applicants must also notify any adjacent communities. These referrals must
be made at least 30 days before an administrative permit is approved. See also WDB 28.5.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 3
28.3.2 What records must be maintained when development is permitted in an SFHA? The
Administrator must maintain a separate record of all permits issued for development in SFHAs,
including the elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the NFIP maps for Williston)
of the lowest floor, including basements, of all replacement or substantially improved buildings;
the elevation (consistent with the datum of the elevation on the NFIP maps for Williston) to which
buildings have been floodproofed; all floodproofing certifications required by these standards; and
a record of all variances approved.
28.4 Standards
28.4.1 Do the general standards of this bylaw apply to development in the SFHAs? Yes.
Development in SFHA’s must, unless specifically exempted, comply with all standards established
in Chapters 13-29. In addition, development in the SFHA must comply with all standards specific
to the underlying zoning district. Where the standards adopted in this chapter and other standards
established by this bylaw differ, the most restrictive standard applies.
28.4.2 Are there additional standards specific to SFHAs? Yes. They are presented in WDB 28.5
through 28.8.
28.5 Alteration of Streams. The alteration of watercourses is regulated by 10 V.S.A. § 1021, et seq. No
administrative permit will be approved for development that involves the alteration of a stream until the
applicant submits a copy of the approved permit from the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources for that
alteration. The flood carrying and sediment transport capacity within the altered or relocated portion of
any watercourse shall be maintained, and any alteration or relocation shall not result in any decrease of
stream stability.
Where can I learn more about state regulation of stream alterations? The River Management Section of the Agency of
Natural Resource’s web page maybe found at: http://www.vtwaterquality.org/permits/htm/pm_streamalt.htm.
28.6 Regulatory Floodway
28.6.1 What are the additional restrictions on development within a Regulatory Floodway? Most
new development is prohibited in areas that have been designated as a Regulatory Floodway. Only
utility and road crossings, trails and trail crossings, with minor related facilities like signs and
benches, and runoff and erosion control measures are permitted. Even these developments are
permitted only after hydrologic and hydraulic analyses conducted in accord with standard
engineering practice by a registered professional engineer demonstrate that the proposed
development will result in no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood.
28.6.2 What about changes in nonconforming uses that are located within a Regulatory
Floodway? First, any such changes must comply with Chapter 2 of this bylaw. Changes that would
be permitted by Chapter 2 are further limited to those for which hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
conducted in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered professional engineer
demonstrate that the proposed development will result in no increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood.
28.6.3 Is outdoor storage, including the parking or storage of recreational vehicles, permitted
within a Regulatory Floodway? No.
28.7 Floodway Fringe
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 4
28.7.1 What are the additional restrictions on development within the Floodway Fringe?
28.7.1.1 Most Development is Prohibited. All new development in areas that have been
designated Floodway Fringe Areas by the NFIP is prohibited with the exception of utility
and road crossings, trails and trail crossings, with minor related facilities like signs and
benches, and runoff and erosion control measures.
28.7.1.2 Construction Standards. All development, including subdivision developments,
planned unit developments, manufactured home or manufactured home parks, that is
permitted must be reasonably safe from flooding and designed and adequately anchored to
prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement during the occurrence of the base flood.
Any development proposed to be located in a SFHA must include base flood elevation data.
Development must be adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards, constructed
with materials that are resistant to flood damage and using construction methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. Utility and service facilities must be located designed,
and constructed to prevent water entry and accumulation and to minimize or eliminate flood
damage. Subdivisions and Planned Unit Developments located in part in the SFHA must be
accessible by dry land access outside the special flood hazard area.
28.7.2 What about changes or additions to nonconforming uses and structures currently located
within the Floodway Fringe? First, any such changes must comply with Chapter 2 of this bylaw.
Changes that would be permitted by Chapter 2 are further limited to those which comply with the
standards established by WDB 28.7.2.1 through 28.7.2.9.
28.7.2.1 Prevent Movement. All development must be reasonably safe from flooding, and
designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during
the occurrence of the base flood.
28.7.2.2 Minimize Damage. All development must be constructed with materials that are
resistant to flood damage and using construction methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
28.7.2.3 Protect Utilities. All development must be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flooding.
28.7.2.4 Below the Lowest Floor. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor which are subject to
flooding shall be used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, and
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum standards.
· Fully enclosed areas below grade on all sides (including below grade crawl
spaces and basements) are prohibited.
· There shall be a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 5
· The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
· Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
28.7.2.5 Lowest Floor: Residential. Residential development that is located in SFHA Zones
A1-A29 shall have the lowest floor, including the basement if there is one, elevated to one
foot or above the base flood elevation.
28.7.2.6 Nonresidential Development. Nonresidential development located in SFHA Zones
A1-A29 shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot or above the
base flood elevation or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so
that the structure is watertight up to two feet above the base flood elevation with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Nonresidential development must be reviewed by a registered professional engineer or
architect who certifies that the design and proposed methods of construction.
28.7.2.7 Accessory Structures. Small accessory structures that are used for parking or
storage (and not for human habitation) need not be elevated above the base flood elevation,
but ALL structures, including accessory structures, must comply with elevation and
development requirements listed in WDB 28.7.1.2, 28.7.2.1, 28.7.2.2, 28.7.2.3, and
28.7.2.4.
28.7.2.8 Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Systems. Compliance with these standards must
be certified by a registered professional engineer and, where applicable, approval by the
Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation.
o New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
o New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters.
o On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
28.7.3 Can recreational vehicles be placed within the Floodway Fringe? Parking or storing
recreational vehicles within the Floodway Fringe is prohibited unless the vehicle(s) is/are fully
licensed and ready for highway use.
28.7.4 Is outdoor storage permitted within the Floodway Fringe? No.
28.8 SFHA not yet classified as Regulatory Floodway or Floodway Fringe
28.8.1 What if the SFHA on my property has not yet been classified by the NFIP as Regulatory
Floodway or Floodway Fringe? In areas where base flood elevations and regulatory floodway
limits have not been provided by the NFIP, base flood elevations and floodway data provided by
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 8 - | 6
FEMA, the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, or other sources may be obtained and used by
to designate areas of Regulatory Floodway and Floodway Fringe. This research and mapping must
be undertaken at the expense of the applicant.
28.8.2 What if there is no base flood elevation data available? Until a regulatory floodway has
been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, encroachment, or other
development shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated development
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. Any
requests for new construction, substantial improvements, encroachment, or other development
under this section must be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic
engineering principles and certified by a registered professional engineer.
28.9 Variances - Enforcement
28.9.1 Is it possible to obtain a variance from the requirements of this chapter? Yes, though it is
very unlikely. In addition to meeting the requirements for variances detailed in WDB 8.1, variances
may only be granted for development within an SFHA if they meet the criteria found in 44 CFR,
Section 60.6. Any variance(s) issued in the SFHA shall not increase flood heights. Applicants
should also be aware that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation increases the risk to life and property and will result in increased flood insurance
premiums to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of coverage. A copy of any variance obtained under
this provision shall be affixed to the deed of the property on file in the town’s land records.
28.9.2 What will happen if I do not comply with this bylaw? Whenever development occurs
contrary to the provisions of this bylaw, enforcement shall proceed as provided by WDB 7.4-6. If
development in an SFHA is still not in compliance after the opportunity to correct the violation has
passed, the Administrator shall, in addition to taking any enforcement action authorized in Chapter
7, submit a declaration to the Administrator of the NFIP requesting a denial of flood insurance.
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, authorizes FEMA to deny
flood insurance to a property declared by a community to be in violation of their flood hazard area
regulations. The declaration shall consist of: the name of the property owner and address or legal
description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location; a clear an unequivocal
declaration that the property is in violation this bylaw; a clear statement that the public body
making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that authority; evidence that the
property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective denial of insurance;
and a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1296 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
28.10 Disclaimer of Liability. This bylaw does not imply that land outside the mapped SFHAs or any
development permitted within an SFHA will be free from flooding or flood damages nor does it create a
liability on the part of the town or any town official or employee for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this bylaw or a decision lawfully made as this bylaw provides.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 1
Chapter 29
Watershed Health
These standards help protect water quality
and watershed health in Williston by
regulating construction site erosion and
stormwater management in new
developments and on redevelopment sites.
This chapter also establishes standards for the
provision and protection of watershed
protection buffers along streams and around
wetlands and lakes.
29.1 Purpose - Authority
29.1.1 What is the purpose of these standards? In adopting these standards the Selectboard makes
the following findings:
· it is well documented that land development - which alters the volume, velocity,
and quality of surface runoff – is likely to adversely affect nearby streams,
including the capacity and stability of their channels, their physical and
chemical characteristics, and the health of the biological communities they
support;
· federal law (see 33 U.S.C. 1293(d)) requires the State of Vermont to maintain
a list of streams that are impaired, that is, that do not fully support certain
functions due to poor water quality;
· the Allen Brook, Williston’s principal stream, appears on that list because
scientific surveys have shown it to be impaired for aquatic life support and
contact recreation due to land development and the accompanying stormwater
runoff and erosion;
· the Muddy Brook, Williston’s natural boundary with South Burlington, also
appears on Vermont’s list of impaired waters because it fails to provide aquatic
life support due to a lack of riparian buffers, land development, and erosion;
See http://www.anr.state.vt.us/dec/waterq/planning/docs/pl_2008.303d_Final.pdf for Vermont’s list
of impaired waters. For factual background see the Watershed Improvement Plan and
Recommendations for a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) for Sediment: Allen Brook, Williston
Vermont: Final Report – March 29, 2003 by Lori Barg, Kari Dolan, Cully Hession, Chris Cianfrani,
and Bob Kort, State of Vermont, Department of Environmental Conservation, Water Quality Division.
· the Town of Williston is subject to state and federal permitting requirements as
a municipal small separate storm sewer (MS4) operator;
· the general permit (3-9017, as amended) under which Williston operates as an
MS4 requires the town to adopt “minimum control measures,” including
programs for the reduction of pollutants from construction sites and for the
post-construction management of stormwater runoff from new developments
and redevelopment sites;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 2
· while the town has actively worked on watershed health through its investments
in stream restoration and the application of its regulations, restoring the health
of the Allen Brook, preventing the addition of other local streams to the list of
impaired waters, and complying with the requirements imposed by the MS4
permit make it necessary to adopt these standards.
29.1.2 Under what authority does the town adopt these standards? These standards are adopted
under the authority of 24 V.S.A. § 4417(9). As noted in WDB 29.1.1, above, their adoption is also
specifically required by 4.2.3 and 4.2.5 of General Permit 3-9014 (as amended January 17, 2013), as
issued by Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, Department of Environmental Conservation.
29.2 Applicability
29.2.1 What activities are subject to these standards? These standards apply to any development for
which a permit is required by this bylaw.
29.2.2 Are there any exceptions from these standards? As provided by WDB 4.2.1.2., accepted
agricultural and forestry practices are exempt from the standards adopted in this chapter.
Developments in which the total cumulative land disturbance including all clearing, grading, and
excavation, is less than ¼ (one-quarter) acre are exempt from the runoff and erosion control standards
provided in sections WDB 29.3 – 29.6 in this chapter, but are encouraged to monitor and minimize
runoff and erosion, taking whatever measures are needed to protect neighboring properties and water
quality.
29.2.3 What about small projects? These standards recognize that the level of runoff and erosion
control required to protect water quality varies with the size and location of the proposed
development.
29.2.3.1 Low Risk Development. WDB 29.3 sets relatively simple runoff and erosion control
standards for smaller developments that pose a relatively low risk of accelerated runoff,
erosion, and sedimentation.
29.2.3.2 All Other Development. WDB 29.4 establishes runoff and erosion control standards
for larger developments and development in vulnerable areas.
29.2.4 What about routine maintenance? What about emergencies? These standards do not apply
to the routine maintenance of public and private roads or utilities, including stormwater management
works, nor do they apply to emergency repairs required by flooding, slope failures, or other natural
hazards or civil emergencies, like a bridge failure. It is understood, however, that runoff and erosion
control measures will be incorporated into maintenance activities where necessary, as part of the
“good housekeeping” practices required by the town’s MS4 permit.
29.3 Low Risk Development
29.3.1 What is a Low Risk Development? A low risk development is one in which the cumulative
land disturbance is greater than ¼ (one-quarter) acre, but less than two (2) acres, in which all land
that will be disturbed is outside the watershed protection buffers established by this chapter, and in
which all land that will be disturbed has a slope of less than eight percent (8%).
29.3.2 What runoff and erosion control standards apply to Low Risk Development?
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 3
29.3.2.1 State Handbook. Applications for permits for low risk developments shall be
accompanied by a completed Runoff and Erosion Control Checklist that shows how the
applicant will comply with the guidance provided in the current edition of Vermont’s Low
Risk Site Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Erosion Control.
Where can I find the Low Risk Site Handbook for Erosion Prevention and Erosion Control? On-line at:
http://dec.vermont.gov/sites/dec/files/wsm/stormwater/docs/StormwaterConstruction
DischargePermits/sw_low_risk_site_handbook.pdf
29.3.2.2 Additional Standards. Low risk developments must also comply with WDB 29.5.1
and 29.5.9-12.
29.4 Runoff and Erosion Control Plans for Other Developments
29.4.1 When must a runoff and erosion control plan be submitted? All applications for permits for
developments that are not exempted by WDB 29.2.3.1, or defined as ‘low risk’ by WDB 29.3.1,
above, shall be accompanied by a professionally-prepared runoff and erosion control plan that shows
how compliance with the performance standards of WDB 29.5 will be attained both during the
construction of the proposed development and the continuing use of the site.
29.4.2 What must be included in a runoff and erosion control plan? Runoff and erosion control
plans shall be based on a grading plan of the site and its immediate environs, showing existing and
proposed contours at intervals of no more than two feet and all information required by the Erosion
and Runoff Control Plan Checklist. EXCEPTION: Detailed contour mapping is not required for
portions of a site that will not be disturbed, but sufficient information must be provided to show how
the transition from disturbed to undisturbed areas will be made.
29.4.3 How will a proposed runoff and erosion control plan be reviewed? The town’s review of a
proposed runoff and erosion control plan will begin with a meeting between the Administrator and
the DPW or their designees and the applicant’s designer. This meeting will ordinarily be on-site. If
the application for a permit is approved, there will also be a pre-construction meeting, as required by
WDB 29.5.3.
29.5 Runoff and Erosion Control Standards. Because these performance standards recognize that there
is a different solution for every site, they sometimes use permissive terms, like ‘should.’ The use of
permissive terms does not constitute an exception to a performance standard. It indicates only that the town
is willing to review a variety of possible ways of achieving compliance.
29.5.1 Design to minimize runoff and erosion. The proposed site plan should fit the site, with the
area to be disturbed, cut and fill, and impervious surfaces being minimized.
29.5.1.1 Avoid Slopes. Development should be directed away from slopes. This bylaw calls
for reduced densities on slopes over 15% (see Chapter 19 and the various zoning districts).
Development is prohibited (except where a variance can be justified) on slopes of 30% or
more.
29.5.1.2 Fit the Terrain. Architectural forms and site improvements should fit the terrain.
Access drives and roads, parking and loading areas, utility lines, and the long axes of buildings
should run more or less parallel to, not more or less perpendicular to slopes. Where buildings
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 4
cross slopes, floors should be staggered with the slope. Additional site planning and design
standards designed to ensure that development fits the terrain are imposed in some zoning
districts, including the ARZD, GZDN, GZDS, and RZD.
29.5.1.3 Phase Construction. The area disturbed at any one time shall be minimized in both
time and space. The runoff and erosion control plan shall show how clearing, grading,
excavation, and fill will be phased so that disturbance is promptly followed by revegetation,
and/or structural stabilization of the site, including temporary stabilization where areas will
remain disturbed for more than 15 days. A copy of the phasing schedule and a checklist on
which the installation of measures by phases is recorded shall be maintained on the site for
review by the town when inspections are made.
29.5.1.4 Minimize Impervious Surfaces. The extent of paving and other impervious surfaces
should be minimized by thoughtful site planning that keeps roads as narrow and as short as
possible, and that keeps surface parking areas small. The use of porous pavements where site
conditions permit is also strongly encouraged, and may be required of uses that propose to
place extensive parking areas in impaired watersheds.
29.5.2 Mark disturbance limits. Land disturbance (clearing, grading, excavation, and fill) shall be
confined within limits that are clearly marked on the site during construction. Disturbance limits
must be shown on the runoff and erosion control plan, then established in the field, subject to
inspection before any clearing, grading, excavation, or fill begins. Disturbance limits must be marked
with a fence or other barrier sufficiently durable to last through the anticipated construction period.
This fence or barrier should be supplemented with brightly colored flagging or tape. Work outside
the approved disturbance limits is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement, as provided by
WDB 7.4-7.6.
29.5.3 Hold a pre-construction meeting. Before any work for which a runoff and erosion control
plan is required is begun, the disturbance limits shall be marked on the site and the applicant shall
arrange an on-site preconstruction meeting between the town staff and all design professionals,
contractors, and subcontractors who will be responsible for the observance of those limits. The
purpose of this meeting shall be to review the runoff and erosion control plan for construction,
including the sequence and schedule for the installation of runoff and erosion control measures, and
the importance of maintaining those measures during the construction period.
29.5.4 Divert runoff from disturbed areas. Disturbed areas shall be protected from surface runoff
by diversion dikes or channels, silt barriers, filter strips, or other measures until they are revegetated
or otherwise stabilized.
29.5.5 Stockpile and replace topsoil. All topsoil removed shall be stockpiled and used in the
revegetation of the site. To put it another way, the topsoil from the site shall be used there, and not
replaced with an inferior material.
29.5.5.1 Silt Fence. Topsoil stockpiles shall be surrounded by a silt fence or an equally
effective sediment control measure that also protects the stockpile from damage during
construction activity.
29.5.5.2 Temporary Cover. Topsoil stockpiles shall be stabilized with mulch that is renewed
weekly or, if the stockpile will not be worked for more than a week, by a mulch followed by
a temporary cover crop.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 5
29.5.6 Protect retained vegetation. Existing vegetation that is to be retained must be protected from
damage during construction, as required here and, in more detail, by the Public Works Standards.
The runoff and erosion control plan must include a schedule (see the Runoff and Erosion Control
Plan Checklist) showing that all measures required to protect existing vegetation will be put in place
before other construction activities begin. This schedule may apply to the entire site or to sequential
phases of construction.
29.5.6.1 Earthwork Within the Dripline. There should be no clearing, grading, excavation, or
other construction activity, including the placement of underground utilities, within the drip
line of trees that are to be retained. The Administrator may permit minor exceptions to this
standard where the terrain or the location of existing utilities and/or buildings make
compliance infeasible.
29.5.6.2 Storage Within the Dripline. There shall be no storage or parking of construction
equipment, materials, vehicles, or waste on or around trees and roots or other vegetation that
is to be retained. This specifically prohibits the dumping of paint, petroleum products, concrete
or stucco mix, dirty water, or any other material that may be deleterious to vegetation that is
to be retained.
29.5.6.3 Use of Trees. The use of trees as a winch supports or anchorages, as temporary power
poles, as sign posts, or for other similar functions is prohibited.
29.5.6.4 Pruning. Trees and shrubs that are to be retained should be properly pruned before
construction begins. This will maximize their ability to withstand damage.
29.5.6.5 Porous Pavement. See WDB 29.5.1.4, above. The use of porous pavements protects
existing root systems.
29.5.7 Anticipate and limit accelerated runoff
29.5.7.1 Channel Design. All filter strips, swales, grassed waterways, other channels, and
outlets shall be designed and constructed to handle the anticipated increase in the volume and
velocity of runoff without flooding or channel erosion.
29.5.7.2 Pre-Construction Rate. Runoff shall be retained on site and infiltrated and/or released
at a rate not exceeding the pre-development rate of release.
29.5.8 Trap sediment on-site. Sediment resulting from accelerated soil erosion shall be retained on
the site, with proposed provisions for regular maintenance and sediment disposal included in the
construction schedule and in the maintenance manual and schedule required by the Runoff and
Erosion Control Plan Checklist.
29.5.9 Make runoff and erosion control measures an asset. Filter strips, swales, grassed waterways
and others channels, stormwater ponds, and other erosion and runoff structures shall be integrated
into the landscaping plan for a site, contributing to the appearance and marketability of the proposed
development and the community, as well as to watershed protection.
29.5.9.1 Lower Density Development. In lower density developments, erosion and runoff
control measures should blend in with the topography and vegetation of surrounding woods
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 6
and fields. As much runoff retention and sediment trapping as possible shall occur on the
surface or in shallow structures that mimic the vegetative composition and structure of natural
wetlands and riparian areas.
29.5.9.2 Higher Density Development. Landscaped areas in higher density developments,
including those required by Chapter 18 of this bylaw, should also, to the extent possible, be
used for stormwater management. Given the higher impervious coverage, underground storage
and mechanical treatment may also be used to comply with these performance standards.
29.5.10 Use appropriate plant materials. Proposed plant materials and planting mixes shall be
suitable for the site and the intended application. The requirements of WDB 23.7 apply to all plant
materials specified in runoff and erosion control plans.
29.5.11 Maintain runoff and erosion control measures. Runoff and erosion control measures must
be installed as designed and properly maintained. Failure to maintain the required measures is a
violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
29.5.12 Schedule inspections during construction. In order to ensure proper functioning and
maintenance of required erosion and runoff control measures during the construction period, the
applicant shall provide for regular inspections of all runoff and erosion control measures by a
qualified professional during the construction period. An inspection and the repair or restoration of
all measures is required after any precipitation event exceeding one inch. Reports on routine
inspections shall be provided to the Administrator and DPW within five working days after each
inspection is made.
29.5.13 Winter Construction. It is best to avoid winter construction, but Williston recognizes that
this is not always possible. Where it is not, additional runoff and erosion control measures may be
required. These measures are established in the state handbooks that are adopted by reference in
WDB 29.5.14.
29.5.14 Where can I find more specific guidance for complying with these performance standards?
29.5.14.1 State Handbook: Construction. All construction site erosion control measures shall
comply with the Vermont Handbook for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction
Sites, Special Publication No. 3, Vermont Geological Survey, or its successors, and with the
current edition of the Town of Williston Public Works Standards.
29.5.14.2 State Handbook: Permanent. All long-term runoff and erosion control measures
shall comply with The Vermont Stormwater Management Manual for Watershed Improvement
Permits, Volumes I and II, Vermont Agency of Natural Resources, April and August, 2002 or
their successors, and with the current edition of the Town of Williston Public Works Standards.
Additional Resources. The Vermont Agency of Natural Resources provides resources about low impact design
to minimize stormwater runoff at
https://anrweb.vt.gov/PubDocs/DEC/WSMD/stormwater/docs/sw_LID%20Guide.pd
f
29.6 Required Improvements. All runoff and erosion control measures required for compliance with the
standards established in this chapter are required improvements, subject to the requirements of Chapter 7
of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 7
29.7 Discharge of Non-Stormwater Waste. Discharging non-stormwater wastes into any stormwater or
street drainage system, public or private is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement, as provided by
WDB 7.4-7.6.
29.7.1 May I connect footing, foundation, or roof drains, or sump pumps to stormwater systems?
Footing, foundation, and roof drains, and sump pumps should ordinarily be daylighted or infiltrated.
They may be connected directly to a stormwater system only with the written permission of the DPW.
29.7.2 Must existing connections to stormwater systems be disconnected from stormwater systems?
Whenever possible. Approval of any permit may be conditioned on the disconnection of existing
footing, foundation, and/or roof drains or sump pumps.
29.8 Wetlands Protection
29.8.1 How will I know if I have wetlands on the site of my proposed development? A wetlands
delineation prepared by a professional wetlands scientist in accord with the current guidelines of the
Army Corps of Engineers must accompany all applications for discretionary permits for development
on sites where wetlands are known or suspected to exist. The need for a wetlands delineation will be
determined during pre-application review.
What is a wetland? Wetlands are lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually
at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this classification wetlands must have one
or more of the following three attributes: (1) at least periodically, the land supports predominantly hydrophytes; (2) the
substrate is predominantly undrained hydric soil; and (3) the substrate is nonsoil and is saturated with water or covered by
shallow water at some time during the growing season of the year."
29.8.2 Are Class II wetlands protected in Williston? Class II wetlands are protected by state law and
this bylaw. They must generally remain in their natural vegetation, but may be crossed by roads, trail,
or utility lines where there is no feasible alternative to such a crossing and where all work is
conducted in compliance with an approved runoff and erosion control plan and a Conditional Use
Permit approved by the Agency of Natural Resources.
29.8.3 Are Class III wetlands protected in Williston? Class III wetlands generally are not protected
by state law, but may be protected by this bylaw and are definitely regulated by the Army Corps of
Engineers. The DRB may, upon the recommendation of the Conservation Commission, require that
Class III wetlands with significant functional values remain in their natural vegetation. The
Conservation Commission may also recommend, and the DRB require, that a functional assessment
of the Class III wetlands on the proposed development site be provided along with the delineation.
Wetlands Classes? State and Federal Wetland Regulations. There are no Class I wetlands in Williston. Class II
wetlands appear on, or are contiguous to wetlands that appear on, the Vermont Significant Wetlands Inventory Maps
prepared by the Agency of Natural Resources. Class III includes all other wetlands. Information on Vermont’s state
wetlands regulations may be found on-line at: http://dec.vermont.gov/watershed/wetlands. Information on the Army
Corps of Engineers regulation of wetlands may be found at http://www.usace.army.mil/Missions/Civil-
Works/Regulatory-Program-and-Permits/
29.9 Watershed Protection Buffers. This section establishes watershed protection buffers for all streams,
ponds, and lakes, and for certain wetlands.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 8
29.9.1 Are buffers required around lakes and ponds? Yes. There shall be a buffer of at least 150
feet above the ordinary high water mark of all ponds or lakes that have more than a half-acre (21,780
SF) of water surface, except for properties in the Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area defined
in WDB 29.9.2;
29.9.2 Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area. The Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area
(LISPA) means all land located within 250 of the mean water level of Lake Iroquois. All
development within this area must comply with the Vermont Lake Shoreland Protection Standards
as provided by 10 V.S.A. § 1441-1454. All applications for an administrative permit will be required
to provide documentation that the proposed development will be in conformance with these
standards.
29.9.2.1 New structures. New structures in the LISPA must be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from the mean water level of Lake Iroquois.
29.9.2.2 Existing structures. Existing, non-conforming structures within the LISPA may be
expanded under limited circumstances as provided by WDB 31.3.4.
29.9.3 Are buffers required along streams? Yes.
29.9.3.1 Named Streams. There shall be a buffer of at least 150 feet above the ordinary high
water mark of the Allen Brook, the Muddy Brook, the Sucker Brook, and the Winooski River.
29.9.3.2 Other Streams. There shall be a buffer of at least 50 feet above the ordinary high
water mark of all unnamed streams – perennial or intermittent - identified on the 7.5’ U.S.
Geological Survey quadrangles covering the town, or on the Williston Field Stream Survey
maps of the Allen and Muddy Brook watersheds prepared by the Vermont Department of
Environmental Conservation.
29.9.4 Are buffers required around wetlands? Yes.
29.9.4.1 Class II Wetlands. There shall be a buffer of at least 50 feet above the delineated
boundary of any Class II wetland.
29.9.4.2 Class III Wetlands. The DRB may, upon the recommendation of the Conservation
Commission, require a buffer above Class III wetlands that have important functional values.
29.9.5 What is the relationship of watershed protection buffers and special flood hazard areas?
The watershed protection buffers required by WDB 28.6.1through 28.6.3 shall be expanded, where
necessary, to include special flood hazard areas.
Special Flood Hazard Areas. These areas are mapped for the National Flood Insurance Program and may sometimes
include more area than the watershed protection buffers required by WDB 29.8. The official maps are on file with Williston
Planning. See Chapter 28 of this bylaw for additional regulations applicable to Special Flood Hazard Areas.
29.9.6 Can any use be made of the land in watershed protection buffers? Watershed protection
buffers shall remain undeveloped, except as provided here.
29.9.6.1 Vegetation. Watershed protection buffers shall remain in native or cultivated
vegetation that serves as an effective filter for surface runoff. Where effective filtering
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - | 9
vegetation is not present, the buffer shall be restored to a combination of wetland, riparian,
forest, and/or meadow vegetation appropriate to the site. Removal or cutting of live or dead
vegetation from a watershed protection buffer is prohibited except where the buffer is used for
accepted agricultural or forestry practices, where a hazardous tree is present, or where it is
necessary to control invasive species. All native vegetation cut within the buffer should be left
in place whenever possible.
29.9.6.2 Lawns. Conventional turf grass lawns do not provide an effective filter for surface
runoff and may not be included in the watershed protection buffers required by this section.
29.9.6.3 Impervious Surfaces. Development within watershed protection buffers shall be
limited to utility and road crossings; trails and trail crossings, with minor related facilities like
signs and benches; and runoff and erosion control measures.
· All work within a watershed protection buffer shall proceed in accordance with
the runoff and erosion control standards of this chapter.
· Utility and road crossings of watershed protection buffers shall be consolidated
wherever possible, and both the width and length of such crossings minimized.
Minimum disturbance trenching may be required for utility lines.
· The runoff and erosion control measures permitted in watershed protection
buffers shall be limited to outfall structures or other measures whose function
requires such a location. Permanent stormwater works, including above or
below ground detention and treatment, shall be permitted only where no
alternative, upland location is feasible.
29.9.6.4 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage is not permitted in watershed protection buffers.
29.9.6.5 Lawn Chemicals. No lawn chemicals, including fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides
may be used in watershed protection buffers. The Administrator may permit an exception to
this standard for the control of invasive plants by, or under the direction, of a public agency.
This prohibition does not apply to accepted farm and forest practices, which are exempt, nor
does it prohibit the use of compost or another organic fertilizer in conservation plantings.
29.9.6.6 Owners’ Responsibilities. The covenants for developments that include watershed
protection buffers shall include a reference to the standards adopted here (WDB 29.9.5) and
in WDB 29.9.6. In developments where an owner’s association is required, that association is
responsible for the protection of the watershed protection buffers.
29.9.7 How will people know where watershed protection buffers are? Watershed protection buffers
must be marked on the ground as well as on the final plans. This may be accomplished using
plantings, fences, or other landscape features, like a line of boulders. The DRB may permit an
exception to this standard where a watershed protection buffer is marked by a definite change in the
terrain.
29.9.8 Is it possible to obtain a variance to permit more development within a watershed protection
buffer? Additional development within watershed protection buffers may be made possible by
variance, as provided by Chapter 8 of this bylaw. To approve such a variance, the DRB must make
all of the findings required by WDB 29.9.7.1 and 29.9.7.2 as well as all findings required by WDB
8.1.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 2 9 - |
10
29.9.8.1 Impervious Cover. The development permitted by variance will result in a total
impervious cover of no more than 10 percent within the buffer.
29.9.8.2 Buffer Width. The development permitted by variance will leave the largest buffer
possible consistent with the need to allow a permitted use. In no case shall a 150-foot buffer
be reduced below 75 feet or a 50-foot buffer be reduced below 25 feet.
29.9.8.3Special Flood Hazard Areas. There are additional limitations on variances in special
flood hazard areas. See WDB 28.7.1.
29.9.9 What about nonconforming uses and structures in watershed protection buffers?
Nonconforming uses and structures located within watershed protection buffers may be changed,
maintained, repaired, enlarged, and replaced as provided by Chapter 2 of this bylaw, but only if all
work complies with the standards established in this chapter. EXCEPTION: No change in use that
permits the processing, manufacture, storage, or handling of regulated hazardous materials, other
potential pollutants, or materials that could be dispersed downstream during a flood will be permitted.
29.10 Source Water Protection Areas
29.10.1 What is a source water protection area? Source water protection areas contribute, or at least
potentially contribute, ground or surface water to drinking water supplies.
Source Water Protection? Williston currently includes two source water protection areas. One surrounds the well that
serves the Porterwood development on Old Creamery Road. The other is the watershed of Lake Iroquois, which is part of
the larger watershed of Shelburne Bay. Shelburne Bay is the source for the Champlain Water District, which supplies water
to Williston and other communities.
29.10.2 What additional standards apply to development in source water areas? No specific
standards apply, but the administrator may refer any proposed development in a source water
protection area to the water provider for comment.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 0 - | 1
Chapter 30
Official Zoning Map
This chapter establishes the official zoning map
and provides rules for its use and interpretation.
30.1 Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map of the Town of Williston is available for review at the
Williston Planning and Zoning Office. The Town makes every effort to provide accurate copies, but
questions about the exact location of a zoning district may be resolved only by reference to the official
zoning map.
30.2 Zoning District Boundaries
30.2.1 How do I know exactly where the zoning district boundaries are? Zoning district
boundaries generally follow property lines, as they were shown on the 20014 tax map, but there are
exceptions to this rule.
30.2.1.1 Streams. Where a zoning district boundary is shown along a stream, that boundary
follows the centerline of the stream unless otherwise clearly indicated by a note on the
official zoning map. Zoning boundaries and the extent of the watershed protection buffers
established by this bylaw shift as the course of the stream shifts.
30.2.1.2 Roads. Where a zoning district boundary is shown along a road, that boundary
follows the centerline of that road unless otherwise clearly indicated by a note on the official
zoning map.
30.2.1.3 Utility Lines. Where a zoning district boundary is shown along a power line or other
utility easement or right-of-way, that boundary follows the centerline of that easement or
right-of-way unless otherwise clearly indicated by a note on the official zoning map.
30.2.1.4 Other Boundaries. Notes on the official zoning map describe boundaries that do not
follow a stream, road, utility line, or property line.
30.2.1.5 Parcel Merger. If a property line that was also used as a zoning district boundary
line on the official zoning map is eliminated by re-platting, the zoning district boundary line
shall remain where it was.
30.2.2 What if I disagree with the Town about a zoning district boundary? If there is a question
about the location of a zoning district boundary, the Administrator will determine where the
boundary is. The Administrator’s decision may be appealed to the DRB using the procedure
established in Chapter 5 of this bylaw.
30.2.3 Is it possible to change a zoning district boundary? Yes, but it is not a simple process. The
boundaries of Williston’s zoning districts are generally consistent with the future land use map
adopted in the Town Plan. This means that changing a zoning district boundary will usually require
two amendments: one to the Town Plan and one to the official zoning district map adopted in this
chapter. The process required to amend the official zoning map is explained in Chapter 8 of this
bylaw. The process of amending a Town Plan is established by 24 V.S.A. § 4385.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 0 - | 2
30.3 About the Zoning Districts. Each zoning district chapter begins with the adoption of a boundary, a
statement of purposes, and a list of permitted uses.
30.3.1 How are uses defined and listed? Uses are listed by name and NAICS classification.
NAICS stands for the North American Industrial Classification System, which is an all-inclusive
hierarchical system for describing economic activities. NAICS classifications include as many as
six digits, for the finest level of detail, but for most purposes of this bylaw less detailed
classifications are adequate. Smaller classifications include all of the more detailed classifications
that begin with the same numbers. For example, NAICS 11 – Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and
Hunting – includes NAICS 111 – Crop Production, and NAICS 1111 – Soybean Farming. Only
those uses listed as permitted for each zoning district are allowed unless otherwise exempted.
30.3.2 What types of standards apply in each zoning district? Four types of standards apply in the
zoning districts created by this bylaw: dimensional, density, general, and specific. Dimensional
standards help determine the location and size of development on a site. Density standards help
determine the total extent of development on a site. The general standards adopted in Chapters 13-
29 regulate access, the provision of infrastructure, outdoor lighting, potential nuisances, and many
other aspects of development. More specific standards are also adopted – in the relevant chapter –
to ensure that each zoning district fulfills its purpose.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 1
Chapter 31
Agricultural/Rural Residential Zoning
District
This chapter establishes the Agricultural/Rural
Residential Zoning District (ARZD) and the
standards that are specifically applicable within
that district.
31.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Permitted Uses
31.1.1 What are the boundaries of the ARZD? The boundaries of the ARZD are shown on the
official zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
31.1.2 What is the purpose of the ARZD? The ARZD implements the vision of Williston’s 2016-
2024 Town Plan, which begins:
Williston will strive to balance responsible, livable suburban growth with rural character and
conservation. To do this, the town will … sustain rural landscapes by requiring an open space
pattern for subdivisions, conserving lands identified in the Chapter 13 - Open Space and
Working Landscapes through acquisitions or easements; and finding ways to help the owners
of working lands continue their stewardship;
Additional policy support for this zoning district is found at 3.2 of the Town Plan and in Chapter 13.
31.1.3 What uses are permitted in the ARZD? See Table 31.A and the notes below.
31.1.3.1 Focus on Farming and Forestry. Consistent with the purpose stated above and in the
Town Plan, the uses permitted in the ARZD are limited to agriculture, the production of forest
products, the mining or quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, outdoor education and recreation,
and residential development that results in substantial open space conservation. Uses that can
help support continuing agriculture are also allowed, as required by Policy of the Open Space
Plan.
31.1.3.2 Defining Agriculture and Forestry. Agriculture and forestry include all accepted
agricultural and forestry practices. Supporting uses, like boarding stables, farm stands, sugar
houses, and the production of energy from agricultural wastes are also permitted. The
processing, distribution, and sale of products raised primarily on the farm or products
fashioned primarily from timber harvested on the land is generally permitted, but
manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade are NOT accepted agricultural or forestry
practices. A discretionary permit is required for such uses, which are subject to all
requirements of this bylaw.
Accepted Practices? Accepted agricultural and forestry practices are defined by the State of Vermont. See WDB
4.2.1.2.
31.1.3.3 Rural Residential. Rural residential development must comply with the open space
development standards of this chapter. It is generally limited to one and two family dwellings,
but more than two dwelling units may be permitted in a structure where creation of a multifamily
dwelling will result in the preservation and restoration of an historic barn. Accessory
dwellings and home businesses are also permitted in the ARZD.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 2
31.1.3.4 Right to Farm. Agricultural and forestry activities in the ARZD are protected by
Vermont’s right-to-farm law. See 12 V.S.A. § 5751, et seq. Beyond the state right-to-farm
law, nonagricultural uses proposed in this zoning district must show that they will have no
direct adverse impact on continuing agriculture on adjoining or nearby lands.
31.1.3.5 Outdoor Recreation. Outdoor education and recreation includes for-fee trails for
biking, hiking, horseback riding, or skiing, and similar activities. Accessory structures - like
an office, shop, or storage building - that support these activities are also permitted. Indoor
educational or recreational facilities may be permitted only where a specific plan for the
property has been adopted following the procedure established in Chapter 9 of this bylaw.
31.1.3.5 Adaptive Reuse of Historic Barns. The reuse of historic barns for multi-dwelling
residential uses, home businesses and banquet facilities is permitted as provided for by 31.12.
31.1.3.6 Residential Educational and Training Facilities. A specific plan was approved by the
Selectboard on December 7, 2015 for Tax Parcel 16:104:270 and 16:104:300 under the
provisions of WDB Chapter 9. This specific plan allows a portion of the former Pine Ridge
School property on Williston Road to be used as a residential educational and training facility
upon the approval of a discretionary permit by the DRB within the area designated for
development. The specific plan authorizes the use of the property as a residential educational
and training facility for students enrolled in a program that is accredited by a recognized
accrediting agency or affiliated with a program accredited by a recognized accrediting agency.
The specific plan authorizes the use of the property as an educational facility including
residential dormitories for students and their families, apartment units, office, conference
room, libraries, dining facilities, recreational facilities, and classrooms, and related
educational use such as seminars and retreats.
The designated open space areas approved by SP 15-01 shall be excluded from future
development. Selective forestry to preserve the health of the forest and hiking trails shall be
allowed, and the open space shall be protected by a conservation easement.
31.1.3.7 Accessory Uses and Structures. Customary accessory uses and structures are
permitted in all zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
31.2 Permit Requirements. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions
noted there, all development in this zoning district must have a permit.
31.3 Dimensional Standards
31.3.1 Is there a maximum building height? Yes. Building height in the ARZD is limited to 36 feet,
but be aware that WDB 31.9.8.1 permits the DRB to impose a lower height limit where doing so is
necessary to help maintain the visual character of rural Williston. Building height within 250 feet
from the mean highwater mark of Lake Iroquois (within the Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection
Area) is limited to 30 feet.
31.3.2 Must development in the ARZD be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines may be controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of Chapter 23 of
this bylaw. Where the requirements of Chapter 23 do not apply, the minimum setback from both side
and rear property lines in the ARZD is 15 feet.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 3
31.3.3 Must development in the ARZD be set back from roads? Yes. The minimum setbacks from
roads in the ARZD shall be:
31.3.3.1 … from the right-of-way of I-89, 150 feet;
31.3.3.2 … from the right-of-way of any other road, except a private road serving a residential
development, 50 feet; and
31.3.3.3 … from a private road serving a residential development, 25 feet.
31.3.3.4 Average Setback Exception. The DRB may allow the setback required along a local
road to be reduced to the average existing setback as part of a request for a discretionary
permit. The average existing setback will be determined by the Administrator by averaging
the existing setback on all properties that are along the same street and within 300 feet of the
lot where a reduction is proposed. A reduction shall be permitted only where the reduced
setback is sufficient to permit for the construction of a sidewalk or, where one is called for in
the Town Plan, a multi-use path.
31.3.3.5 Average Setback Exception – Williston Woods and Porterwood development.
Williston Woods and Porterwood are two existing mobile home developments, served by
private streets, developed with setbacks vastly different from the standards of this bylaw.
Within these two developments, the Administrator may allow the setback required along a
local road to be reduced to the average existing setback. The average existing setback will be
determined by the Administrator by averaging the existing setback on all properties that are
along the same street and within 300 feet of the lot where a reduction is proposed.
31.3.4 Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area Development Standards. Properties within the
Lake Iroquois Shoreland Protection Area (LISPA) as provided by WDB 29.9.2 are subject to the
following development standards:
31.3.4.1. State Permits Required. All new development and the expansion of the footprint of
any existing structures within the LISPA shall require evidence of a permit or statement of
exemption from the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation demonstrating
compliance with the Vermont Lakeshore Protection standards.
31.3.4.2 New Structures. All new structures must be setback a minimum of 100 feet from the
mean water level of the lake.
31.3.4.3 Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming habitable structures in the LISPA may
be expanded or altered under limited conditions. Expansions of nonconforming habitable
structures must demonstrate compliance with the Vermont Lakeshore Protection standards.
31.3.4.4 Limitation of Expansion. Expansions of nonconforming habitable structures is
limited to increasing the footprint of the existing habitable structure by no greater than 20%
of the existing structure over a five year period of time. Expansion of the footprint of
nonconforming habitable structures may only take place on the side of the structure away from
the lakeshore.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 4
31.3.4.5 Septic Systems. Expansions of nonconforming habitable structures, either by
increasing the floor area of the structure or by increasing the number of bedrooms must
demonstrate compliance with the state’s current wastewater regulations (septic regulations).
31.3.4.6 Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming structures may be moved but only to the
extent that the existing structure is made less nonconforming by moving the footprint of the
structure away from the lake, and best practices for stormwater management are employed on
the property.
31.3.5 What uses are permitted in required setbacks? Required setbacks must be landscaped as a
Type I, III, or IV buffer, as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads, pedestrian
ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility lines, may cross
required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a
required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within required setbacks.
31.3.6 Are there minimum lot dimensions? Just one. Lots must have a frontage of at least 40 feet on
an existing or proposed public or private road or drive.
31.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 for a summary of the density standards of this bylaw.
31.4.1 Is there a minimum lot size in the ARZD? Only for development on lots created before
Williston adopted interim open space development regulations on September 20, 2004 and for new
lots created from existing parcels of less than 10.5 acres after that date. For those lots, the minimum
lot size is 80,000 square feet.
31.4.2 What density is permitted on other lots? The density of all other development in the ARZD
is controlled by the specific standards adopted in this chapter, beginning with WDB 31.7.
31.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29.
31.6 Specific Standards are presented in WDB 31.7 through WDB 31.13.
31.7 Open Space Development. An open space development is a residential subdivision in which a
specified area of open space is protected as a condition of approval.
31.7.1 How much open space must be conserved? All developments that involve more than 10.5
acres in this zoning district must protect at least 75% of their total area as open space. The proposed
protected open space must be clearly delineated on the concept plan submitted with the preapplication,
on all plans submitted with the application for a discretionary permit, and on the
approved final plan.
31.7.2 Must certain lands be included in the open space? Yes. Protected open space must meet the
following requirements, as applicable.
31.7.2.1 Watershed Protection. The protected open space must include all lands within the
watershed protection buffers established by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
31.7.2.2 Conservation Areas. The protected open space must include all conservation areas
identified in the Open Space Plan to the extent consistent with the landowner’s right to
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 5
beneficial use of his or her property. This means that if a landowner has only conservation
areas or has no other lands physically suitable for development, the Conservation Commission
and the DRB will work with that landowner to either effect a transfer of development rights,
as provided by Chapter 16 of this bylaw or to create an open space development that minimizes
consumption of lands that should be protected.
An Alternative to Development? Landowners whose holdings include conservation areas and other resources,
like productive farmland, that are identified in the Open Space Plan may find it more profitable to propose a sale
of development rights to the Town. Williston’s Environmental Reserve Fund and funding that is sometimes
available from the Vermont Housing and Conservation Board may make it possible for a landowner to realize a
reasonable return without enduring the development approval process or assuming the risks of becoming a
developer.
31.7.2.3 Scenic Viewsheds. The protected open space should include scenic viewsheds that
are identified in the Open Space Plan or by the Conservation Commission. It is acknowledged,
however, that the mapping of scenic viewsheds is not precise. It is also acknowledged that
partial protection of a viewshed may be effective when combined with the design techniques
that may be required for compliance with WDB 31.7. Landowners who wish to develop
parcels including scenic viewsheds will work with the Conservation Commission and DRB to
maximize protection of the identified view.
31.7.2.4. Important Farmlands. The protected open space must include important farmlands
identified in the Open Space Plan to the extent consistent with the landowner’s right to
beneficial use of his or her property. This means that if a landowner has only important
farmlands or has no other lands physically suitable for development, the Conservation
Commission and the DRB will work with that landowner to effect a transfer of development
rights, as provided by Chapter 19 of this bylaw, or to create an open space development that
minimizes consumption of lands that should be protected.
31.7.2.5 Slopes: 30% or More. The protected open space must include all slopes of 30% or
more, except where a variance can be justified, as provided by Chapter 8 of this bylaw.
31.7.2.6 Slopes: 15%-29%. The protected open space should include all slopes of 15%-29%
to the extent consistent with the landowner’s right to beneficial use of his or her property. This
means that if a landowner has only slopes or has no other lands physically suitable for
development, the Conservation Commission and the DRB will work with that landowner to
effect a transfer of development rights, as provided by Chapter 19 of this bylaw, or to create
an open space development that minimizes consumption of lands that should be protected. .
Unless there are no other lands physically suitable for development, creation of a building lot
or any other development on 15%-29% slopes is not allowed. Where development is permitted
on slopes of 15-29%, its density shall be reduced to one dwelling unit per 10 acres
31.7.2.7 Other Lands. Other lands within the proposed development may be included as
protected open space in order to provide the minimum 75% open space required by WDB
31.7.1, and to comply with the contiguity standard of WDB 31.7.3, below.
31.7.3 Must the protected open space be contiguous? Yes. The protected open space must be
contiguous, except as provided here. It must also be contiguous with any open space on adjoining
lots or parcels that is currently protected, or is identified for protection in the Town Plan. The DRB
may allow exceptions to this standard where:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 6
31.7.3.1 … a small area that is isolated from the rest of the open space on the site is within a
watershed protection buffer required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw; or
31.7.3.2 … the only home sites that comply with the standards of this chapter are adjacent to
protected open space on an adjoining lot or parcel.
31.7.4 How is contiguity defined? Contiguous open space is generally defined as an area of forest
and/or other natural community that is unfragmented by development and remains in a natural state. In
establishing standards for contiguity, the Conservation Commission and DRB will consider the context
of the proposed development, including the type and relative value of resources as identified in WDB
27, 28, and 29 to be protected, and the configuration of open space that will best ensure the protection
of those resources.
31.7.5 Are there limitations on the use of protected open space? Yes.
31.7.5.1 Agriculture and Forestry. Protected open space may be used for agriculture, forestry,
community gardens, and landscaping.
31.7.5.2 Crossings. Crossings of protected open space for roads, trails, and utility lines are
permitted, but only where these crossings are consolidated to the maximum extent practical;
the width and length of the crossing/s are minimized; and all areas disturbed during
construction of the crossing are restored to their natural functions. Plans for the restoration of
disturbed areas must be included in the runoff and erosion control measures required by
Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
31.7.5.3 Trails. Trails may run through protected open space and no hedge, planting, or fence
shall block such a trail. Fences are permitted for agricultural purposes, but where a fence
crosses a trail, a gate or stile shall be provided. Depending on the area disturbed by trail
construction runoff and erosion control measures may be required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
31.7.5.4 Sewerage. Any component of an individual or community sewerage system that is
entirely underground may be placed in protected open space that is not dedicated to the town
or another agency. All areas disturbed during the construction of such a system shall be
restored to meadow or pasture runoff and erosion control measures must be provided during
construction as required by Chapter 29 of this bylaw. Where the protected open space used for
the underground components of an individual sewerage system is owned by a homeowner’s
association, the application for a permit for construction of that system must be accompanied
by an easement from that homeowner’s association.
31.7.6 How can open space be legally protected? The open space required by WDB 31.4.1 may be
protected using any of the three methods listed here. The method/s to be used must be clearly
established at the time a concept plan is filed for pre-application review.
31.7.6.1 Dedication for Public Use. The open space created by an open space development
may be dedicated to the town or to another public agency designated by the town, but only
where it would be part of a country park or conservation area identified in the Town Plan.
31.7.6.2 Private Land Conservation. The open space created by an open space development
may be retained in a block placed under a conservation easement to which the town or another
public agency designated by the town is a party. This block of open space may be retained by
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 7
the developer for agricultural or other purposes or deeded to an owner’s association. Where
protected open space is deeded to an owner’s association, the owners are responsible for the
maintenance of that open space, as required by Chapter 7 of this bylaw.
31.7.6.3 Designated Open Space. The open space created by an open space development may
also be protected simply by designation. Where open space is protected by designation alone,
no permit for a use that is not permitted by WDB 31.4.4 shall be issued within the designated
open space nor shall any amendment of the final plans or boundary adjustments that change
the boundaries of the designated open space be approved. Applicants should note that the
protection of open space via designation alone will not result in the award of points in growth
management review. See WDB 11.8.5.
31.7.7 Must the protected open space be platted as a separate lot? Yes, the protected open space
required by this chapter must be platted as a separate lot.
31.7.8 Must the protected open space be surveyed? Yes. The protected open space required by this
chapter must be shown on the final plans and must be monumented in accordance with the
requirements of 12.4.1.5 with the same degree of accuracy as a building lot. Open space areas must
also be marked and the applicant will provide latitude and longitude coordinates from the Vermont
state grid so that the town can easily find the open space boundaries in the field should the monuments
be insufficient.
31.8 Housing Design in Open Space Developments. The 75% open space requirement that is detailed
above means that housing (or other) development may take place on no more than 25% of any site of more
than 10.5 acres.
31.8.1 Must specific home sites be designated within the 25% (or less) area that is available for
development? Yes.
31.8.1.1 Designated Homesites. Proposed home sites that comply with all requirements of this
bylaw, specifically including WDB 31.9, must be shown within that portion of a proposed
open space development (25% or less) where development will be permitted.
31.8.1.2 Maximum Size of Designated Home Sites. Designated home sites may not exceed
the one-half acre clearing limit of WDB 31.9.6.1. All construction on the site except access
driveways, utility lines, and the underground components of on-site wastewater disposal
systems shall be confined to the designated home site.
31.8.2 How many home sites (what density) are permitted in open space developments? Open space
developments may have an average density of no more than one dwelling for every 80,000 square
feet, except that:
31.8.2.1 … land included in watershed protection buffers and slopes of 30% or more shall not
be included in the parcel size for the purposes of calculating the number of home sites
permitted, and
31.8.2.2 … that areas with a slope of 15% or more may have an average density of only one
home site for every 10 acres.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 8
31.8.2.3 Incentives for Lower Densities. Voluntary reductions in density are encouraged by
WDB 15.2.3.1 and WDB 15.11.2.
31.8.3 What is the minimum lot size in an open space development? The minimum lot size shall be
15,000 square feet, but lot sizes shall vary with the terrain. Uniform lot sizing that contributes to a
suburban character will not be approved.
31.8.4 Is there a maximum cluster size? Yes. No cluster shall include more than seven lots, except
as provided by WDB 31.11, below.
31.8.5 Are there requirements for access and connectivity beyond those established elsewhere in
this bylaw? Yes.
31.8.5.1 Internal Circulation. Open space developments that include more than one cluster
shall minimize the number of points of access to public roads by relying on internal roads that
link the clusters. Such roads may cross protected open space, in compliance with WDB
31.7.4.2. Where the terrain will not allow a road connecting clusters, a connecting trail shall
be provided.
31.8.5.2 Connectivity. Where the terrain allows, the DRB may require road or trail connections
to other properties through protected open space where necessary to provide emergency access
or improve neighborhood circulation. All crossings of protected open space must comply with
the standards of WDB 31.7.4.2.
31.8.6 Are there minimum distances between clusters of home sites? Yes. Clusters of lots must be
effectively separated from neighboring properties, public ways, and each other by open space. The
following criteria will be used in determining compliance with this standard.
31.8.6.1 Using the Terrain. Terrain features, including existing woods, fields that remain in
agricultural use, ridgelines, steep slopes, streams, wetlands, and the watershed protection
buffers required by the Chapter 29 of this bylaw should be used to separate clusters, and to
buffer home sites from adjoining properties and public ways whenever possible.
31.8.6.2 Buffer Width. The width of the buffers between clusters shall vary with the terrain
and the presence of screening vegetation. The DRB may require that the minimum buffer be
anywhere from 100 to 500 feet. In making its determination of the minimum required buffer
between clusters, the DRB shall consider the advice of the Conservation Commission and the
following factors:
· the presence of vegetation and its effectiveness in providing visual screening
between clusters, and between clusters and public ways;
· the presence of terrain features, including slopes, ridges, and valleys, and their
effectiveness in visually separating clusters and separating clusters and public
ways; and
· the orientation of the proposed cluster to public ways.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 9
31.8.6.3 Enhancing Buffers. The developer may propose, and the DRB may approve, the use
of earthen berms and plantings to increase the effectiveness of buffers between clusters, and
between clusters and public ways.
31.8.6.4 Adjoining Open Space. The applicant may propose, and the DRB may find, that a
narrower buffer is adequate along a property boundary where there is protected open space or
terrain that is unsuitable for building on the adjoining property.
31.9 Lots and Home Sites. Each lot created shall contain a home site that meets the criteria adopted here.
The concept plan submitted with the pre-application shall show how home sites are individually placed so
as to best maintain environmental quality, accessibility, compatibility with neighboring uses, and the rural
character this zoning district protects. The following criteria will be used in determining compliance with
this standard.
31.9.1 Provide for Adequate Wastewater Treatment Each lot shall provide for adequate wastewater
treatment, either through an onsite septic system or a community sewerage system as permitted by
WDB 31.
31.9.2 Ensure an Adequate Water Supply. The developer shall demonstrate that each dwelling can
reasonably expect to obtain an adequate domestic water supply. Wherever the proposed average
density will exceed one dwelling unit for each 10 acres, this shall be accomplished by actual on-site
well testing supervised by a registered engineer or a groundwater hydrologist.
31.9.3 Provide Safe Road Access. Each home site shall have safe access to an existing or proposed
public or private road.
31.9.4 Respect the Terrain. Home sites and the access drives and roads serving them shall be placed
along the contours of the land in a way that minimizes grading and the visual impact of the
development.
31.9.5 Provide Trail Connections. Home sites shall, where possible, be connected to the Town’s
trail system – existing or proposed - via the adjoining open space.
31.9.6 Minimize Visual Impacts Using Existing Vegetation and Terrain. Where possible, homes and
accessory buildings shall be effectively screened from view from public ways by existing woodland or
forest vegetation or the terrain. This does not mean that the development has to be invisible: brief views
of structures through the branches of screening vegetation or a break in screening terrain are acceptable.
It does mean that homes must be carefully sited and that the clearing of existing screening vegetation
must be strictly limited.
31.9.6.1 Clearing Limit. Clearing existing woodland or forest vegetation for a home site,
including the yard and the space occupied by any accessory structure shall be limited to a halfacre.
This does not include access driveways, utility lines, or areas cleared for the underground
components of on-site wastewater disposal systems, but does include on-site circulation and
parking areas.
31.9.6.2 Breaks in Slope: Forested. Existing woodland and forest vegetation shall be left in
place, forming a wooded or forested buffer of at least 50 feet in width, at the top of any distinct
break in any slope of more than 8%. These buffers may be thinned (the canopy cover within
the view corridor must still be at least 25%) to provide one view corridor of no more than 25
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 10
feet in width for each dwelling. The DRB may, with the advice of the Conservation
Commission, permit additional view corridors where the required thinning will not have an
adverse visual impact.
31.9.6.3 Breaks in Slope: Not Forested. Where there is no existing woodland and forest
vegetation to be left in place, a forest buffer of at least 50 feet in width must be planted at the
top of any distinct break in any slope of more than 8%. These buffers may include view
corridors that are no more than 25 feet in width.
31.9.7 Minimize Visual Impacts in Open Areas. Where homes and accessory buildings cannot be
effectively screened by existing vegetation or the terrain, they should be sited where they will be
visually absorbed by a slope and or woods. This means that the structure, or structures, are sited and
designed so that they blend into the background created by a slope or a stand of trees. No part of a
structure that is “absorbed” is ever outlined against the sky, as seen from any public way. Further,
there is low contrast, as measured by color and reflectivity, between the structure and the background
provided by the vegetation and terrain.
31.9.8 Supplement Screening or Absorption, as Necessary. To augment visual screening or
absorption, a developer may also propose, and the DRB, with the advice of the Conservation
Commission, may approve:
31.9.8.1 … a building height limit of less than 36 feet;
31.9.8.2 … the installation and maintenance of screening vegetation and berms;
31.9.8.3 … limiting the area of glass and other reflective surfaces and specifying exterior
colors that do not contrast with the landscape; and/or
31.9.8.4 … limiting building bulk or arranging building mass to reduce the visual impact of a
dwelling or accessory structures. This may include placing buildings along rather than across
a slope and/or “stepping” a building into the slope to minimize grading.
31.9.9 Demonstrate Compliance. Applicants may be required to place brightly-colored balloons,
erect story poles, or provide three-dimensional visual simulations to demonstrate that a typical home
and outbuildings would be absorbed by the vegetation or terrain, or that the installation of berms and
plantings, and architectural techniques would result in visual absorption of the home.
31.10 Community Sewerage Systems. Community sewerage systems serving a single cluster of lots may
be used to help protect open space where the use of individual on-site systems is limited by terrain
conditions.
31.10.1 Can a community sewerage system be installed anywhere? No. Community sewerage
systems may not be used where the soils at the proposed site are unsuitable or only marginally
suitable for the use of such systems.
31.10.2 What measures are required to obtain approval of a community sewerage system?
Community sewerage systems are required improvements subject to all requirements of Chapter 7
of this bylaw, specifically including the continuing maintenance requirements of WDB 7.2.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 11
31.12 Barn Restoration. As provided by 3.2.4 of the Town Plan, preservation and restoration of historic
barns will be encouraged by permitting residential uses of such structures that include more than two
dwelling units.
31.12.1 What makes a barn historic? An historic barn is one that is listed on the national or state
registers of historic places.
31.12.2 What about the density standard? Relaxation of the use standard in this zoning district does
not constitute a relaxation of the density requirements. A landowner who wishes to place, for
example, four apartments in an historic barn must still have a parcel of at least 320,000 square feet.
31.12.3 How will the plans for restoration of an historic barn be reviewed? Restoration of an
historic barn requires a discretionary permit, with review by the HAAC preceding review by the
DRB.
31.12.4 What standards will the HAAC and DRB use in their review? Barn restoration plans will
be evaluated and approved or rejected based on how well they maintain the original, agricultural
appearance and context of the structure while providing a reasonable housing choice. The Secretary
of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation (https://www.nps.gov/tps/standards/rehabilitation.htm)
shall be utilized in the review of barn restoration plans.
31.12.5 Are any other nonagricultural uses of restored barns permitted? Yes. Restored barns may
be used for home businesses with the approval of an Administrative Permit, and for use as banquet
facilities with the approval of a Discretionary Permit by the DRB.
31.13 Standards for Nonresidential/Nonagricultural Uses. As Table 31.A indicates, a few
nonagricultural, nonresidential uses may be permitted in this zoning district. These include nonmetallic
mining and quarrying, limited manufacturing using local farm or forest products, and veterinary services.
All require a discretionary permit. All must comply with the standards established here.
31.13.1 Is the scale of commercial operations in the ARZD limited? Yes. Those commercial
enterprises that are not defined as accepted agricultural or forestry practices or home businesses shall
be limited in scale to help maintain the rural character of this zoning district. No such use shall require
more than 16 parking spaces.
31.13.2 Are outdoor sales permitted for nonresidential/nonagricultural uses in the ARZD? Yes,
but only within areas designated for that purpose on the approved plan. Outdoor sales outside
designated areas are a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
31.13.3 Is outdoor storage permitted for nonresidential/nonagricultural uses in the ARZD? Yes,
but only within side and rear yards that are designated for that purpose on an approved site plan.
Outdoor storage outside designated areas is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as
provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
31.13.3.1 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage areas must be buffered from public ways and
adjoining properties, as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
32.13.3.2 Screening Fences. Screening fences or walls, which shall be located on the interior
side of the buffer required by WDB 23.3.2, may be required by the DRB. Where such a
requirement is imposed, the screening fence or wall shall be:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 12
· … an architectural extension of any building to which it is attached, with similar
colors and detailing, or
· … a classic rural fence pattern, like stone or split rail.
· Security fencing may be proposed. Where the DRB finds that security fencing
is compatible with the rural landscape, it may require that such fencing be on
the interior side of a wider than ordinarily required landscaped, forested, or
wooded buffer.
31.13.3.3 Temporary Storage. The temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and
materials outside designated areas is permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 1 - | 13
Table 31.A – Agricultural/Rural
Residential Zoning District
NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically listed in this table are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Residential (dwellings) As described in WDB 31.1.3.3 and WDB 31.4.
Agriculture. Forestry, Fishing & Hunting 11
Including the processing, distribution, and sale of
products primarily from the farm or woodlot.
Support Activities 115
Specifically includes the maintenance and repair of
farm and forestry equipment.
Nonmetallic Mineral Mining & Quarrying 2120
Support Activities for Mining 213 But only as an accessory to 2120.
Utilities 20
Regulation of utilities is generally at the state level
in VT.
Electric Power Generation 2491
Specifically includes power generation from farm
wastes
Manufacturing, but only as listed below In compliance with WDB 31.13 only.
Food Manufacturing 291 Made primarily with local products only.
Wineries 29213 Using primarily local grapes only.
Textiles 293-17 Made primarily with local products only.
Apparel, Leather Products 295-16 As a home business only.
Sawmills 3111 Using primarily local timber only
Furniture manufacturing 337 As a home business only
Wholesale Trade 42 Permitted only as an accessory to other uses
Retail Trade, as per the note 43-44
Sale of local farm and forest products is permitted,
otherwise retail trade is permitted as a home
business only.
Transportation and Warehousing 48-49 As an accessory use only.
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services As a home business only, except as below.
Veterinary Services 541940
Residential Educational and Training Programs 611
Tax Parcels 16:104:270 and 300 only.
Requires approval of a Discretionary Permit
Accommodations and Food Services, but only as
listed
Bed and Breakfast Inns 721191 Requires approval of a Discretionary Permit
Other Services 81 As a home business only, except as below.
Auto Repair and Maintenance 81111
As a home business or incidentally as part of the
repair and maintenance of farm and forest
equipment and in compliance with WDB 31.13
Outdoor Recreation
Public parks are permitted in all zoning districts.
Private outdoor recreation is permitted as described
in WDB 31.1.3.5
Public Administration 92
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 2 - | 1
Chapter 32
Business Park Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Business Park
Zoning District (BPZD) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within it.
32.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Permitted Uses
32.1.1 What are the boundaries of the BPZD? This zoning district is shown on the official zoning
map that accompanies this bylaw.
32.1.2 What is the purpose of the BPZD? This zoning district includes Blair Park and adjoining lots
that are used primarily for office buildings, senior housing, and the Vermont Technical College. The
area is almost built-out as a conventional office park where relatively large buildings are surrounded
by surface parking and landscaped grounds. The standards adopted here provide for that pattern to
continue, but include three important changes from the previous zoning.
32.1.2.1 Relationship to the Street. New buildings in the BPZD will be required to have a
direct relationship to the street as well as to their own parking lots, resulting in somewhat more
pedestrian-oriented development.
32.1.2.2 Vermont Technical College. Vermont Technical College’s Williston campus has
replaced some retail and office uses. A technical college can involve a considerable diversity
of principal and accessory uses, all of which are now explicitly permitted.
32.1.2.3 Retailing. The previous zoning permitted a wide range of retail uses in the BPZD.
There are currently only four retail stores, however, and the Town Plan suggests that retailing
should be concentrated to the south, in the Taft Corners and Mixed Use Commercial zoning
districts. Table 32-A still permits a wide range of retail uses, but retailing will now be confined
to lots with frontage on Route 2. Retail in other parts of this district can only be permitted as
an accessory use as described in WDB 17.2.
32.1.2.4 Restaurants. Standalone restaurants are not permitted in the BPZD. Accessory food
services as described in WDB 17.3 are allowed, however.
32.1.3 What uses are permitted in the BPZD? The permitted uses are listed in Table 32-A.
32.1.4 Are accessory uses and structures permitted? Customary accessory uses and structures are
permitted in all zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
32.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
32.3 Dimensional Standards
32.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the BPZD? The maximum building height in this
zoning district is 36 feet, except where the incentives of WDB 32.7 apply.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 2 - | 2
32.3.2 Must development in the BPZD be set back from property lines? Setbacks from rear and
side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of
Chapter 23.
32.3.3 Must development in the BPZD be set back from roads? The minimum setback from any
road in this zoning district is 25 feet.
32.3.4 What use may be made of the required setbacks? The setbacks must be landscaped as a
Type I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads,
pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where they are permitted, overhead utility lines
may cross required setbacks. Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a required
setback. Access drives and roads, and parking and loading areas may not be placed within the
required setbacks.
32.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 for an explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of
the density standards of this bylaw.
32.4.1 What density of residential development is permitted in the BPZD? The average density of
residential development, including mixed use development, permitted in this zoning district is a
minimum of 5.0 DU/A, a net of 7.5 DU/A, and a maximum of 15 DU/A with a transfer of development
rights or the provision of affordable housing.
32.4.2 What density of nonresidential development in permitted in the BPZD? See WDB 19.3
for an explanation of how the standards of this bylaw regulate nonresidential densities.
32.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29 of this bylaw.
32.6 Specific Standards. Specific standards for development in the BPZD are presented in WDB 32.4
and 5.
32.6.1 Is there an incentive for performance? Yes. The height limit will be increased from 36 to 52
feet where perpetually affordable housing and/or structured parking are provided. To qualify, the
development must create more than three (3) dwelling units, of which 30% or greater are perpetually
affordable, and/or provide 30% or greater of its parking requirement in a structure, resulting in a
commensurate reduction in surface parking and loading areas.
32.6.2 Are there any limits on the use of the incentive offered by 32.6.1? Yes. It is not the intent of
the building height incentive to permit the construction of four or five story buildings with flat roofs.
This incentive is intended to make it possible to build three or, depending on the grade of the site,
four story buildings that have diverse, attractive rooflines.
32.7 Outdoor Sales and Storage
32.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted in the BPZD? No.
32.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted in the BPZD? No. An exception for the temporary storage
of construction equipment and materials is provided in Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 2 - | 3
32.8 Pedestrian-Orientation
32.8.1 Must sidewalks be provided in the BPZD? Where they do not exist, yes. See WDB 15.2.4.
32.8.2 What else is required to make the BPZD more pedestrian-friendly? Buildings must invite
pedestrians in, rather than being isolated from the street and sidewalk.
32.8.2.1 Pedestrian Connections. There must be a direct pedestrian connection between the
principal building entrance/s and the sidewalk/s or path/s along the adjoining street/s. This is
in contrast to the current situation in which the connection from the parking area is the
principal connection.
32.8.2 Building Line to Street. New buildings must come to the setback from the street. This
means that parking must move to the side and/or rear of the building, and/or be provided in a
structure. An exception of up to 30% of a building’s frontage may be made for an entry plaza
or courtyard. The DRB may also permit an exception for accessible parking.
Table 32.A – Business Park Zoning District NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically listed in this table are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with
all applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Residential (multi-family dwellings) At an average density of 5 DU/A.
Retail Trade
44-45 New retail uses are permitted only on lots
fronting but excluding NAICS 447 – Gasoline Stations on Route 2.
Information 51
Excluding NAICS 51213, Motion Picture
Theatres, which are confined to the TCZD.
Finance and Insurance 52
Real Estate 531
Professional, Scientific, & Technical Services,
excluding 54194. Veterinary Services as per the note
54 Excluding vet services for large animals.
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative & Support Services
but excluding 5617, Services to Buildings
561
Educational Services 61 See WDB 32.1.2.2.
Health Care & Social Services 62
Fitness Centers 71394
Accommodations (Lodging) 721
Personal Care Services 8121
Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional, and
Similar Organizations
813
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 3 - | 1
Chapter 33
Gateway Zoning District North
This chapter establishes the Gateway Zoning
District North (GZDN) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within that district.
33.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Permitted Uses
33.1.1 What are the boundaries of the GZDN? The Gateway Zoning District North is shown on the
official zoning map which accompanies this bylaw.
33.1.2 What is the purpose of the GZDN? This zoning district includes Williston’s northern
“gateway,” on the west side of Route 2A. It offers a location for a continuing diverse mix of light
industrial, commercial, and office uses.
33.1.3 What uses are permitted in the GZDN? See Table 33.A and WDB 33.1.3.1 and 2, below.
33.1.3.1. Retail Commercial. Predominantly retail uses are permitted only on lots facing Route
2A. Retailing will be further limited to uses that ordinarily require considerable space relative
to the volume of sales and uses and that rely on outdoor sales and storage.
33.1.3.2 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all zoning
districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
33.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
33.3 Dimensional Standards
33.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the GZDN? Yes. The maximum building height in
this zoning district is 36 feet.
33.3.2 Must development in the GZDN be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of
Chapter 23.
33.3.3 Must development in the GZDN be set back from roads? Yes. Setbacks from roads in this
zoning district shall be:
33.3.3.1 … from the right-of-way of Route 2A, 25feet; and
33.3.3.2 … from the right-of-way of any other road, 25 feet.
33.3.3.3 Average Setback Exception. The DRB may allow the setback required along a local
road to be reduced to the average existing setback. The average existing setback will be
determined by the Administrator by averaging the existing setback on all properties that are
along the same street and within 300 feet of the lot where a reduction is proposed. A reduction
shall be permitted only where the reduced setback is sufficient to permit for the construction
of a sidewalk or, where one is called for in the Town Plan, a multi-use path.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 3 - | 2
33.3.4 What use can be made of the required setbacks? The setbacks must be landscaped as a Type
I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23. Access drives, roads, pedestrian ways,
underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility lines, may cross
required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a
required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within required setbacks.
33.3.5 Is a minimum frontage required in the GZDN? Yes. All lots in this zoning district must have
at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may require
a greater frontage where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
33.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 for an explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of
the density standards of this bylaw. WDB 19.3 explains how the standards of this bylaw regulate
nonresidential densities.
33.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29.
33.6 Specific Standards Specific standards are presented in WDB 33.7 and 33.8.
33.7 Outdoor Sales and Storage
33.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted in the GZDN? Outdoor sales are permitted in this zoning district,
but only within areas designated for that purpose on the approved plan. Outdoor sales outside
designated areas are a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
33.7.1.1 Within Buffers. Outdoor sales areas are not permitted within the landscaped buffers
required by WDB 33.7.1.2 and Chapter 23.
33.7.1.2 Within Setbacks. Outdoor sales may be permitted within the front setbacks
established by WDB 33.3.1, in compliance with the following standards.
· Outdoor sales areas may, along with access drives and other impervious
surfaces, occupy no more than 50% of the area included within the setback. The
remaining area must be landscaped, as required by WDB 33.3.4.
· Outdoor sales areas must be separated from roads by a continuous landscaped
buffer that is at least eight (8) feet wide and includes the street trees required
by Chapter 26 of this bylaw.
· Outdoor sales areas must be separated from sidewalks or recreation paths by a
continuous landscaped buffer of at least six (6) feet.
33.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? Yes. Outdoor storage is permitted in this zoning district,
but only within side and rear yards that are designated for that purpose on an approved site plan.
Outdoor storage outside designated areas is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as
provided by WDB 7.4-7.6.
33.7.2.1 Buffering and Setbacks. Outdoor storage areas must be buffered from all adjoining
properties as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 3 - | 3
33.7.2.2 Screening. Screening fences or walls, which shall be located on the interior side of
the buffer required by WDB 33.3.4, may be required by the DRB. Where such a requirement
is imposed, the screening shall be an architectural extension of the building, with similar colors
and detailing.
33.7.2.3 Temporary Storage. Temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and
materials is permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
33.8 Slopes – Watershed Protection. The northern and, to a lesser extent, western edges of this
zoning district include steep slopes above the Winooski River. Development on or near these slopes
is subject to review by the Conservation Commission and the standards of Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
It is also subject to the additional standards adopted here.
33.8.1 Are there additional limits on clearing and grading that could affect steep slopes in this
zoning district? Yes.
33.8.1.1 Below the Crest Line. There shall be no clearing or grading of slopes greater than
15%, except where the DRB finds that there can be no reasonable use of the property without
an exception to this standard.
33.8.1.2 Above the Crest Line. A 50-foot buffer shall be left above the crest line of the slope
above the river. Where there is existing forest or woodland vegetation within that buffer it
shall remain. Where the land has been previously cleared, woodland vegetation shall be reestablished
as part of the development. These required buffers may also be used to comply
with the landscaped buffer standards of Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
33.8.2 Are there additional limits on building that could affect steep slopes in this zoning district?
Yes. Grading should be minimized by careful attention to the siting of access drives and roads,
parking and loading areas, buildings, and other improvements, all of which should parallel the
contours of the slope. Larger buildings should be terraced or stepped along the slope to help minimize
both grading and apparent building mass. Retaining walls may be required to help minimize cut and
fill.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 3 - | 4
Table 33.A - Gateway Zoning District North NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
on parcels facing on Route 2A
Retail Trade
Motor Vehicle & Parts Dealers 441
Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores 442
Building Material & Garden Equipment & Supplies 444
Gasoline Stations, with convenience stores 44711
Convenience Stores 44512
Sporting Goods Stores 45111
off Route 2A
Construction 20
Manufacturing 31-33
Wholesale Trade 42
Retail Trade, but only as listed below
Motor Vehicle & Parts Dealers 441
Home Furnishings Stores 4424
Building Material & Garden Equipment & Supplies
Dealers
444
Manufactured Home Dealers 45393
Nonstore Retailers 454
Transportation & Warehousing,
but not 491, retail outlets for the Postal Service
48-49
Information, but not 51213, Theaters or Public
Libraries
51 Theaters and libraries should be
confined to the growth center or village
center.
Finance and Insurance
Investment Advisors 52393
Insurance Agencies and Brokerages 52421
Real Estate And Rental and Leasing
Real Estate Offices 5312
Real Estate, Related Activities 5313 Property managers and appraisers.
Rental & Leasing Services 532
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, but only as listed below
Profession and Technical Services 541
Testing Laboratories 54138
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 3 - | 5
Veterinary Services 541940 But only for small animals.
Admin & Support - Waste Management & Remediation, but only as listed below
Admin & Support Services 561-5616
Waste Management & Remediation Services 562
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers 71394
Accommodation & Food Services, as listed below
Limited Service Eating Places (cafeterias, snack
bars) 72421 Only as an accessory use.
Food Service Contractors 72401
Caterers 72402
Mobile Food Services (vendors, kiosks) 72403
Other Services, but only as listed below
Repair & Maintenance 811
Civic and Professional Organizations 813
Death Care Services 8124
Dry Cleaning & Laundry Services 81202
Linen & Uniform Supply 81203
Pet Care 81291
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 1
Chapter 34
Gateway Zoning District South
This chapter establishes the Gateway Zoning
District South (GZDS) and the standards that are
specifically applicable within that district.
34.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Uses Permitted
34.1.1 What are the boundaries of the GZDS? The GZDS is shown on the official zoning map that
accompanies this bylaw.
34.1.2 What is the purpose of the GZD? The area around Exit 12 is a “gateway,” in which many
people form their first impression of Williston. The high level of accessibility and visibility make
this an appropriate location for uses that serve travelers on I-89 and shoppers, as well as for offices
that attract commuters from throughout the region. Pedestrians will not be forgotten, however, nor
will pavement, steel, and chrome be allowed to dominate the view from the road. Special care will
be taken to protect the wooded hillsides south of I-89 and safe access to Route 2A will be a major
consideration.
34.1.3 What uses are permitted in the Gateway Zoning District South? Two principal types of
development are anticipated in the GZDS: traveler services and offices. This bylaw also allows
residential uses to be mixed with offices south of I-89 and provides limited opportunities for
industrial uses in existing and approved buildings.
34.1.3.1. Traveler Services. Parcels fronting Route 2A will continue to be developed for
services to travelers and commuters. The uses that may be approved are shown in Table
34.A. Park-and-ride lots are also permitted.
34.1.3.2 Office Parks. Off Route 2A, this area is suitable for offices that attract employees
and clients from throughout the region. The types of office use that may be permitted are
listed in Table 34.A.
34.1.3.3 Residential. Residential uses may be mixed with offices at a minimum average
density of five units per acre (5 du/A) and a maximum average density of 7.5 units per acre
(7.5 du/A). That maximum may be increased to as many as 10 dwelling units per acre with a
transfer of development rights, as permitted by WDB 19.5.
34.1.5.4 Light Industrial and Warehousing Uses. Industrial uses that do not generate large
volumes of truck traffic may be permitted in existing or approved buildings that are designed
for that purpose. WDB 34.9 and 34.10 set standards for such uses.
Approved? The term ‘approved’ is important in WDB 34.1.5.4 because it honors the possibility for one
additional building that was approved in the specific plan adopted for the Hillside East area That building could
be used for an industrial use that provides all of the public benefits listed in the specific plan.
34.1.3.5 Accessory Structures and Uses. Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 2
34.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
34.3 Dimensional Standards
34.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the GZDS? Yes. Building height in the GZDS is
limited to 36 feet, except where it is reduced to comply with WDB 34.8.5, below.
34.3.2 Must development in the GZDS be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements
of Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
34.3.3 Must development in the GZDS be set back from roads? Yes. Setbacks from roads in this
zoning district shall be:
34.3.3.1 From the Right-of-Way of I-89, 150 feet, except for public park-and-ride lots,
which may be within 50 feet of I-89;
34.3.3.2 From the Right-of-Way of Route 2A, 75 feet; and
34.3.3.3 From the Right-of-Way of Any Other Road, public or private, 50 feet.
34.3.3.4 Average Setback Exception. The DRB may allow the setback required along a local
road to be reduced to the average existing setback. The average existing setback will be
determined by the Administrator by averaging the existing setback on all properties that are
along the same street and within 300 feet of the lot where a reduction is proposed. A
reduction shall be permitted only where the reduced setback is sufficient to permit for the
construction of a sidewalk or, where one is called for in the Town Plan, a multi-use path.
34.3.4 What uses are permitted in the required setbacks? Setbacks must be landscaped as a
Type I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads,
pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead
utility lines, may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also
run parallel to and within a required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed
within the required setbacks.
34.3.5 Is a minimum lot frontage required in the GZDS? Yes. All lots in this zoning district
must have at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The
DRB may require a greater frontage where necessary to provide safe access.
34.4 Density Standards There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district. See Chapter 19 for an
explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of the density standards of this bylaw. WDB
19.3 explains how the standards of this bylaw regulate nonresidential densities.
34.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted, comply
with all standards established in Chapters 13-29 of this bylaw.
34.6 Specific Standards Standards that apply only in this zoning district are presented in WDB 34.7
and 34.8.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 3
34.7. Outdoor Sales and Storage
34.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted in the GZDS? With the exception of gas pumps, outdoor sales
are prohibited in this zoning district.
34.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted in the GZDS? Outdoor storage is prohibited in this zoning
district, except as provided here.
34.7.2.1 During Construction. Temporary storage of construction equipment and materials is
permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
34.7.2.2 Solid Waste. Solid waste storage that is sited and screened in compliance with this
bylaw is permitted.
34.7.2.3 Storage Parking. Service vehicles and vehicles awaiting repair and pick up may be
kept in parking areas that are:
· in a side or rear yard (behind the front building line);
· buffered as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw;
· in compliance with Chapter 14 of this bylaw.
34.8 Hillside Development
34.8.1 Is the clearing of woodland or forest limited? Clearing of wooded or forested sites with an
average slope of more than three percent (3%) will be limited to 35% of the area of the parcel that
is within the GZDS. The remainder of each site must remain in woodland or forest vegetation,
except as specifically provided by WDB 34.8.3. This clearing limit includes access roads and
utility lines.
34.8.2 Is pruning of the existing forest or woodland vegetation allowed? Trees may be pruned and
brush cleared to create sight lines that enhance security. Pruning shall not extend more than 10 feet
above the ground surface.
34.8.3 Is replacement of the existing forest or woodland vegetation with another type of
landscaping allowed? The intent of this chapter is to maintain the appearance of a wooded hillside
south of I-89. The existing forest or woodland vegetation may be managed, as provided by WDB
34.5.2, but may be thinned or replaced with conventional landscaping only as permitted here.
34.8.3.1 Park-and-Ride Lot. The setback for a park-and-ride lot along I-89 may be converted
to a Type III or IV landscaped buffer (see Chapter 23 for landscaped buffer types) to help
provide site security.
34.8.3.2 Conventional Lawns. Small areas of lawn or other conventional landscaping may be
proposed on the south-facing sides of buildings to highlight entryways and provide a place
for employees or residents to recreate. Conventional landscaping is also permitted in parking
lot islands or the central hub of a roundabout. These areas will be counted as part of the total
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 4
cleared area permitted by WDB 34.8.1. They must include major shade and/or coniferous
trees that have an expected mature height taller than the building.
34.8.3.3 North Sides. In order to protect views from the north, the existing scrub forest shall
be removed from the north side of each building and replaced with a minimum 75-foot wide
buffer that mimics the mature (climax) mixed hardwood and evergreen forest vegetation
expected on this site. In order to protect views while this required buffer matures, an
additional buffer of at least 75 feet of the existing scrub forest shall be retained to the north
of the planted buffer.
34.8.3.4 Defensible Space. Conventional landscaping shall be permitted only as provided in
WDB 34.8.3.2. The existing forest or woodland vegetation on the east and west sides of
buildings may be thinned, but not cleared, to provide a wildfire defense space no more than
30 feet in width.
34.8.4 Is there a limit on impervious surfaces in the GZDS? The total area of impervious surfaces
permitted in this zoning district is not directly limited, but the use of structured parking and porous
pavement to help minimize impervious surfaces is required wherever feasible.
34.8.4.1 Structured Parking. Structured parking must be used to provide at least 1/3 of the
required parking for any building larger than 10,000 square feet or any combination of
buildings totaling 40,000 square feet or more. The DRB may permit a partial exception to
this requirement if the applicant can show that it is not physically feasible to comply.
34.8.4.2 Porous Pavement, Porous pavements must be used for surface parking, walks, and
other flatwork. The DRB may permit a partial exception to this requirement if the applicant
can show that it is not physically feasible to comply.
34.8.5 Are there specific design standards for building on hillsides in the GZDS? Yes.
34.8.5.1 Minimize cut and fill. Grading should be minimized by careful attention to the
siting of access drives and roads, parking and loading areas, buildings, and other
improvements, all of which should parallel the contours of the slope. Monolithic buildings
should be avoided, and larger buildings should be terraced or stepped along the slope to help
minimize both grading and apparent building mass. Retaining walls may also be required to
help minimize cut and fill.
34.8.5.2 Minimize contrast. While color and vitality are encouraged in most of Williston’s
commercial areas, building design on the hillsides of the GZDS should minimize contrast
with the slope and its forest cover. Building orientation and height; building bulk or mass;
building materials and colors; the extent of glass (especially west-facing glass); and the
location and design of signs will all be reviewed for compliance with this principle.
34.8.5.3 Terrace parking and loading areas. Surface parking and loading areas should be
terraced or stepped along the slopes, with distinct level areas divided by ample areas of
retained forest or landscaping.
34.8.5.4 Visual Absorption. No building shall be silhouetted against the sky, as viewed from
any public way, except roads, sidewalks, and paths on the same parcel. To state this in
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 5
another way, all buildings shall be fully visually absorbed by the slope and its woodland or
forest cover.
34.8.5.5 Lighting. Careful attention must be paid to the impact of both outdoor and interior
lighting, as seen through windows, on views across the property. Illumination should be
subdued to the maximum extent consistent with the development’s use. Large expanses of
windows must not be placed on the north sides of buildings.
34.9 Industrial Uses.
34.9.1 Are “light” industrial uses permitted in the GZDS? Table 34.A permits manufacturing uses
in existing buildings, but only in compliance with WDB 34.9.2. New industrial buildings will not
be permitted in this zoning district, except where they are consistent with an approved specific
plan.
34.9.2 What standards apply to industrial uses in the GZDS?
34.9.2.1 Outdoor Sales and Storage are strictly limited. See WDB 34.7.
34.9.2.2 Suitability of Buildings and Property. Industrial uses shall only be allowed in
existing and approved buildings on sites that have already been designed for and are suitable
for industrial uses. Suitable buildings would have such design features as loading docks and
site configurations that can accommodate truck traffic and truck turning movements.
34.9.2.3 Environmental Impacts. Proposed industrial uses must not require permits from the
State of Vermont for discharges to the air or water, or use hazardous materials in quantities
that would trigger WDB 18.5.3’s requirement for a Hazardous Materials Management Plan,
with the exception of a stormwater discharge permit.
34.9.2.4 Compatibility with Permitted Uses. Industrial uses may be permitted in existing and
approved buildings in the GZDS only where their impacts on the environment, the town’s
infrastructure, and neighboring land uses are determined to be compatible with each other.
34.10 Wholesale Trade, Warehousing and Distribution.
34.10.1 Are wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution uses permitted in the GZDS? Table
34.A permits wholesale trade and warehousing uses in existing buildings, but only in compliance
with WDB 34.10.2. New warehousing and distribution buildings will not be permitted, except
where they are consistent with an approved specific plan.
34.10.2 What standards apply to industrial uses in the GZDS?
34.10.2.1 Outdoor Sales and Storage are strictly limited. See WDB 34.7.
34.10.2.2 Suitability of Buildings. Warehousing, wholesale trade, and distribution uses shall
only be allowed in existing and approved buildings that have already been designed for and
are suitable for warehousing, wholesale trade and distribution. Suitable buildings would
have such design features as loading docks and site configurations that can accommodate
truck traffic and truck turning movements.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 6
34.10.2.3 Compatibility with Permitted Uses. Warehousing and distribution uses may be
permitted in existing and approved buildings in the GZDS only where their impacts on the
environment, the town’s infrastructure, and neighboring land uses are determined to be
compatible with each other.
Table 34.A - Gateway Zoning District South NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with
all applicable requirements of this bylaw and the purpose statement for this zoning district.
on parcels adjoining Route 2A ONLY
Retail Trade, as below
Gasoline Stations, with convenience stores 44711
Accommodation & Food Services, as below No drive-through food service is
permitted in Williston.
Hotels and Motels, except Casino Hotels 72111
RV Parks and Recreational Camps 72121
Full Service Restaurants 72411
Limited Service Eating Places (cafeterias, snack
bars) 72421
Caterers 72402 As an accessory to other permitted uses
Mobile Food Services (vendors, kiosks) 72403 As an accessory to other permitted uses
Drinking Places 72421 As an accessory to other permitted uses
offices on all parcels
Information, but specifically not 51213,
Theaters 51 Theaters are confined to the TCZD.
Finance & Insurance 52
No drive-through banking is permitted in
the GZDS.
Professional, Scientific, and Technical
Services, but specifically not 54194, Veterinary
Services that involve livestock
54 Vets for livestock are permitted only in the
ARZD.
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative and Support Services, but
specifically not 5617, Services to Buildings
561 5617 is permitted in the IZDW
Educational Services 61
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports,
Similar Events 7113
Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional
Org 813
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 4 - | 7
In existing and approved buildings ONLY
Manufacturing, but specifically not 322,
Paper, 324, Petroleum and Coal Products, 325,
Chemicals, or 331, Primary Metals
Manufacturing
31-33 See WDB 34.9 for standards for these
uses.
Furniture and Home Furnishing Merchant
Wholesalers 4232
Prof and Commercial Equipment and Supplies
Merchant Wholesalers 4234
Electrical and Electronic Goods Merchant
Wholesalers 4236
Hardware and Plumbing and Heating
Equipment and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers 4237
Miscellaneous Durable Goods Merchant
Wholesalers 4239
Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods 424
Beer, Wine, and Distilled Alcoholic Beverage
Merchant Wholesalers 4248
Miscellaneous Non Durable Goods Merchant
Wholesalers 4249
Wholesale Electronics Markets and Agents and
Wholesalers 425
Warehousing and Storage 493
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 5 - | 1
Chapter 35
Industrial Zoning District East
This chapter establishes the Industrial Zoning
District East (IZDE) and the standards that are
specifically applicable within it.
35.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Permitted Uses
35.1.1 What are the boundaries of the IZDE? This zoning district is shown on the official zoning
map that accompanies this bylaw.
35.1.2 What is the purpose of the IZDE? This zoning district was originally created for IBM’s
Williston facility. The 2016-2024 Town Plan expanded it to include lands owned by the Chittenden
Solid Waste District and VELCO. This zoning district is intended to accommodate uses related to
computer and electronic equipment design and manufacturing, technology development and
utilization businesses, offices of technology and business services that do not generate customer
traffic, solid waste disposal, and utilities in the area that is accessible from Redmond Road in
north-central Williston. IBM’s operations in this zoning district have typically included data
management, micro chip design, and office functions in support of IBM’s manufacturing functions,
including those located across the Winooski River in Essex Junction in a campus type setting. In
recent years, IBM has begun to lease space in their existing buildings in this zone to other tenants
who require office facilities within a business campus type setting. This zoning district may also
be home to a future public works facility and a park built on the reclaimed landfill.
35.1.3 What uses are permitted in the IZDE? The uses permitted in this zoning district are listed
in Table 35.A. Changes in that list of uses may be authorized through the specific plan process.
35.1.3.1 Landfills. This bylaw applies to the regional landfill that may be built on the lands
in this zoning district only to the limited extent permitted by 24 V.S.A. § 4413(a)(5).
35.1.3.2 Public Power. As provided by 24 V.S.A. § 4413(b), this bylaw does not regulate
public power generation and transmission facilities.
35.1.3.3 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory structures and uses are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
35.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
35.3 Dimensional Standards
35.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the IZDE? Yes. The maximum building height in
the IZDE is 36 feet.
35.3.2 Must development in the IZDE be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements
of Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 5 - | 2
35.3.3 Must development in the IZDE be set back from roads? Yes. The minimum setback from
any road in this zoning district shall be 50 feet.
35.3.4 What use may be made of the required setbacks? The required setbacks must be landscaped
as a Type I, III, or IV buffers in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads,
pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility
lines, may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to
and within a required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within required
setbacks.
35.3.5 Is a minimum lot frontage required in the IZDE? Yes. All lots in this zoning district must
have at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may
require a greater frontage where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
35.4 Density Standards. Lot Size. There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district. See Chapter
19 for an explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of the density standards of this
bylaw. WDB 19.3 explains how the standards of this bylaw regulate nonresidential densities.
35.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29.
35.6 Specific Standards Standards that apply on in this zoning district are presented in WDB 35.7.
35.7. Outdoor Sales and Storage
35.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted? No. Retail uses are not permitted in this zoning district.
35.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? Yes. Outdoor storage is permitted in this zoning district,
but only within areas that are designated for that purpose on an approved site plan. Outdoor
storage outside designated areas is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided
in WDB 7.4-7.6.
35.7.2.1 Buffering. Outdoor storage areas must be buffered from all public ways and
adjoining properties as required by Chapter 23.
35.7.2.2 Screening. Screening fences or walls must also be provided as required by Chapter
23 of this bylaw.
35.7.2.3 Temporary Storage. Temporary storage of construction equipment and materials is
permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
35.8 Specific Plans. Specific plans (see Chapter 9 of this bylaw) may be used to refine the requirements
of this zoning district. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application, require that the applicant submit
a specific plan before a discretionary permit for a new use, a new structure, or a major addition will be
approved.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 5 - | 3
Table 35.A - Industrial Zoning District East NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Mining, but only as listed below
Nonmetallic Mineral Mining & Quarrying 2120
Accessory to solid waste management and
disposal only.
Manufacturing, but only as listed below
Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing 334
Telecommunication Facilities 517 In compliance with Chapter 21.
Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services 5182
Finance 52 Only without in-person customer contact.
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services,
but only as listed below
Engineering and Related Services 5413
But not those involving on-site customer
contact or deployment of field service
personnel.
Design Services 5414
But not those involving on-site customer
contact or deployment of field service
personnel.
Computer Systems 5415 Computer System Design and Related Services
Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting
Services 5416
Scientific Research and Development Services 5417
Waste Management & Remediation Services 562
Utilities 22 See WDB 35.1.3.2.
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 6 - | 1
Chapter 36
Industrial Zoning District West
This chapter establishes the Industrial Zoning
District West (IZDW) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within it.
36.1 Boundaries – Purpose
36.1.1 What are the boundaries of the IZDW? This zoning district is shown on the official zoning
map that accompanies this bylaw.
36.1.2 What is the purpose of the IZDW? This zoning district accommodates a variety of
industrial and some commercial uses, providing numerous jobs. The principal goal here is to ensure
that industrial uses can prosper without adverse impacts on or complaints from incompatible
neighbors.
36.1.3 What uses are permitted in the IZDW? See Table 36.A and the following notes.
36.1.3.1 Limited Commercial. Commercial uses will be limited to space-extensive retailing
and a limited range of services that generally would not contribute to the on-the-street
vitality of a retail shopping area.
36.1.3.2 Offices. Independent offices are not generally permitted in this zoning district, but
may be permitted in business incubators or in order to support the adaptive re-use of existing
industrial buildings.
Business Incubator. A space that is made available to start-up enterprises at less than market rates. Incubators
generally provide central services to the start-ups, including shared administrative support and business planning.
36.1.3.3 Accessory Structures and Uses. Accessory uses and structures are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided in Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
36.1.3.4 Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. The IZDW is the only zoning district where
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries are allowed. Medical Marijuana dispensaries in the IZDW
are only allowed as follows:
36.1.3.4.1 Discretionary Permit Required. An Administrative Permit to establish a
Medical Marijuana Dispensary may only be issued by the Zoning Administrator following
the approval of a Discretionary Permit by the DRB, following all of the required
procedures of WDB 6.
36.1.3.4.2 Submission Requirements and Security Plan. Applications for Medical
Marijuana Dispensaries must include all of the information required by the Discretionary
Permit Checklist and must also include a Security Plan that explains how the Dispensary
will be secured including:
· A description of how all points of entry (including but not limited to
doors, windows, HVAC grates and roof accesses) will be secured.
· A description of how all marijuana materials will be secured within the
dispensary
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 6 - | 2
· A description of what on-site security will be provided during hours of
operation.
· A description of all alarm systems and automatic lighting or other
systems that will be used to provide security for the dispensary after
hours.
36.1.3.4.3 Hours of operation. The DRB may permit a medical marijuana dispensary to
operate between the hours of 9:00 AM and 6:00PM, Monday through Friday. In
consultation with Williston’s Planning, Police and Fire departments, the DRB may decide
to further restrict the hours of operation of a Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
36.1.3.4.4 Signage. Signage for a Medical Marijuana Dispensary may only be approved as
a part of the Discretionary Permit. Signage shall include text only and shall not incorporate
any graphical elements including but not limited to pictures, icons or symbols. Signs for
medical marijuana dispensaries may only be placed on the wall of the building containing
the main entrance of the dispensary within OR on the ground within 50 feet of the
dispensary entrance. Signs are limited to one (1) wall sign of 12 square feet in size OR one
freestanding sign no more than six (6) feet in height of no more than eight(8) square feet in
size.
36.1.3.4.5 Other Limitations on Operation of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries. A
Medical Marijuana Dispensary may only be permitted if it meets all of the requirements
and operates under all of the restrictions of 18 V.S.A §4471-4472 as it was adopted in June
of 2012, including but not limited to the number of registered patients, amounts of
marijuana allowed on-site, and all prohibitions on the consumption of marijuana contained
therein.
36.1.3.4.7 Location No Medical Marijuana Dispensary shall be located within 1000 feet of
the property line of a child care center or within 2000 feet of the property line of a school
in existence at the time a complete Discretionary Permit application for the Dispensary is
filed with the Zoning Administrator.
36.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
36.3 Dimensional Standards
36.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the IZDW? Yes. Building height in the IZDW is
limited to 36 feet. Equipment used for manufacturing (NAICS 31-33) located on parcels with
frontage on avenues A, B C, or D at least 300 feet from Industrial Avenue and Williston Road
may exceed this maximum with the approval of a discretionary permit by the DRB. Applicants
will be required to obtain written authorization from the FAA for any equipment allowed under
this provision as required by WDB 4.3.
36.3.2 Must development in the IZDW be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from
rear and side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer
requirements of Chapter 23.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 6 - | 3
36.3.3 Must development in the IZDW be set back from roads? Yes. The minimum setbacks
from roads in this zoning district shall be:
36.3.3.1 … from the right-of-way of I-89, 150 feet; and
36.3.3.2 … from the right-of-way of any other road, 35 feet.
36.3.3.3 Average Setback Exception. The DRB may allow the setback required along a local
road to be reduced to the average existing setback. The average existing setback will be
determined by the Administrator by averaging the existing setback on all properties that are
along the same street and within 300 feet of the lot where a reduction is proposed. A
reduction shall be permitted only where the reduced setback is sufficient to permit for the
construction of a sidewalk or, where one is called for in the Town Plan, a multi-use path.
36.3.4 What use may be made of the required setbacks? The required setbacks must be landscaped
as a Type I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23. Access drives, roads, pedestrian ways,
underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility lines may cross
required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a
required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within the required setbacks.
36.3.5 Is a minimum lot frontage required in the IZDW? Yes. All lots must have at least 40 feet
of frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may require a greater
frontage where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
36.4 Density Standards. There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district. See chapter 19 for an
explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of the density standards of this bylaw.
WDB 19.3 explains how the standards of this bylaw regulated nonresidential densities.
36.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29.
36.6 Specific Standards Specific Standards are presented in WDB 36.7.
36.7. Outdoor Sales and Storage
36.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted? Yes. Outdoor sales are permitted in this zoning district, but
only within areas designated for that purpose on the approved plan. Outdoor sales outside
designated areas are a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
36.7.1.1 Outdoor sales areas must be separated from public sidewalk/s or path/s by a lawn or
other landscaped area.
36.7.1.2 Outdoor sales areas must not be within required setbacks or landscaped buffers.
36.7.1.3 Outdoor sales areas that contain more than 4,000 square feet of paving must comply
with the landscaping requirements for parking areas. See WDB 23.5.
36.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? Yes. Outdoor storage is permitted in this zoning district,
but only within side and rear yards that are designated for that purpose on an approved site plan.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 6 - | 4
Outdoor storage outside designated areas is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as
provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
36.7.2.1 Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage must be buffered from public ways and adjoining
properties, as required by Chapter 23.
36.7.2.2 Screening. Screening fences or walls, which shall be located on the interior side of
the buffer required by WDB 36.3.4, above, may be required by the DRB. Where such a
requirement is imposed, the screening shall be an architectural extension of the building,
with similar colors and detailing.
36.7.2.3 Temporary Storage. Temporary storage of construction equipment and materials is
permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
36.8 Specific Plans. Specific plans (see Chapter 9 of this bylaw) may be used to refine the requirements
of this zoning district. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application, require that the applicant submit
a specific plan before a discretionary permit for a new use, new structure, or major addition will be
approved.
Table 36.A - Industrial Zoning District – West NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Mining, but only as listed below
Nonmetallic Mineral Mining & Quarrying 2120
Support Activities for Mining 213 But only as an accessory to the above.
Construction 23
Manufacturing 31-33
Wholesale Trade 42
Retail Trade, but only as listed below
Motor Vehicle & Parts Dealers 441
Home Furnishings Stores 4424
Building Material & Garden Equipment & Supplies
Dealers
444
Manufactured Home Dealers 45393
Nonstore Retailers 454
Transportation & Warehousing 48-49
But retail outlets for Postal Service 491 Permitted only as accessory uses.
and Couriers & Messengers 492 Permitted only as accessory uses.
Information 51
but specifically not 51213, Theaters 51213 Should be in the TC Zoning District
and specifically not 51911, News Syndicates 51911 These uses belong in the growth center or
or 51912, Libraries PUBLIC ONLY! 51912 village center.
Telecommunications Facilities 517 In compliance with Chapter 21.
Other financial investment activities 5239
Rental & Leasing Services 532
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 54
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 6 - | 5
Admin & Support & Waste Management &
Remediation, but only as listed below
Investigation & Security Services 5616
Services to Buildings & Dwellings 5617
Waste Management & Remediation Services 562
Educational Services, but only as listed below
Technical & Trade Schools 6115
Child Day Care Services 6244
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation, but only as
listed below
Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers 71394
Accommodation & Food Services, only as listed
below
Limited Service Eating Places (cafeterias, snack bars) 724221 As an accessory to other permitted uses.
Food Service Contractors 72221
Caterers 72232
Mobile Food Services (vendors, kiosks) 72233
Other Services, but only as listed below
Repair & Maintenance 811
Death Care Services 8122
Drycleaning & Laundry Services, except coinoperated
81202
Linen & Uniform Supply 81203
Pet Care 81291
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries Only as restricted by WDB 36.1.3.4
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 1
Chapter 37
Mixed Use Commercial Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Mixed Use
Commercial Zoning District (MUCZD) and
the standards that are specifically applicable
within that district.
37.1 Purpose – Boundaries – Permitted Uses
37.1.1 What are the boundaries of the MUCZD? The boundaries of the Mixed-Use Commercial
Zoning District are shown on the official zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
37.1.2 What is the purpose of the MUCZD? This zoning district is transitional between the mixeduse,
pedestrian-oriented TCZD and the industrial and warehouse dominated IZDW. It is currently
occupied by a mix of uses that includes large retail stores and other space-intensive uses, some of
which are commercial, some of which are industrial, and some of which have characteristics of both.
The Town Plan says that this area ultimately should consist of uses that support the more intensive
commercial activity to the east and that generate little vehicular traffic per square foot.
37.1.3 What uses are permitted in the MUCZD? See Table 37.A. and WDB 37.1.3.1-5.
37.1.3.1 Retail Sales. Retailing will be limited to uses that ordinarily require considerable
space relative to the volume of sales and uses and that rely on outdoor sales and storage. Table
39.A imposes broad limits on retailing by type, but this purpose statement and the standards
adopted below also limit the type of retailing that is appropriate in this zoning district. The
retail uses that are permitted here must not detract from the concentration of pedestrianoriented
retailing in the TCZD.
37.1.3.2 Other Uses. Beyond retail, a wide variety of uses are permitted by Table 37.A, all
subject to standards that will, over time, add visual diversity and interest and make the area
friendlier to pedestrians. This variety does not extend, however, to truly industrial uses.
37.1.3.3 Outdoor Sales and Storage. An important distinction between this and the adjoining
commercial zoning districts is that outdoor sales and outdoor storage will be permitted. These
uses are not permitted at all in the Business Park Zoning District and outdoor sales in the Tafts
Corner Zoning District will be limited to special events like a farmer’s market or occasional
“sidewalk” sales and sidewalk vendors.
37.1.3.4 Residential Uses. Residential uses encouraged. They should have a minimum density
of 5 dwelling units per acre, an average density of 7.5 dwelling units per acre, and a maximum
of 15 dwelling units per acre.
37.1.3.5 Light Industrial and Warehousing Uses. Industrial uses that do not generate large
volumes of truck or vehicular traffic may be permitted in existing buildings that have been
designed and built for these purposes. WDB 37.6 and 37.7 set standards for such uses. New
buildings for industrial and/or warehousing uses are not permitted, and existing buildings not
currently designed for these uses are not permitted.
37.1.3.5 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all zoning
districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 2
37.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6 of this bylaw. With the minor exceptions
noted there, all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an
administrative permit can be approved.
37.3 Standards
37.3.1 What dimensional standards apply in this zoning district?
37.3.1.1 Is there a maximum building height? Building height is limited to 36 feet, except
where the incentives of WDB 37.5.4 apply.
37.3.1.2 Are there property line setbacks? Setbacks from rear and side property lines in this
zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of Chapter 23 of this
bylaw.
37.3.1.3 Are there setbacks from roads? Yes. The minimum setbacks from roads in this zoning
district shall be:
· from the right-of-way of I-89, 150 feet;
· from the right-of-way of any other road, 25 feet.
37.3.1.4 Use of Required Setbacks. The required setbacks must be landscaped as a Type III or
IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads, pedestrian ways,
underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility lines may cross
required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within
a required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within required setbacks.
37.3.1.5 Lot Size and Dimensions.
· Lot Size. There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district.
· Frontage. All lots must have at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or
proposed public or private road. The DRB may require a greater frontage where
necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
37.3.2 Do the general standards of this bylaw apply to development in this zoning district? Yes.
Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted, comply with all standards
established in this bylaw.
37.3.3 Are there additional standards specific to this zoning district? Yes. They are presented in
the following sections.
37.4. Outdoor Sales and Storage
37.4.1 Are outdoor sales permitted? Outdoor sales are permitted in this zoning district, but only
within areas designated for that purpose on the approved plan. Outdoor sales outside designated areas
are a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided in WDB 7.4-7.6.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 3
37.4.1.1 Buffers and Setbacks. Outdoor sales areas must not be within the landscaped buffers
required by WDB 37.3.1.2 and Chapter 23 or within the setbacks established by WDB
37.3.1.3.
37.4.1.2 Buffer from Sidewalk. Outdoor sales areas must be separated from sidewalks or
recreation paths by a landscaped buffer of at least six (6) feet.
37.4.1.3 Internal Landscaping. Outdoor sales areas that contain more than 4,000 square feet
of paving must comply with the landscaping requirements for parking areas established in
Chapter 23.
37.4.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? Outdoor storage is permitted in this zoning district, but only
within side and rear yards that are designated for that purpose on an approved site plan. Outdoor
storage outside designated areas is a violation of this bylaw, subject to enforcement as provided
by WDB 7.4-7.6.
37.4.2.1 Buffering and Setbacks. Outdoor storage areas must be buffered from all adjoining
properties and public ways as required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
37.4.2.2 Screening. Screening fences or walls, which shall be located on the interior side of
the buffer required by WDB 37.4.2.1, may be required by the DRB. Where such a requirement
is imposed, the screening shall be an architectural extension of the building, with the same
colors and detailing.
37.4.2.3 Temporary Storage. Temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and
materials is permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
37.5 Development Pattern. There are currently a number of large, monolithic, single-story buildings
in this zoning district, most of which have long dead walls and are surrounded by large expanses of
pavement. These buildings will not be considered non-conforming so that they may be adapted to other
uses, but the existing pattern will not be repeated in new development, which must comply with the
following standards. Major additions to existing buildings must also comply with these standards to the
extent determined to be feasible by the DRB.
37.5.1 How will development be made more pedestrian-friendly? Buildings must invite pedestrians
in, rather than being isolated from the street and sidewalk.
37.5.1.1 Pedestrian Connections. There must be a direct pedestrian connection between the
principal building entrance/s and the sidewalk/s or path/s along the adjoining street/s. This is
in contrast to the current situation in which the connection from the parking area is the
principal connection.
37.5.1.2 Building Line to Street. New buildings must come to the setback from the street. This
means that parking and outdoor sales must move to the side and/or rear of the building or, in
the case of parking, into a structure. An exception of up to 30% of a building’s frontage may
be made for an entry plaza or courtyard. The DRB may also permit an exception for accessible
parking.
37.5.1.3 No Dead Walls. Dead walls are permitted in the rear of buildings to provide service
and storage space. Other walls must be animated by clearly-demarked entrances; functional
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 4
windows, including display windows; architectural detailing; and signs. The DRB may allow
an exception where a side wall does not face a street, pedestrian way, or customer parking
area.
What is a Dead Wall? A dead wall is any uniform blank wall that is 29 or more feet long.
37.5.2 How will buildings be made more appealing?
37.5.2.1 Building Mass. Apparent building mass must be broken up using clearly-demarked
doors and windows, including display windows; variations in the building footprint; and
architectural detailing, including changes in materials, patterns, textures, and color.
Landscaping may also be used to reinforce changes in massing. Changes in massing should
not be merely cosmetic, but should correspond to the arrangement of internal space in the
building.
37.5.2.2 Building Facades. Building facades must feature:
· a clearly distinguished foundation or base;
· a clearly distinguished top, which may be a parapet or cornice (it must be
architectural, not just paint) or, preferably, a sloping roof; and
· a clearly-defined sign band or other set locations for signs.
37.5.2.3 Side and Rear Walls. The use of inferior materials for the sides or rear of a building
is not permitted.
37.5.3 What other design elements are required? New development in the MUCZD must offer at
least three of the following elements: These elements may be provided cumulatively, in or accessory
to, multiple buildings that are part of a single development proposal.
37.5.3.1 … mixed commercial uses of varied sizes, including uses in two or more major (twodigit)
NAICS classifications and excepting accessory uses, like incidental retail sales
associated with a service business, and including uses that vary in floor area by more than
20%;
37.5.3.2 … a “wrap” of smaller shops around at least one street facing side of any retail space
of more than 20,000 square feet;
37.5.3.3 … lodging (a hotel) and/or residential uses, including affordable dwelling units;
37.5.3.4 … structured parking that provides 30% or greater of the required parking;
37.5.3.5 … multiple stories, and not just the appearance of multiple stories;
37.5.3.6 … wide sidewalks that may be used for outdoor dining and/or with seating that
encourages outdoor social interaction;
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 5
37.5.3.7 … on-site renewable energy generation (solar panels or geo-thermal)
generating 25% or more of the estimated energy demand of the development; and/or
37.5.3.8 … an urban park, as defined in the Open Space Plan. Credit for compliance will be
provided only where a proposed park is visible and accessible to the public so that it
complements other proposed uses. A picnic table for employee lunch breaks is not an urban
park.
37.5.4 Is there an incentive for performance? Yes. The height limit will be increased from 36 to 52
feet where perpetually affordable housing and/or structured parking are provided. To qualify, the
development must create more than three (3) dwelling units, of which 30% or greater are perpetually
affordable, and/or providing 30% or greater of its parking requirement in a structure, resulting in a
commensurate reduction in surface parking and loading areas.
37.5.5 Are there any limits on the use of the incentive offered by 37.5.4? Yes. It is not the intent of
the building height incentive to permit the construction of four or five story buildings with flat roofs.
This incentive is intended to make it possible to build three or, depending on the grade of the site,
four story buildings that have diverse, attractive sloping rooflines. Buildings with flat roofs are
limited to 36 feet in height.
37.6 Industrial Uses.
3769.1 Are “light” industrial uses permitted in the MUCZD? Table 37.A permits manufacturing
uses in existing buildings, but only in compliance with WDB 37.6.2. New industrial buildings will
not be permitted in this zoning district, except where they are consistent with an approved specific
plan.
37.6.2 What standards apply to industrial uses in the MUCZD?
37.6.2.1 Outdoor Sales and Storage are strictly limited. See WDB 37.4.
37.6.2.2 Suitability of Buildings and Property. Industrial uses shall only be allowed in
existing and approved buildings on sites that have already been designed for and are suitable
for industrial uses. Suitable buildings would have such design features as loading docks and
site configurations that can accommodate truck traffic and truck turning movements.
37.6.2.3 Environmental Impacts. Proposed industrial uses must not require permits from the
State of Vermont for discharges to the air or water, or use hazardous materials in quantities
that would trigger WDB 18.5.3’s requirement for a Hazardous Materials Management Plan,
with the exception of a stormwater discharge permit.
37.6.2.4 Compatibility with Permitted Uses. Industrial uses may be permitted in existing and
approved buildings in the MUCZD only where their impacts on the environment, the town’s
infrastructure, and neighboring land uses are determined to be compatible with each other.
37.7 Wholesale Trade, Warehousing and Distribution.
37.7.1 Are wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution uses permitted in the MUCZD? Table
37.A permits wholesale trade and warehousing uses in existing buildings, but only in compliance
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 6
with WDB 37.7.2. New warehousing and distribution buildings will not be permitted, except where
they are consistent with an approved specific plan.
37.7.2 What standards apply to wholesale trade, warehousing, and distribution uses in the
MUCZD?
37.7.2.1 Outdoor Sales and Storage are strictly limited. See WDB 37.4.
37.7.2.2 Suitability of Buildings. Warehousing, wholesale trade, and distribution uses shall
only be allowed in existing and approved buildings that have already been designed for and
are suitable for warehousing, wholesale trade and distribution. Suitable buildings would
have such design features as loading docks and site configurations that can accommodate
truck traffic and truck turning movements.
37.7.2.3 Compatibility with Permitted Uses. Warehousing and distribution uses may be
permitted in existing and approved buildings in the MUCZD only where their impacts on the
environment, the town’s infrastructure, and neighboring land uses are determined to be
compatible with each other.
37.8 Specific Plans. Specific plans (see Chapter 9 of this bylaw) may be used to refine the requirements of
this zoning district. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application, require that the applicant submit a
specific plan before a discretionary permit for a new use, or a new structure or major addition will be
approved.
Table 37.A - Mixed Use Commercial
Zoning District NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Residential, (multi-family dwellings)
Retail Trade, but only as listed below
Motor Vehicle & Parts Dealers 441
Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores 442
Building Material & Garden Equipment & Supplies
Dealers
444
Convenience Stores 44512
But only as an accessory to other permitted
uses,
Sporting Goods Stores 45111
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores 45112
Gift, Novelty, and Souvenir Stores 45313
But only as an accessory to other permitted
uses
Information, but specifically not 51213, Theaters 51 Theaters should be in the TCZD.
Finance & Insurance 52
Real Estate 529
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, but
specifically not 54194, Veterinary Services as noted
54
Vets with outdoor treatment and/or boarding
facilities must be located in the ARZD
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 7
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative Support Services 561
Educational Services 61
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation, but
specifically not 71111 – Performing Arts Companies
71 Theaters should be in the TC Zoning District
Accommodation & Food Services, as listed below No drive-through food service is permitted.
Hotels and Motels, except Casino Hotels 72111
Full Service Restaurants 72491
But only as an accessory to other permitted
uses.
Limited Service Eating Places (cafeterias, snack bars) 72011
But only as an accessory to other permitted
uses
Food Service Contractors 72019
Caterers 72031
Mobile Food Services (vendors, kiosks) 72033
Drinking Places 72041
But only as an accessory to other permitted
uses.
Other Services, but only as listed below
Personal & Laundry Services 812
specifically except 81203 Linen & Uniform Supply 81203
Public Administration 92 Parks are permitted in all zoning districts.
In existing and approved buildings ONLY
Manufacturing, but specifically not 322, Paper, 324,
Petroleum and Coal Products, 325, Chemicals, or 331,
Primary Metals Manufacturing 31-33
See WDB 37.6 for standards for these uses.
Warehousing, only as listed below
Furnishing and Home Furnishing Merchant
Wholesalers 4232
See WDB 37.7 for standards for these uses.
Prof and Commercial Equipment and Supplies
Merchant Wholesalers 4234
Electrical and Electronic Goods Merchant
Wholesalers 4236
Hardware and Plumbing and Heating Equipment and
Supplies Merchant Wholesalers 4237
Miscellaneous Durable Goods Merchant Wholesalers 4239
Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods 424
Beer, Wine, and Distilled Alcoholic Beverage
Merchant Wholesalers 4248
Miscellaneous Non Durable Goods Merchant
Wholesalers 4249
Wholesale Electronics Markets and Agents and
Wholesalers 425
Couriers and Messengers 492
Warehousing and Storage 493
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 7 - | 8
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 8 - | 1
Chapter 38
Mixed Use Residential Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Mixed Use Residential
Zoning District (MURZD) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within that district.
38.1 Purpose – Boundaries – Permitted Uses
38.1.1 What are the boundaries of the MURZD? The boundaries of the Mixed-Use Residential
Zoning District are shown on the official zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
38.1.2 What is the purpose of the MURZD? This zoning district is transitional between the
predominantly commercial TCZD and the residential neighborhoods and open space to the east. It
is currently occupied by a mix of uses that includes offices, elder housing, and retail. There are also
large vacant parcels, the appropriate development of which will play a key role in the
implementation of the town’s goal of creating a pedestrian-friendly, design-conscious, mixed-use
growth center. As WDB 38.1.3 explains, future development in this zoning district will be
predominantly higher density residential, housing a population that can easily bicycle or walk into
the TCZD and that will help support improved transit service in the future.
38.1.3 What uses are permitted in the MURZD?
38.1.3.1 Residential. New development in this zoning district must be predominantly
residential. For the purposes of this ‘predominantly’ will be defined by three criteria.
· New development must have a minimum density of at least five dwelling
units per acre, an average density of 7.5 dwelling units per acre, and may have
a density of up to 15 units per acre, as provided by Chapter 19 of this bylaw.
· Nonresidential uses should generally be in mixed-use buildings that also
include dwellings. Buildings that do not include dwellings will be limited to
no more than 15% lot coverage.
· At least 10% of the proposed dwellings must be included in the first phase of
development.
38.1.3.2 Commercial. Retail shops, personal services, restaurants, and the other commercial
uses that are anticipated in this zoning district must be comparatively (when compared with
the commercial uses permitted in the TCZD and MUCZD) small scale. This does not mean
these uses will serve only the nearby dwellings, but the appearance, mix of uses, and scale of
both buildings and uses must be that of a local or neighborhood shopping center rather than
that of a regional shopping center. Table 38.A lists the uses that may be permitted, but all
proposed uses must also comply with this purpose statement and the standards adopted
below.
38.1.3.3 Offices. The existing office buildings will be conforming uses, but new office space
should be mixed with residential and/or permitted commercial uses, consistent with WBD
38.1.3.2.
38.1.3.4 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 8 - | 2
38.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6 of this bylaw. With the minor
exceptions noted there, all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an
administrative permit can be approved.
38.3 Standards
38.3.1 What dimensional standards apply in this zoning district?
38.3.1.1 Is there a maximum building height? Building height is limited to 36 feet, except as
provided by WDB 38.5.4.
38.3.1.2 Are there property line setbacks? Setbacks from rear and side property lines in this
zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of Chapter 23 of this
bylaw.
38.3.1.3 Are there setbacks from roads? Yes. The minimum setbacks from roads in this
zoning district shall be:
· from the right-of-way of I-89, 150 feet; and
· from the right-of-way of an arterial road, 50 feet.
· There is no minimum setback from other roads. New buildings in this zoning
district should have a direct and immediate relationship to the street. A
sidewalk or recreation path must be provided along with street trees.
Depending on the proposed character and intensity of the development the
DRB may permit street trees to be installed in tree wells in a wide sidewalk or
it may require a planting strip.
38.3.1.4 Use of Required Setbacks. The required setbacks must be landscaped as a Type I,
III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access drives, roads,
pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead
utility lines may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also
run parallel to and within a required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed
within required setbacks.
38.3.1.5 Lot Size and Dimensions.
· Lot Size. There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district.
· Frontage. All lots must have at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or
proposed public or private road. The DRB may require a greater frontage
where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
38.3.2 Do the general standards of this bylaw apply to development in this zoning district? Yes.
Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted, comply with all standards
established in this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 8 - | 3
38.3.3 Are there additional standards specific to this zoning district? Yes. They are presented in
the following sections.
38.4. Outdoor Sales and Storage. Outdoor sales and storage are not permitted in this zoning district
except for the temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials in compliance with
Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
38.5 Development Pattern. Existing development in this zoning district is auto-oriented. Adequate
parking and loading areas will still be allowed, but the streetscapes created by new development in the
MURZD must be pedestrian-oriented. Re-development must also comply with these standards, to the
extent determined to be feasible by the DRB.
38.5.1 How will development be made more pedestrian-friendly? Buildings must invite
pedestrians in, rather than being isolated from the street and sidewalk.
38.5.1.1 Pedestrian Connections. There must be a direct pedestrian connection between the
principal building entrance/s and the sidewalk/s or path/s along the adjoining street/s.
38.5.1.2 Building Line to Street. New buildings must come to the setback from the street or,
where it is on private property, to the sidewalk. This means that parking must move to the
side and/or rear of the building or be handled in nearby parking areas or structures. An
exception of up to 30% of a building’s frontage may be made for an entry plaza or courtyard.
38.5.1.3 No Dead Walls. Dead walls are permitted in the rear of buildings to provide service
and storage space. Other walls must be animated by clearly-demarked entrances; functional
windows, including display windows; architectural detailing; and signs. The DRB may allow
an exception to this standard where a side wall does not face a street, pedestrian way, or
customer parking area.
What is a Dead Wall? A dead wall is any uniform blank wall that is 30 or more feet long.
38.5.2 How will buildings be made more appealing?
38.5.2.1 Building Mass. Apparent building mass must be broken up using clearly-demarked
doors and windows, including display windows; variations in the building footprint; and
architectural detailing, including changes in materials, patterns, textures, and color.
Landscaping may be used to reinforce changes in massing. Changes in massing should not
be merely cosmetic, but should correspond to the arrangement of internal space in the
building.
38.5.2.2 Building Facades. Building facades must feature:
· a clearly distinguished foundation or base;
· a clearly distinguished top, which may be a parapet or cornice (it must be
architectural, not just paint) or, preferably, a sloping roof; and
· a clearly-defined sign band or other set locations for signs.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 8 - | 4
38.5.2.3 Side and Rear Walls. The use of inferior materials for the sides or rear of a building
is not permitted.
38.5.2.4 Mixing Uses. Mixed-use buildings must comply with the standards of Chapter 22 of
this bylaw.
38.5.3 What other design elements are required? New development in the MURZD must offer the
following elements:
38.5.3.1 … multiple stories, and not just the appearance of multiple stories – single story
buildings may be permitted as part of a multiple building development, but must not exceed
15% of total lot coverage;
38.5.3.2 … wide sidewalks that may be used for outdoor dining and/or with seating that
encourages outdoor social interaction;
38.5.3.3 … an urban or neighborhood park, as defined in the Open Space Plan. Credit for
compliance will be provided only where a proposed park is visible and accessible so that it
complements other proposed uses. A picnic table for employee lunch breaks is not an urban
park.
38.5.3.4 Multiple Structures. These elements may be provided cumulatively, in or accessory
to, multiple buildings that are part of a specific plan.
38.5.4 Is there an incentive for the provision of affordable housing and/or structured parking?
Yes. The maximum building height in this zoning district will be increased from 36 to 52 feet
where perpetually affordable housing and/or structured parking are provided. To qualify, the
development must create more than three (3) dwelling units, of which at least 30% are perpetually
affordable, and/or provide 30% or greater of its parking requirement in a structure, resulting in a
commensurate reduction in surface parking and loading areas.
38.5.5 Are there any limits on the use of the incentive offered by WDB 38.5.4? Yes. It is not the
intent of the building height incentive to permit the construction of four or five story buildings with
flat roofs. This incentive is intended to make it possible to build three or, depending on the grade of
the site, four story buildings that have diverse, attractive sloping rooflines. Buildings with flat roofs
are limited to 36 feet in height.
38.6 Specific Plans. Specific plans (see Chapter 9 of this bylaw) may be used to expand and refine the
requirements of this zoning district. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application for the development
of large or multiple parcels in the MURZD, recommend that the applicant submit a specific plan for the
development of those parcels before a discretionary permit will be approved.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 8 - | 5
Table 38-A - Mixed Use Residential
Zoning District NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district. Accessory uses
may not be listed separately, see Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Residential (multi-family dwellings) At a density of at least 5 DU/A
Retail Trade, but only as listed below
Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores 442
The key to “appropriate” retail in the
MURZD is scale. Electronics Stores are
permitted, for example, but the intent is to
permit a storefront Radio Shack, not a large
electronics dealer like a Best Buy. Likewise,
food stores are permitted, but the intent to
permit a bakery, not a supermarket.
Electronics and Appliance Stores 443
Food and Beverage Stores 445
Health and Personal Care Stores 446
Clothing and Clothing Accessories Stores 448
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores 45112
Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores 45113
Musical Instrument and Music Stores 45117
Book, Periodical, and Music Stores 4512
Florists 4531
Office Supplies, Stationery, and Gift Stores 4532
Information 51
Telecommunications Facilities 517 see Chapter 21 of this bylaw
Finance & Insurance 52
Real Estate 529
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services,
but specifically not 54164, Veterinary Services as
noted
54
Vets with outdoor treatment and/or boarding
facilities must be located in the ARZD.
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative Support Services 561
Educational Services 61
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation, but
specifically not 71111 – Performing Arts Companies
71 Theaters should be in the TCZD.
Accommodation & Food Services, as listed below
No drive-through food service Full Service Restaurants 72211 is permitted.
Limited Service Eating Places (cafeterias, snack bars) 72221
Caterers 723
Only in association with a permitted
restaurant
Other Services, but only as listed below
Personal & Laundry Services, specifically except
81203 Linen & Uniform Supply
812
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 1
Chapter 39
Residential Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Residential Zoning
District (RZD) and the standards that are
specifically applicable within that district.
39.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Uses Permitted
39.1.1 What are the boundaries of the RZD? The boundaries of the Residential Zoning District are
shown on the official zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
39.1.2 What is the purpose of the RZD? This zoning district includes Williston’s suburban
residential neighborhoods. Its purpose has long been to ensure that incompatible uses do not appear
in those neighborhoods. These standards add another important goal: to encourage a somewhat
more compact, diverse, and pedestrian-friendly pattern of residential development that also protects
important open space resources. To help achieve this goal, the standards adopted here increase the
density of development permitted in the RZD. This increase in density also recognizes the fact that
some of Williston’s most pleasant residential neighborhoods – Meadow Brook and Williston Hills,
for example – were developed at higher densities and are now nonconforming. Permitting a
somewhat higher density will also encourage the provision of more affordable housing.
39.1.3 What uses are permitted in the RZD? This is a residential zoning district. Very few other
uses are permitted.
39.1.3.1 Residential Patterns: Development in the RZD must use a pattern that protects open
space resources and results in a pedestrian-friendly neighborhood that is organized around
one or more focal points wherever practicable. Focal points will usually take the form of a
neighborhood green or park, but other focal points, like a community center, may be
proposed.
39.1.3.2 Nonresidential. The only nonresidential uses permitted in this zoning district are
child care centers, churches, elementary and middle schools, and parks. Home businesses are
also permitted (see WDB 20.4), but they are, by definition a residential use.
39.1.3.3 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw. See also Chapter 20 – Residential
Improvements - for standards governing accessory structures and uses in the RZD.
Where’s the use table? No use table is provided for this zoning district. The only uses
allowed in the RZD are listed in WDB 39.1.3 above.
39.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6 of this bylaw. The creation of new
residential lots and nonresidential uses in this zoning district always requires a discretionary permit.
39.3 Dimensional Standards
39.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the RZD? Yes. Building height in this zoning
district is limited to 36 feet.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 2
39.3.2 Must development in the RZD be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines may be controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of Chapter 23 of
this bylaw. Where a landscaped buffer is not required, a minimum setback of 10 feet from the side
and 15 feet from the rear property lines is required.
Buffer Requirements? Chapter 23 of this bylaw requires landscaped buffers between potentially incompatible uses. So,
a buffer that complies with Chapter 23 must be provided where residential development adjoins other uses, including the
nonresidential uses permitted in the RZD. 10 and 15-foot setbacks will be required between residential uses.
39.3.3 Must development in the RZD be set back from roads? Yes. Except where WDB 39.3.3.4
applies, the minimum setbacks from roads in the RZD shall be:
39.3.3.1 From the Right-of-Way of I-89: 150 feet;
39.3.3.2 From the Right-of-Way of an Arterial Road, 50 feet; and
39.3.3.3 From Other Roads, Public or Private: 25 feet.
39.3.3.4 Average Setback Exception. Residential infill on lots in neighborhoods where the
typical setback from the road varies from the standards of WDB 39.3.3.1-3 may meet the
average setback of the existing dwellings. In determining that average setback, the
Administrator will consider all existing dwellings that are along the same road as and within
300 of the proposed dwelling.
How Are Setbacks Measured? Required setbacks are ordinarily measured at grade from the nearest point on the
property or right-of-way line to the outside foundation wall of the structure or, where the setback is to a parking
area or similar surface, to the outer edge of that surface. This method of measurement will not be used for
structures that have an above-grade projection (bay window, deck, eaves, etc.) that extends more than three feet
toward the property line.
39.3.4 What uses are permitted in the required setbacks? The required setbacks in the RZD must
be landscaped as a Type I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw, but access
drives, roads, pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted,
overhead utility lines may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also
run parallel to and within a required setback. Outdoor storage may also be permitted. See WDB
20.12 re outdoor storage in side and rear setbacks.
39.3.5 Is a minimum lot frontage required in the RZD? Yes. All lots must have at least 40 feet of
frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may require a greater frontage
where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
39.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 of this bylaw for an explanation of how density is measured and
a summary of the density standards in all zoning districts.
39.4.1 What density of development is permitted in open space developments in the RZD? The
average density of open space developments in the RZD may not exceed three (3.0) DU/A, except
where:
39.4.1.1 … a bonus for the provision of affordable housing is permitted, as provided by
WDB 39.10.3
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 3
39.4.1.2 … where development takes place on slopes of 15-30%, where the average density
of development will be limited to one dwelling per acre.
39.4.1.3 Minimum Area Per Dwelling: Open Space Development. The minimum area per
dwelling, where dwellings are placed on individual lots, in an open space development in the
RZD shall be 5,445 SF.
39.5 General Standards Development in the RZD must, unless specifically exempted, comply with
all standards established in Chapters 13 through 29 of this bylaw. See specifically the standards
adopted in Chapter 20. Those standards regulate the typical use and improvement of all residential
properties.
39.6 Specific Standards Standards that apply only within this zoning district are presented in WDB
39.6.7-10.
39.7 Outdoor Sales and Storage. Other than the occasional sale of household goods (garage or yard
sales) outdoor sales are not permitted in the RZD. Outdoor storage may be permitted. See Chapter 20
of this bylaw on both topics.
39.8 Open Space Development
39.8.1 Is there a requirement for the provision of open space in residential developments in the
RZD? Yes. As noted in WDB 39.1.2, proposed developments in the RZD must generally be
consistent with Williston’s goal of creating a compact, walk-able neighborhoods while conserving
open space.
39.8.2 How much open space must be conserved? Unlike the ARZD, there is no quantitative
minimum requirement for open space conservation in the RZD. Every site will be different. The
goal is to conserve as much as possible of the lands listed below, while permitting residential
development at the density permitted by WDB 39.4.
39.8.2.1 Watershed Protection. The protected open space must include all lands within the
watershed protection buffers established by Chapter 29 of this bylaw.
39.8.2.2 Significant Wildlife Habitat Areas. The protected open space must include all
significant wildlife habitat areas identified in WDB Chapter 27 to the extent consistent with
the landowner’s right to beneficial use of his or her property. This means that if a landowner
has only significant wildlife habitat areas or has no other lands physically suitable for
development, the Conservation Commission and the DRB will work with that landowner to
either effect a transfer of development rights, as provided by Chapter 19 of this bylaw or to
create an open space development that minimizes consumption of lands that should be
protected.
39.8.2.3 Uncommon, Rare, Threatened, or Endangered Species. The protected open space
must include all uncommon, rare, threatened, or endangered species as identified in WDB
Chapter 27.
39.8.2.4 Unique Natural Communities. The protected open space must include all unique
natural communities identified in WDB Chapter 27 to the extent consistent with the
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 4
landowner’s right to beneficial use of his or her property. This means that if a landowner has
only unique natural communities or has no other lands physically suitable for development,
the Conservation Commission and the DRB will work with that landowner to either effect a
transfer of development rights, as provided by Chapter 16 of this bylaw or to create an open
space development that minimizes consumption of lands that should be protected.
39.8.2.5 Scenic Viewsheds. The protected open space should include scenic viewsheds that
are identified in WDB Chapter 27 or by the Conservation Commission. It is acknowledged,
however, that the mapping of scenic viewsheds is not precise. It is also acknowledged that
partial protection of a viewshed may be combined with development through good site
planning. Landowners who wish to develop parcels including scenic viewsheds will work
with the Conservation Commission and DRB to maximize protection of the identified
view/s.
39.8.2.6 Minimizing Visual Impacts. People should expect to have views that include
residential neighborhoods in the RZD, but the DRB may, with the advice of the
Conservation Commission, require any of the mitigating measures listed in WDB 31.7 in
order to protect a specific view.
39.8.2.7. Farmlands of Local Importance. Protecting farmland is not a primary goal in the
RZD. It is assumed that residential development is desirable in this zoning district. The
Conservation Commission and DRB will still evaluate the possibilities for protecting
important farmlands, as identified in WDB Chapter 27, where they adjoin farms in the
ARZD or where they may be used for community gardens.
39.8.2.8 Community Gardens. The provision of community gardens may be required where
gardens associated with individual dwellings are not feasible.
39.8.2.9 Slopes: 30% or More. The protected open space must include all slopes of 30% or
more, except where a variance can be justified, as provided by Chapter 8 of this bylaw.
39.8.2.10 Slopes: 15%-30%. The protected open space should include all slopes of 15%-
30% to the extent consistent with the landowner’s right to beneficial use of his or her
property. This means that if a landowner has only slopes or has no other lands physically
suitable for development, the Conservation Commission and DRB will work with that
landowner to effect a transfer of development rights (see Chapter 19 of this bylaw) or to
create an open space development that minimizes consumption of lands that should be
protected. Where development is permitted on slopes of 15-30%, its density shall be reduced
to one dwelling unit per acre.
39.8.2.11 Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks are generally required in residential
developments. See WDB 15.4.
39.8.2.12 Other Lands. Other lands within a proposed development may be included as
protected open space in order to comply with the contiguity standard of WDB 39.8.3 and/or
to provide a landscaped buffer required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
39.8.3 Must the protected open space be contiguous? The protected open space on a site should be
contiguous wherever possible. It is acknowledged, however that complete contiguity may not be
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 5
possible on every site in the RZD. Applicants will work with the Conservation Commission and
DRB to maximize the contiguity of protected open spaces, while still attaining the permitted
number of dwellings.
39.8.4 Are there limitations on the use of protected open space? Yes.
39.8.4.1 Agriculture and Forestry. Protected open space may be used for agriculture,
forestry, community gardens, and landscaping.
39.8.4.2 Neighborhood Parks. Neighborhood parks may be sited on former farmlands or
‘other lands’ and may include incidental areas of other protected lands, like watershed
protection buffers.
39.8.4.3 Crossings. Crossings of protected open space for roads, trails, and utility lines are
permitted, but only where these crossings are consolidated to the maximum extent practical;
the width and length of the crossing/s are minimized; and all areas disturbed during
construction of the crossing are restored to their natural functions or appropriately
landscaped. Plans for the restoration of disturbed areas must be included in the runoff and
erosion control measures required by Chapter 29.
39.8.4.4 Trails. Trails may run through protected open space and no hedge, planting, or
fence shall block such a trail. Fences are permitted for agricultural purposes, but where a
fence crosses a trail, a gate or stile shall be provided. Depending on the area disturbed by
trail construction, runoff and erosion control measures may be required by Chapter 29 of this
bylaw.
39.8.4.5 Landscaped Buffers. Protected open space may be used as a landscaped buffer
required by Chapter 23 of this bylaw.
39.9 Pedestrian-Friendly Development
39.9.1 Must sidewalks and/or trails be provided? Yes. See WDB 15.2.4.
39.9.2 How else will development be made more pedestrian-friendly?
39.9.2.1 Pedestrian Connections. All principal building entrances must face the street and
there must be a direct pedestrian connection between the principal building entrance and the
adjoining sidewalk or trail.
39.9.2.2 Focal Points. New residential developments shall be organized around one or more
focal points. Focal points may take the form of a neighborhood or community park or a
village green or square. A larger project might also have a community center or a pool as
one of its focal points. Ideally, every dwelling unit will be within a 1,320 foot walk of a focal
point, but the DRB may permit minor exceptions to this distance standard.
39.9.2.3 Connectivity. As required, by WDB 13.7, connectivity shall be maximized within
and between residential neighborhoods. This does not preclude the use of culs-de-sac where
the terrain imposes a physical obstacle to connectivity. It does preclude gated neighborhoods
and the use of culs-de-sac or other dead-end streets where the terrain permits a reasonable
connection.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 3 9 - | 6
39.10 Housing Choice
39.10.1 Is a diversity of housing types required? The provision of a diversity of housing types in
each residential neighborhood is not required, but it is strongly encouraged by the residential
growth management system established by Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
39.10.2 Is affordable housing required? No. The provision of affordable housing in each
residential neighborhood is not required, but it is strongly encouraged by the residential growth
management system established by Chapter 11 of this bylaw and the density bonus established in
WDB 39.10.3.
39.10.3 Is there a density bonus for the provision of affordable housing? Yes. The average
density of residential development in the RZD may be increased to five dwelling units per acre (5
DU/A) in any proposed development in which at least 30% of the proposed dwellings will be
perpetually affordable.
39.10.4 Are affordable neighborhoods protected from “scrape-offs?” Yes. Infill development in
the RZD with homes that have a significantly greater size and/or bulk than those surrounding them
is limited. Infill housing shall have an FAR (floor area ratio) of no more than 2.5 times the average
FAR of the eight nearest dwellings.
What is a “scrape-off? A scrape-off occurs when an existing home of modest size is demolished and replaced with a
larger and more expensive home. Scrape-offs can eventually destroy both the affordability and character of a
neighborhood.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 0 - | 1
Chapter 40
Gateway Zoning District West
This chapter establishes the Gateway Zoning
District West (GZDW) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within that district.
40.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Permitted Uses
40.1.1 What are the boundaries of the GZDW? The Gateway Zoning District West is shown on the
official zoning map which accompanies this bylaw.
40.1.2 What is the purpose of the GZDW? This zoning district includes Williston’s western
“gateway,” west of Taft Corners along Williston Road (U.S. 2); it is where many people form their
first impression of Williston. It offers a potential location for the adaptive reuse of older single
family dwellings with a mix of, office, commercial, and residential uses in a high visibility location
along a major travel corridor into the town’s growth center.
40.1.3 What uses are permitted in the GZDW? See Table 40.A and WDB 40.1.3.1 and 2, below.
40.1.3.1. Office and Comercial. Commercial and office uses are permitted only on lots facing
Williston Road. Office and commercial uses are limited to those that are most likely to be
compatible with the existing residential neighborhoods to the north and south.
40.1.3.2 Residential. Residential uses may be mixed with offices at a minimum average
density of five units per acre (5 du/A) and a maximum average density of 7.5 units per acre
(7.5 du/A). That maximum may be increased to as many as 10 dwelling units per acre with a
transfer of development rights, as permitted by WDB 19.5 or with the development of
perpetually affordable housing as provided by WDB .
Properties developed with single family dwellings in existence on Janaury 1, 2015 may
continue to be used as such, and may be expanded by adding additional floor area and
bedrooms.
40.1.3.3 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all zoning
districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
40.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor exceptions noted there,
all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an administrative permit
can be approved.
40.3 Dimensional Standards
40.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the GZDW? Yes. The maximum building height in
this zoning district is 36 feet.
40.3.2 Must development in the GZDW be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines in this zoning district are controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of
Chapter 23.
40.3.3 Must development in the GZDW be set back from roads? Yes. Setbacks from roads in this
zoning district shall be:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 0 - | 2
40.3.3.1 … from the right-of-way of U.S. 2, 25feet; and
40.3.3.2 … from the right-of-way of any other road, 25 feet.
40.3.3.3 Average Setback Exception. The DRB may allow the setback required along a local
road to be reduced to the average existing setback. The average existing setback will be
determined by the Administrator by averaging the existing setback on all properties that are
along the same street and within 300 feet of the lot where a reduction is proposed. A reduction
shall be permitted only where the reduced setback is sufficient to permit for the construction
of a sidewalk or, where one is called for in the Town Plan, a multi-use path.
40.3.4 What use can be made of the required setbacks? The setbacks must be landscaped as a Type
I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23. Access drives, roads, pedestrian ways,
underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted, overhead utility lines, may cross
required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a
required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be placed within required setbacks.
40.3.5 Is a minimum frontage required in the GZDW? Yes. All lots in this zoning district must have
at least 40 feet of frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may require
a greater frontage where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
40.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 for an explanation of how density is calculated and a summary of
the density standards of this bylaw. WDB 19.3 explains how the standards of this bylaw regulate
nonresidential densities.
40.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in Chapters 13-29.
40.6 Specific Standards Specific standards are presented in WDB 40.7 and 40.8.
40.7 Design Review All new commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings and multiple-family
dwellings, and major additions to those buildings in this zozing district are subject to the design review
standards of WDB Chapter 22.
40.8 Outdoor Sales and Storage
40.8.1 Are outdoor sales permitted in the GZDW? No.
40.8.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? No. However, temporary outdoor storage of construction
equipment and materials is permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 0 - | 3
Table 40.A - Gateway Zoning District West NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Residential (multi-family dwellings)
Finance and Insurance
Investment Advisors 52393
Insurance Agencies and Brokerages 52421
Real Estate And Rental and Leasing
Real Estate Offices 5312
Real Estate, Related Activities 5313 Property managers and appraisers.
Rental & Leasing Services 5322
But not including outdoor sales and
storage.
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, but only as listed below
Profession and Technical Services 541
Veterinary Services 541940 Only for small animals.
Admin & Support Services 561-5616
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Other Services, but only as listed below
Death Care Services 8124
Pet Care 81291
Civic and Professional Organizations 813
Public Administration 92
Public parks are permitted in all zoning
districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 1
Chapter 41
Taft Corners
Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Taft Corners
Zoning District (TCZD) and the standards that
are specifically applicable within that district.
41.1 Purpose – Boundaries – Uses Permitted
41.1.1 What are the boundaries of the TCZD? The boundaries of the TCZD are shown on the
official zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
41.1.2 What is the purpose of the TCZD? The Town Plan (See Policy 3.1) calls for the
development of a design-conscious, pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use town center here in the heart of
Williston’s growth center.
Town Plan Excerpts that Provide the Policy Basis for this Chapter
The Town of Williston will encourage and support a design-conscious, pedestrian-friendly, mixed-use development and
redevelopment pattern in the Taft Corners area. The town has worked toward this objective by successfully obtaining
Growth Center Designation in 2008 and revising the Unified Development Bylaw in 2009. The town envisions the
majority of new growth and development activity taking place in the Growth Center. The town will continue to support
this objective by encouraging the construction of planned infrastructure in the Growth Center, concentrating new
development in the Growth Center, and examining and monitoring the effectiveness of its bylaws
from 3.3. Taft Corners – The Taft Corners Zoning District is the core of Williston’s commercial area – the place where
the town’s goal of creating a pedestrian-friendly, design conscious, mixed use commercial center can best be realized.
Coupled with the construction of the grid streets, this will allow diverse, smaller-scale retail, office, and residential uses
to be intermingled with the large retail stores and extensive parking areas that now dominate the area.
See also 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, 4.2.7, and 4.3.
41.1.3 What uses are permitted in the TCZD? See Table 41.A. and WDB 41.1.3.1-5.
41.1.3.1 Retail Sales. The TCZD will evolve into an intensive retail center, with most new
buildings coming to the sidewalk to help create amenable shopping streets along Trader
Lane and other grid roads. Space consumptive retail uses, like auto dealers and building
supplies, will be guided to the MUCZD or other locations.
41.1.3.2 Accommodations and Food Services. At least one hotel will be necessary for the
long-term success of the TCZD. Food services, including street vendors, will also be
permitted.
41.1.3.3 Entertainment. Indoor arts, entertainment, and recreation uses will be encouraged to
draw people to the area.
41.1.3.4 Other Uses. Beyond retailing, accommodations, and restaurants a wide variety of
business and personal service uses are permitted by Table 41.A, all subject to standards that
will, over time, add visual diversity and interest and make the area friendlier to pedestrians.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 2
41.1.3.5 Residential Uses. Residential uses encouraged. As provided in Chapter 19 of this
bylaw, they must have a minimum density of 5 dwelling units per acre, an average density of
7.5 dwelling units per acre, and a maximum of density 15 dwelling units per acre with a
transfer of development rights from the ARZD or the provision of a minimum of 30% of the
proposed units as perpetually affordable housing.
41.1.3.6 Accessory Uses. Customary accessory uses and structures are permitted in all
zoning districts, as provided by Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
41.2 Permits. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6 of this bylaw. With the minor
exceptions noted there, all development in this zoning district will require a discretionary permit before an
administrative permit can be approved.
41.3 Dimensional Standards
41.3.1.1 Is there a maximum building height in this zoning district? Building height in the
TCZD is limited to 36 feet, except where the incentives of WDB 41.5.4 apply.
41.3.1.2 Must development in this zone be set back from property lines? Setbacks from rear
and side property lines in the TCZD controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of
Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Where landscaped buffers are not required, there are no setback
requirements.
41.3.1.3 Must development in the TCZD be set back from roads? Yes. The minimum
setbacks from roads in this zoning district shall be:
· from the right-of-way of I-89, 150 feet; and
· from the right-of-way of Williston Road and Route 2A, 25 feet.
· Along other roads, buildings will generally come to the sidewalk, with the
exceptions provided by WDB 41.5.1.2.
These setbacks must be landscaped as a Type III or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23
of this bylaw.
41.3.1.4 What Use may be made of the Required Setbacks? The required setbacks must be
landscaped as a Type II, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this bylaw. Access
drives, roads, pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such lines are permitted,
overhead utility lines may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°). Pedestrian ways
may also run parallel to and within a required setback. Parking and loading areas may not be
placed within required setbacks.
41.3.1.5 Density Standards. Lot Size. There is no minimum lot size in this zoning district.
See Chapter 19 of this bylaw for a summary of density standards in this district.
41.3.2 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards established in this bylaw.
41.3.2 Specific Standards Specific Standards are presented in WDB 41.7
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 3
41.4. Outdoor Sales and Storage
41.4.1 Are outdoor sales permitted?. Outdoor sales in the TCZD will be limited to special
events like a farmer’s market or occasional “sidewalk” sales and sidewalk vendors.
41.4.2 Is outdoor storage permitted? Outdoor storage is not permitted in this zoning district,
excepting the temporary outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials, which is
permitted in compliance with Chapter 17 of this bylaw.
41.5 Development Pattern.
41.5.1 How will development be made more pedestrian-friendly? Buildings must invite
pedestrians in, rather than being isolated from the street and sidewalk.
41.5.1.1 Pedestrian Connections. There must be a direct pedestrian connection between the
principal building entrance/s and the sidewalk/s or path/s along the adjoining street/s. This is
in contrast to the current situation in which the connection from the parking area is the
principal connection.
41.5.1.2 Building Line to Sidewalk. New buildings must come to the sidewalk. This means
that parking and outdoor sales must move to the side and/or rear of the building or into a
structure. An exception of up to 30% of a building’s frontage may be made for an entry
plaza or courtyard. The DRB may also permit exceptions for accessible parking and where
the terrain and necessary grading make bringing the building to the sidewalk impractical.
41.5.1.3 No Dead Walls. Dead walls are permitted in the rear of buildings to provide service
and storage space. Other walls must be animated by clearly-demarked entrances; functional
windows, including display windows; architectural detailing; and signs. The DRB may allow
an exception where a side wall does not face a street, pedestrian way, or customer parking
area.
What is a Dead Wall? A dead wall is any uniform blank wall that is 30 or more feet long.
41.5.2 How will buildings be made more appealing?
41.5.2.1 Building Mass. Apparent building mass must be broken up using clearly-demarked
doors and windows, including display windows; variations in the building footprint; and
architectural detailing, including changes in materials, patterns, textures, and color.
Landscaping may also be used to reinforce changes in massing. Changes in massing should
not be merely cosmetic, but should correspond to the arrangement of internal space in the
building.
41.5.2.2 Building Facades. Building facades must feature:
· a clearly distinguished foundation or base;
· a clearly distinguished top, which may be a parapet or cornice (it must be
architectural, not just paint) and/or, preferably, a sloping roof; and
· a clearly-defined sign band or other set locations for signs.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 4
41.5.2.3 Side and Rear Walls. The use of inferior materials for the sides or rear of a building
is not permitted.
41.5.3 What other design elements are required? New development in the TCZD must offer
at least five (5) of the elements listed below. These elements may be provided cumulatively,
in or accessory to, multiple buildings that are part of a single development proposal.
41.5.3.1 … multiple uses, containing a combination of one retail use and at least one of the
following: retail, office or residential uses on the same property;
41.5.3.2 … a “wrap” of smaller shops around at least one street facing side of any retail
space of more than 20,000 square feet;
41.5.3.3 … lodging (a hotel) and/or residential uses, including affordable dwelling units;
41.5.3.4 … structured parking that provides 30% or greater of the required parking;
41.5.3.5 … multiple stories, not just the appearance of multiple stories where the floor area
of upper level stories must be at least 60% or more of the first story floor area;
41.5.3.6 … wide sidewalks that may be used for outdoor dining and/or with seating that
encourages outdoor social interaction;
41.5.3.7 … public artwork, the nature of which must be approved by the DRB, with the
advice of the HAAC, public art must be proportionate in size and scale to the buildings in
the proposed development, and be incorporated into the design of an urban park
41.5.3.8 … on-site renewable energy generation, solar panels or geo-thermal,
generating 25% or more of the estimated energy demand of the development; and/or
41.5.3.9 … an urban park, as discussed in 4.4 of the 2016-2024 Williston Comprehensive
Plan Credit for compliance will be provided only where a proposed park is visible and
accessible to the public so that it complements other proposed uses. A picnic table for
employee lunch breaks is not an urban park.
41.5.4 Is there an incentive for performance? Yes. The height limit will be increased from 36 to
52 feet where perpetually affordable housing and/or structured parking are provided. To qualify,
the development must create more than three (3) dwelling units, of which 30% or greater are
perpetually affordable, and/or provide 30% or greater of its parking requirement in a structure,
resulting in a commensurate reduction in surface parking and loading areas.
41.5.5 Are there any limits on the use of the incentive offered by 41.5.4? Yes. It is not the intent
of the building height incentive to permit the construction of four or five story buildings with flat
roofs. This incentive is intended to make it possible to build three or, depending on the grade of the
site, four story buildings that have diverse, attractive rooflines.
41.6 Specific Plans. Specific plans (see Chapter 9 of this bylaw) may be used to refine the requirements
of this zoning district. The DRB may, when reviewing a pre-application, require that the applicant submit
a specific plan before a discretionary permit for a new use, or a new structure or major addition will be
approved.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 5
41.7 Adirondack Views. Much of this zoning district has great westward views to the Adirondacks.
Every specific plan and every application for a discretionary permit in the TCZD must show how views to
the Adirondacks (where they exist) will be used as a feature of the proposed development. This does not
mean that views must be left unimpeded. It does mean that developments must find a way to use this
natural asset. Compliance with this standard could take a variety of forms, including, but not limited to,
an urban park (see WDB 41.5.3.9) with westward views, windows from indoor “public” spaces facing
west; an outdoor dining area with an Adirondack view, etc.
Table 41.A – Taft Corners Zoning District NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district.
Residential At a density of at least 5 DU/A.
Retail Trade,
but excluding 441-12, Automobile and Motor Vehicle
Dealers; 447, Gasoline Stations, including
convenience stores with gas; 45383, Manufactured
Home Dealers; 4542, Vending Machine Operators;
and 45431, Fuel Dealers
44-45
Parts Dealers 4413
Only where ALL sales and service are
indoors
Building Material and Garden Equipment and
Supplies
444
Only small specialty stores, where ALL
sales and service are indoors - indoor
lighting fixture sales - would be an example,
Information 51 may be permitted.
Finance & Insurance 52
Real Estate 531
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services,
but not 54194, Veterinary Services as noted
541
Vets with outdoor treatment and/or boarding
facilities must be located in the ARZD
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative Support Services 561
Educational Services 61
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 71 Indoors only
Accommodation & Food Services, but excluding
72319 - Food Service Contractors
72 No drive-through food service is permitted.
Caterers 72331 But only accessory to other permitted uses.
Mobile Food Services (vendors, kiosks) 72333
Drinking Places 72341 But only accessory to other permitted uses
Other Services, but only as listed below
Personal & Laundry Services 812
excluding 81233 Linen & Uniform Supply 81233
Public Administration 92 Public parks are permitted in all districts.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 1 - | 6
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 2 - | 1
Chapter 42
Village Zoning District
This chapter establishes the Village Zoning District
and the standards that apply within that district.
42.1 Boundaries – Purpose – Uses Permitted
42.1.1 What are the boundaries of the VZD? The boundaries of the VZD are shown on the official
zoning map that accompanies this bylaw.
42.1.2 What is the purpose of the VZD? The village is the focus of Williston’s identity as a place.
It is the seat of local government, a center of education and recreation, and home to a number of the
town’s residents. The VZD is established to maintain the village as a point of stability and a
reminder of history in a town that is, otherwise, changing quite rapidly. Policy 3.6 of the Town
Plan states:
The Town of Williston will continue to maintain and protect the historic character of its
village center.
Policy 4.1 goes on to say:
The Town of Williston will continue to use design review to protect the historic character of
the Village Zoning District (VZD). The town will also consider ways to protect historic
resources outside the VZD.
42.1.3 Does the town have specific authority to create and regulate an historic district? Yes. 24
V.S.A. 4414(1)(F)(i) gives Vermont municipalities the authority to create historic districts and
require design review within those districts.
42.1.4 What uses are permitted in the VZD? The VZD is predominantly residential in character,
with a mix of lot sizes and housing types. Small-scale commercial uses, including home businesses
and institutional uses are also permitted, subject to standards that ensure compatibility with both
neighboring residential uses and the historic character of the village. See Table 42.A and the notes
below.
42.1.4.1 Village Character. The VZD is a true mixed-use zoning district that permits single
family homes, apartments, small businesses, and institutions, including churches, schools,
and local government. The common tie here is not use (although industrial uses are
prohibited), but a modest scale; spacious lots with trees and other landscaping; and a
pedestrian orientation. All new buildings and uses must perpetuate these characteristics.
42.1.4.2 Scale of Enterprises. WDB 42.9.1 explicitly limits the size of commercial uses to
ensure that they are consistent with the historic character of the VZD.
42.2 Permit Requirements. Permit requirements are explained in Chapters 4-6. With the minor
exceptions noted there, all development in this zoning district must have a permit. Be informed,
however, that permit requirements in this zoning district are different.
42.2.1 How are permit requirements different in the VZD? All exterior changes in the VZD are
subject to design review. As explained below, some proposed exterior changes may be approved by
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 2 - | 2
the Administrator, who may seek the advice of the HAAC before making a decision, but some
developments that would not require a discretionary permit outside the VZD must be reviewed by
the DRB.
42.2.2 Which proposed developments in the VZD can be reviewed by the Administrator? The
Administrator may review applications for permits for proposed developments that would only
require an administrative permit outside the VZD on lots that are not in the Williston Village
National Register Historic District and that are not in the additional review area established by Map
5 of the Town Plan. The Administrator may seek the advice of the HAAC before making a decision
on any such application, and the HAAC may, upon finding that the proposed use could have a
significant impact on the character of the village, require that the proposed application be submitted
to the DRB.
42.2.3 Which proposed developments in the VZD must be reviewed by the DRB? The DRB must
issue a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) for any development in the Williston Village
National Register Historic District, that is in the additional review area established by Map 6 of the
Town Plan or that is referred to it by the HAAC.
42.2.3.1 With an Administrative Permit. Where the proposed work would otherwise require
only an administrative permit, the DRB will review the proposed development for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed development complies, the
DRB will approve the application for a COA, imposing any conditions it finds necessary to
ensure compliance. If the proposed development fails to comply, the DRB will reject the
application for a COA.
42.2.3.2 With a Discretionary Permit. Where a discretionary permit is required for the
proposed development, the COA will be combined with the discretionary permit.
42.3 Dimensional Standards
42.3.1 Is there a maximum building height in the VZD? Yes. Building height in this zoning
district is limited to 36 feet.
42.3.2 Must development in the VZD be set back from property lines? Yes. Setbacks from rear
and side property lines may be controlled by the landscaped buffer requirements of Chapter 23 of
this bylaw. Where the requirements of Chapter 23 do not apply, the minimum setback from both
side and rear property lines is 10 feet.
Buffer Requirements? A buffer that complies with Chapter 23 must be provided where residential development adjoins
other uses, including the nonresidential uses permitted in the VZD. 15-foot setbacks will be required between residential
uses.
42.3.3 Must development in the VZD be set back from roads? Yes. Except where WDB 42.3.3.4
applies, the minimum setbacks from roads in the VZD shall be:
42.3.3.1 From the Right-of-Way of I-89: 150 feet;
42.3.3.2 From the Right-of-Way of Route 2, where it is town policy to maintain a wide,
landscaped “greenbelt,” 50 feet; and
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 2 - | 3
42.3.3.3 From Any Other Road, public or private, 25 feet.
42.3.3.4 Average Setback Exception. Residential infill on lots in parts of the Village where
the typical setback from the road varies from the standards of WDB 42.3.3.1-3 may meet the
average setback of the existing dwellings. In determining that average setback, the
Administrator will consider all existing dwellings that are along the same road as and within
300 feet of the proposed dwelling.
42.3.3.5 What uses are permitted in the required setbacks? The required setbacks in the VZD
must be landscaped as a Type I, III, or IV buffer in compliance with Chapter 23 of this
bylaw, but access drives, roads, pedestrian ways, underground utility lines, and where such
lines are permitted, overhead utility lines may cross required setbacks at a right angle (±10°).
Pedestrian ways may also run parallel to and within a required setback. Outdoor storage may
also be permitted. See WDB 20.12 re outdoor storage in side and rear setbacks.
42.3.3.6 Route 2 Setback. New parking and loading areas may not be placed within required
setback along Route 2. Existing parking and loading areas that are within the required
setback along Route 2 are nonconforming and must be removed as part of any proposal for a
change in use, new building, or major addition to an existing building. The DRB may, upon
finding that full compliance with this standard is not feasible, permit an exception, provided
that the proposed development will result in a reasonable (given the site) addition to the
landscaped space within the setback.
42.3.4 Is a minimum lot frontage required in the VZD? Yes. All lots must have at least 40 feet of
frontage on an existing or proposed public or private road. The DRB may require a greater frontage
where necessary to provide safe access to the lot.
42.4 Density Standards. See Chapter 19 of this bylaw for an explanation of how density is measured and
a summary of the density standards in all zoning districts.
42.4.1 What density of development is permitted in the VZD? The average density of development
permitted in the VZD shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre (2.0 DU/A), except where
development takes place on slopes of 15-30%, where the average density will be limited to one
dwelling per acre.
42.4.2 Is there a minimum area per dwelling in the VZD? Yes, the minimum area per dwelling
where dwellings are placed on individual lots is .15 A (6,534 SF).
Why are they different? This is explained in more detail in Chapter 19. To put it briefly, the difference between the
average density and the minimum lot size provides flexibility in subdivision design.
42.4.3 Is there a requirement that lot sizes be mixed in the VZD? Yes. The VZD is generally
characterized by varying lot sizes in close proximity. This pattern, which has evolved over the
last 200 years, should continue. Proposed developments with a uniform, “cookie-cutter” pattern
of lots will not be approved.
42.5 General Standards Development in this zoning district must, unless specifically exempted,
comply with all standards adopted in Chapters 13-29 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 2 - | 4
42.6 Specific Standards Standards that apply only within this zoning district are presented in WDB
42.7-42.9
42.7 Outdoor Sales and Storage. Outdoor sales and storage associated with residential premises is
regulated by Chapter 20 of this bylaw. The standards adopted here apply to the permitted commercial and
institutional uses.
42.7.1 Are outdoor sales permitted in the VZD? Permanent outdoor sales areas and displays are
prohibited in the VZD. The occasional, temporary outdoor display of goods for sale will be
permitted, provided that the extent of the area occupied by outdoor sales is less than 1,000 SF.
42.7.2 Is outdoor storage permitted in the VZD? The temporary outdoor storage of construction
equipment and materials is permitted in all zoning districts by Chapter 17. No other outdoor
storage is permitted for commercial and institutional uses in the VZD.
42.8 Historic Design Review
42.8.1 Must all development in the VZD be consistent with the Williston Village Historic
District Design Review Guide? Yes. Development in the VZD must be consistent with the
Williston Village Historic Design Review Guide (Guide), which is attached to this bylaw as
Appendix H.
42.8.2 If the Guide only says “should,” do I really have to comply? Yes, to the extent feasible.
The use of ‘should’ and similar formulations of standards in this chapter does not exempt anyone
from compliance. This language is, instead, an acknowledgement of the difficulties that are
sometimes encountered in maintaining the historic appearance of existing buildings as they age, as
well as of the fact that not all existing buildings in the VZD have historic character. ‘Should’
provides some flexibility for the Administrator or DRB to accept practical solutions that are in the
spirit of the Guide. The designers of new buildings should read the Guide as mandatory.
42.8.3 Does this bylaw add anything to the Guide? Yes.
42.8.3.1 Color. The Guide does not make it clear that color is among the legitimate
considerations in design review in the VZD. It is. The HAAC and DRB may consider the
compatibility of proposed colors with those on surrounding buildings and the overall
character of the Village.
42.8.3.2 Fences. The color and material of front yard fences in the VZD are subject to
approval by the Administrator with the advice of the HAAC.
42.8.3.3 Siding. Vinyl siding is not permitted on historic structures. Cementitious fiberboard
may be acceptable instead of clapboard outside the Williston Village National Register
Historic District. Replacement siding must comply with this standard to the extent of the
change being made.
42.8.3.4 Signs. Signs must comply with both the Guide and the standards adopted in Chapter
25 of this bylaw.
42.8.3.5 Skylights. Skylights are permitted, but they must not be visible from a public way.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 2 - | 5
42.9 Standards for Commercial Uses. See also WDB 42.4.
42.9.1 Is there a maximum size for commercial uses in the VZD? Yes. No more than 4,000 SF on
any lot may be devoted to permitted (see Table 42.A) commercial uses, with no more than 2,500
SF of that space being on any one floor.
42.9.2 Do the off-street parking and loading requirements of this bylaw apply in the tight spaces
of the VZD? The requirements of Chapter 14 do apply, but the DRB may permit the provision of
less parking than is required by that chapter where doing so will better maintain the historic
character of the village, while not creating parking conflicts with neighboring uses.
Table 42.A - Village Residential Zoning District NAICS Notes
Uses that are not specifically permitted are prohibited. Listed uses are permitted only in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this bylaw and with the purpose statement for this zoning district. Accessory uses
may not be listed separately. See Chapter 17 of this bylaw re accessory structures and uses.
Residential (multiple or single family dwellings)
Retail Trade, but only as listed below
Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores 442
The key to appropriate retail in the VZD is
scale, which is explicitly limited by WDB
42.9.1.
Food and Beverage Stores 445
Health and Personal Care Stores 446
Clothing and Clothing Accessories Stores 448
Hobby, Toy, and Game Stores 45112
Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores 45113
Musical Instrument and Music Stores 45117
Book, Periodical, and Music Stores 4512
Florists 4531
Office Supplies, Stationery, and Gift Stores 4532
Information 51
Finance & Insurance 52
Real Estate 529
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services,
but specifically not 54164, Veterinary Services as
noted
54
Vets with outdoor treatment and/or boarding
facilities must be located in the ARZD
Management of Companies & Enterprises 55
Administrative Support Services 561
Educational Services 61
Health Care and Social Assistance 62
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 71
Bed and Breakfast Inns 721191
Full Service Restaurants 7221 No drive-through food service is permitted
Personal Care Services 8121
Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Professional, and
Similar Organizations
813
Public Administration 92 Parks are permitted in all zoning districts
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 3 - | 1
Chapter 43
Parks and Recreation Impact Fees
This chapter establishes a parks and recreation
impact fee that must be paid by most
residential development projects.
43.1. Purpose – Authority - Repeal
43.1.1 Why does Williston charge a parks and recreation impact fee? The 2011-2016
Comprehensive Plan (see Chapter 8) and other plans and studies prepared for the town make it
clear that numerous parks and recreation improvements are needed to serve Williston’s anticipated
population growth. This chapter establishes a parks and recreation impact fee to help pay for those
improvements and, specifically, to ensure that new residents bear a fair portion of the costs of those
improvements.
43.1.2 Does the town have the authority to impose impact fees? Yes. 24 V.S.A. § 5200, et. seq.,
gives Vermont municipalities the authority to charge recreation (and other) impact fees.
43.1.3 Does this chapter replace the parks and recreation impact fee Williston has been
charging? Yes. Adoption of this chapter repeals Section 3-B and Table R-3 of the Williston Impact
Fee Ordinance, which was first adopted on November 29, 2001, and last amended on July 17,
2003.
43.2 Payment - Calculation
43.2.1 Who must pay the parks and recreation impact fee? Any residential development that
results in an increase in the number of dwelling units must pay a parks and recreation impact fee.
43.2.2 When must the parks and recreation impact fee be paid? Payment of the parks and
recreation impact fee required by WDB 43.2.1 must accompany the application for the
administrative permit that will allow work to begin on the proposed dwelling(s) for which the fee is
owed. Impact fee payments, like all other permit fees, will be made to the Town Clerk, based on a
calculation provided by Williston Planning.
43.2.3 How was the parks and recreation impact fee calculated? The parks and recreation impact
fee was calculated based on a study entitled Recreation Impact Fee Analysis, Williston Vermont
prepared by Michael J. Munson, July 30, 2012. See Appendix I for an explanation of how the
interim fee was established.
43.2.4 So, how much do I owe? The parks and recreation impact fees are:
43.2.4.1 Single Family Dwellings. The net parks and recreation impact fee for each singlefamily
dwelling for Fiscal Years 2015-2025 is listed in Table 43.A
43.2.4.2 Multiple Family Dwellings/Condominiums. The net parks and recreation impact fee
for each unit in a multiple-family or condominium dwelling for Fiscal Years 2015-2025 is
listed in Table 43.A
43.2.5 Are there lower parks and recreation impact fees for affordable housing? Not at this time.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 3 - | 2
43.3 Use of the Fees. Parks and Recreation impact fees may be used to build all or any part of the parks
and recreation improvements listed in Section III (A-E) of the report entitled Recreation Impact Fee
Analysis, Williston Vermont prepared by Michael J. Munson, July 30, 2012. Parks and recreation impact
fees may not be used for other purposes, except that they may be used to support the update and revision
of this chapter.
43.4 Management of the Fees
43.4.1 How will I know that the parks and recreation impact fees I paid were used for the
projects listed in WDB 45.3?
43.4.1.1 Separate Account. Park and recreation impact fees will be placed in a separate
interest bearing account: the "Williston Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Account.” The
Town Manager will maintain a ledger for this account which indicates the date of payment
of each fee, the amount paid, the name of the payer, and the date that the fee collected was
spent on one or more of the parks and recreation improvement projects listed in Table 43.A.
43.4.1.2 Annual Report. Once each year, the Town Manager shall prepare and submit to the
Selectboard and Planning Commission an annual accounting of all fees paid into and
withdrawn from the Williston Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Account. This report shall
show the amounts collected and their source, the amounts expended, and the projects for
which expenditures were made.
43.4.2 What happens if the town does not use the impact fee I paid in a timely fashion? If the
town does not expend an impact fee within six years of the date it is collected, the owner of the
property at the end of the six-year time period may apply for and receive a refund of that fee. The
request for a refund must be filed in writing within one year after the expiration of the six-year time
period.
43.4.3 What happens if the costs of the improvements supported by impact fees turn out to be less
than estimated? As provided by 24 V.S.A. § 5302(d), if the actual expense of the projects funded
by the impact fees established in this chapter is less than anticipated in the Parks and Recreation
Impact Fee Analysis, the town will, upon request by the then owner of the property for which a fee
was paid, refund that portion of the fee paid, with accrued interest, that was in excess of the amount
that should have been charged. A request for this type of refund must be filed within one year of
the completion of the last of the projects listed in Table 45.A.
43.4.4 Suppose I paid an impact fee, and then decided not to build. Can I get a refund? Anyone
who pays a parks and recreation impact fee may request and receive a refund of that fee if the
proposed development was never begun. Where such a refund is requested, the approved
administrative permit will be voided and accrued interest will be retained to offset the town’s
administrative expenses. A new administrative permit, and if necessary, a new discretionary
permit, and payment of all required fees, including the parks and recreation impact fee, will be
required before any development activity is permitted on the site.
43.5 Appeals
43.5.1 Is it possible to appeal an impact fee? Yes. As required by 24 V.S.A. § 5203(f), anyone
who must pay a parks and recreation impact fee may challenge the imposition of that fee or the
amount of the fee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 3 - | 3
must be filed within thirty days after payment of the impact fee (the fee must be paid before an
appeal can be filed) and must state the basis of the appeal as required by WDB 45.6.3,
43.5.2 Will there be a hearing on an appeal? Yes. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a
notice of appeal, the Selectboard shall hold a public hearing to receive oral and written evidence
and argument from the appellant, staff, and other interested parties.
43.5.3 On what basis could the Selectboard overturn the imposition of an impact fee and provide
a refund? The Selectboard’s first concern in hearing a request to avoid the payment of impact fees
must be equal treatment of all applicants. The appellant must, therefore, clearly demonstrate that it
should not pay the fee, or pay a reduced fee, because its circumstances are unique, not shared by
other applicants, and not adequately foreseen in the town’s determination of the parks and
recreation impact fees adopted in this chapter.
43.5.4 How will notice of the Selectboard’s decision be reported? The Selectboard will provide
the appellant with a written notice of its decision within forty-five (45) days after the end of the
hearing. If that decision is to overturn the imposition of the fee, the notice of decision will be
accompanied by a refund check.
TABLE 43.A
Parks and Recreation Impact Fees Fiscal Years 2015-2025
Per Dwelling Unit
FY Single Family Multi-Family
2015 $900.00 $711.00
2016 $1100.00 $869.00
2017 $1300.00 $1027.00
2018 $1500.00 $1185.00
2019 $1700.00 $1343.00
2020 $1900.00 $1500.00
2021 $2100.00 $1659.00
2022 $2100.00 $1659.00
2023 $2100.00 $1659.00
2024 $2100.00 $1659.00
2025 $2100.00 $1659.00
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 4 - | 1
Chapter 44
School Impact Fees
This chapter establishes a school impact fee
that must be paid by most residential
development projects.
44.1. Purpose – Authority - Repeal
44.1.1 Why does Williston charge a school impact fee? The 2011-2016 Comprehensive Plan (see
Chapter 6) and other plans and studies prepared for the town make it clear that numerous
improvements to both Williston Schools (K-8) and Williston’s share of improvements to Champlain
Valley Union High School (9-12) are needed to serve Williston’s anticipated population growth. This
chapter establishes a school impact fee to help pay for those improvements and, specifically, to
ensure that new residents bear a fair portion of the costs of those improvements.
44.1.2 Does the town have the authority to impose impact fees? Yes. 24 V.S.A. § 5200, et seq. gives
Vermont municipalities the authority to charge school (and other) impact fees.
44.1.3 Does this chapter replace the school impact fee Williston has been charging? Yes. Adoption
of this chapter repeals Section 3-A and Table S-6 of the Williston Impact Fee Ordinance, which was
first adopted on November 29, 2001, and last amended on July 17, 2003.
44.2 Payment - Calculation
44.2.1 Who must pay the school impact fee? Any development that results in an increase in the
number of dwelling units must pay a school impact fee.
44.2.2 When must the school impact fee be paid? Payment of the school impact fee required by
WDB 45.2.1 must accompany the application for the administrative permit that will allow work to
begin on the proposed dwellings that will generate the additional population for which the fee is
owed. Impact fee payments, like all other permit fees, will be made to the Town Clerk, based on a
calculation provided by Williston Planning.
44.2.3 Can one prepay school impact fees in order to avoid possible increases in these fees? No.
As provided in WDB 45.2.3, school impact fees may be paid only at the time an application for an
administrative permit is filed.
44.2.4 How was the school impact fee calculated? The school impact fee was calculated based on a
study entitled School Impact Fee Analysis, Williston Vermont prepared by Michael J. Munson, June
1, 2012. See Appendix I for an explanation of how the school impact fee was established.
44.2.5 So, how much do I owe? The school impact fees are:
44.2.5.1 Single Family Dwellings. The combined net school impact fee for each single-family
dwelling for Fiscal Years 2012 through 2024 is listed in Table 44.A and varies from year to
year.
44.2.5.2 Multiple Family Dwellings/Condominiums. The combined net school impact fee for
each single-family dwelling for Fiscal Years 2012 through 2024 is listed in Table 44.A and
varies from year to year.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 4 - | 2
44.2.6 Are there lower school impact fees for affordable housing? Not at this time.
44.3 Use of the Fees. School impact fees will be used to pay for the bonds used to finance the construction
of the Allen Brook School in 1997, and the bonds used to finance the renovations to the Champlain Valley
Union High School in 2005/6. School impact fees may not be used for other purposes, except that they may
be used to support the update and revision of this chapter.
44.4 Management of the Fees
44.4.1 How will I know that the school impact fees I paid were used for the projects listed in WDB
45.3?
44.4.1.1 Separate Account. School impact fees will be placed in a separate interest bearing
account: the "Williston School Impact Fee Account.” The Town Manager will maintain a
ledger for this account which indicates the date of payment of each fee, the amount paid, the
name of the payer, and the date that the fee collected was spent on one or more of the school
improvement projects listed in Table 44.A.
44.4.1.2 Annual Report. Once each year, the Town Manager shall prepare and submit to the
Selectboard and Planning Commission an annual accounting of all fees paid into and
withdrawn from the Williston School Impact Fee Account. This report shall show the amount
collected and their source, the amounts expended, and the projects for which expenditures
were made.
44.4.2 What happens if the town does not use the impact fee I paid in a timely fashion? If the town
does not expend an impact fee within six years of the date it is collected, the owner of the property
at the end of the six-year time period may apply for and receive a refund of that fee. The request for
a refund must be filed in writing within one year after the expiration of the six-year time period.
44.4.3 What happens if the costs of the improvements supported by impact fees turn out to be less
than estimated? As provided by 24 V.S.A. § 5302(d), if the actual expense of the projects funded by
the impact fees established in this chapter is less than anticipated in the School Impact Fee Analysis,
the town will, upon request by the then owner of the property for which a fee was paid, refund that
portion of the fee paid, with accrued interest, that was in excess of the amount that should have been
charged. A request for this type of refund must be filed within one year of the completion of the last
of the projects listed in Table 45.A.
44.4.4 Suppose I paid an impact fee, and then decided not to build. Can I get a refund? Anyone
who pays a school impact fee may request and receive a refund of that fee if the proposed
development was never begun. Where such a refund is requested, the approved administrative permit
will be voided and accrued interest will be retained to offset the town’s administrative expenses. A
new administrative permit, and if necessary, a new discretionary permit, and payment of all required
fees, including the school impact fee, will be required before any development activity is permitted
on the site.
44.5 Appeals
44.5.1 Is it possible to appeal an impact fee? Yes. As required by 24 V.S.A. § 5203(f), anyone who
must pay a school impact fee may challenge the imposition of that fee or the amount of the fee by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal must be filed within thirty
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 4 - | 3
days after payment of the impact fee (the fee must be paid before an appeal can be filed) and must
state the basis of the appeal as required by WDB 45.6.3,
44.5.2 Will there be a hearing on an appeal? Yes. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a notice
of appeal, the Selectboard shall hold a public hearing to receive oral and written evidence and
argument from the appellant, staff, and other interested parties.
44.5.3 On what basis could the Selectboard overturn the imposition of an impact fee and provide
a refund? The Selectboard’s first concern in hearing a request to avoid the payment of impact fees
must be equal treatment of all applicants. The appellant must, therefore, clearly demonstrate that it
should not pay the fee, or pay a reduced fee, because its circumstances are unique, not shared by
other applicants, and not adequately foreseen in the town’s determination of the school impact fees
adopted in this chapter.
44.5.4 How will notice of the Selectboard’s decision be reported? The Selectboard will provide the
appellant with a written notice of its decision within forty-five (45) days after the end of the hearing.
If that decision is to overturn the imposition of the fee, the notice of decision will be accompanied
by a refund check.
TABLE 44.A
COMBINED NET IMPACT FEES FOR EDUCATION FACILITIES
Per Dwelling Unit
Net Fees for K-8 facilities Net Fees for 9-12 facilities Combined Net Impact Fees
Fiscal
Year
Single family Multi-family Single family Multi-family Single family Multi-family
2015 $7,148.21 $2,473.14 $4,061.18 $1,381.45 $11,209.39 $3,854.59
2016 $0.00 $0.00 $4,065.57 $1,384.88 $4,065.57 $1,384.88
2017 $0.00 $0.00 $4,069.56 $1,388.00 $4,069.56 $1,388.00
2018 $0.00 $0.00 $4,073.21 $1,390.86 $4,073.21 $1,390.86
2019 $0.00 $0.00 $4,076.56 $1,393.48 $4,076.56 $1,393.48
2020 $0.00 $0.00 $4,079.66 $1,395.91 $4,079.66 $1,395.91
2021 $0.00 $0.00 $4,082.78 $1,398.35 $4,082.78 $1,398.35
2022 $0.00 $0.00 $4,085.43 $1,400.42 $4,085.43 $1,400.42
2023 $0.00 $0.00 $4,087.90 $1,402.35 $4,087.90 $1,402.35
2024 $0.00 $0.00 $4,090.21 $1,404.16 $4,090.21 $1,404.16
2025 $0.00 $0.00 $4,090.21 $1,404.16 $4,090.21 $1,404.16
Adopted by the Selectboard June 1, 2009 Amended: October 15, 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 5 - | 1
Chapter 45
Transportation Impact Fees
This chapter establishes a transportation
impact fee that must be paid by most
development projects.
45.1. Purpose – Authority - Repeal
45.1.1 Why does Williston charge a transportation impact fee? The 2016-2024 Williston
Comprehensive Plan (see Chapter 6) and other plans and studies prepared for the town make it clear
that numerous transportation improvements are needed to serve Williston’s anticipated growth. This
chapter establishes a transportation impact fee to help pay for those improvements and, specifically,
to ensure that new residents and businesses bear a fair portion of the costs of those improvements.
45.1.2 Does the town have the authority to impose impact fees? Yes. 24 V.S.A. § 5200, et seq.,
gives Vermont municipalities the authority to charge transportation (and other) impact fees.
45.2 Payment - Calculation
45.2.1 Who must pay the transportation impact fee? Any development for which a discretionary
permit is required that results in an increase in the number of dwelling units or, in the case of
nonresidential development, in an increase in PM peak hour trip ends (trips occurring between the
hours of 4:00 PM and 6:00 PM on weekdays, regardless of mode of travel) must pay a transportation
impact fee. The DRB may specify that an alternative measure of peak trip demand be used for
determining the transportation impact fee on recommendation from the town’s transportation
engineer. Examples of such development include churches, schools, and other uses generating
significant amounts of traffic with peak periods outside of the P.M. peak hour of demand.
45.2.2 Does “development” include additions or expansions of existing uses? Yes. Additions to
nonresidential uses that require the approval of a discretionary permit by the DRB are subject to the
transportation impact fee adopted here.
45.2.3 When must the transportation impact fee be paid? Payment of the transportation impact fee
required by WDB 45.2.1 must accompany the application for the administrative permit that will
allow work to begin on the proposed addition, building or dwellings that generate the trips for which
the fee is owed. Impact fee payments, like all other permit fees, will be made to the Town Clerk,
based on a calculation provided by Williston Planning.
45.2.4 Can one prepay transportation impact fees in order to avoid possible increases in these fees?
No. As provided in WDB 45.2.3, transportation impact fees may be paid only at the time an
application for an administrative permit is filed.
45.2.5 How was the transportation impact fee calculated? The net transportation impact fee adopted
here is calculated based on the Town of Williston, Vermont and Chittenden County regional planning
Commission (CCRPC) Transportation Impact Fee Study performed by Resource Systems Group in
2019. This study, using a 2040 horizon, compares projected growth and its impact on Williston’s
transportation system to a set of transportation projects intended to mitigate that congestion. The
result is a fee that is intended to ensure that new development pays its share of the cost of maintaining
the level of service of Williston’s transportation system at current levels.
Adopted by the Selectboard June 1, 2009 Amended: October 15, 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 5 - | 2
45.2.6 So, how much do I owe? The transportation impact fees are:
45.2.6.1 Single Family Dwellings. The net transportation impact fee for each single-family
dwelling is $1943.00 per PM peak hour trip end X 1.01 PM peak hour trip ends per dwelling,
totaling $1962.43
45.2.6.2 Multiple Family Dwellings/Condominiums. The net transportation impact fee for
each unit in a multiple-family or condominium dwelling is $1943.00.00 per PM peak hour trip
end X 0.78 PM peak hour trip ends per dwelling, totaling $1,515.54.
45.2.6.3 Nonresidential Developments. The net transportation impact fee for all other
development is $1943.00 multiplied by the number of PM peak hour trip ends that
development is expected to generate.
45.2.7 How do I know how many PM peak hour trip ends a proposed development will generate?
The number of PM peak hour trips generated by a proposed nonresidential development will be
estimated using the most current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation.
The Administrator’s determination of PM peak hour trip ends made using that reference is subject to
appeal using the procedures of WDB 5.4.
45.2.8 Are there other ways of calculating the number of trips for the purpose of determining the
transportation impact fee? There may be circumstances when other traffic generation sources may
be required. Other sources may include professionally conducted traffic generation studies not
included in the ITE TRIP GENERATION manual or local trip generation studies conducted for the
particular use. Local trip generation studies are required when: a) the particular land use is not
covered by ITE; b) there are fewer than 4 data points (studies) in the ITE TRIP GENERATION
manual; c) the size or intensity of the use falls outside the range of the TRIP GENERATION data
points. When using local trip generation studies, the town shall have its own traffic consultant verify
the proposed trip generation calculation at the expense of the developer prior to acceptance by the
Administrator.
45.2.8 Are there lower transportation impact fees for affordable housing? Yes. As permitted by 24
V.S.A. § 5205, the net transportation impact fees for perpetually affordable housing units will be
waived at the following rate:
Perpetually affordable at 100% of the Area Median Income or below:
Transportation Fees discounted 50%
Perpetually affordable at 80% of the Area Median Income or below:
Transportation Fees discounted 100%
A perpetually affordable housing unit is one that meets the definition of ‘affordable housing’
established in this bylaw.
45.2.9 Do all public facilities have to pay transportation impact fees? No. Transportation impact
fees will not be collected for the construction of new Town facilities or facilities built by the
Chittenden Solid Waste District.
45.2.10 Are there any other uses that are not subject to transportation impact fees? Yes. Child Day
Care Services (NAICS 6244) will not be assessed transportation impact fees under this chapter.
Adopted by the Selectboard June 1, 2009 Amended: October 15, 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 5 - | 3
45.3 Use of the Fees. Transportation impact fees may be used to build all or any part of the transportation
improvements listed in Table 45.A. Transportation impact fees may not be used for other purposes, except
that they may be used to support the update and revision of this chapter.
45.4 Management of the Fees
45.4.1 How will I know that the transportation impact fees I paid were used for the projects listed
in WDB 45.3?
45.4.1.1 Separate Account. Transportation impact fees will be placed in a separate interest
bearing account: the "Williston Transportation Impact Fee Account.” The Town Manager will
maintain a ledger for this account which indicates the date of payment of each fee, the amount
paid, the name of the payer, and the date that the fee collected was spent on one or more of
the transportation improvement projects listed in Table 45.A.
45.4.1.2 Annual Report. Once each year, the Town Manager shall prepare and submit to the
Selectboard and Planning Commission an annual accounting of all fees paid into and
withdrawn from the Williston Transportation Impact Fee Account. This report shall show the
amounts collected and their source, the amounts expended, and the projects for which
expenditures were made.
45.4.2 What happens if the town does not use the impact fee I paid in a timely fashion? If the town
does not expend an impact fee within six years of the date it is collected, the owner of the property
at the end of the six-year time period may apply for and receive a refund of that fee. The request for
a refund must be filed in writing within one year after the expiration of the six-year time period.
45.4.3 What happens if the costs of the improvements supported by impact fees turn out to be less
than estimated? As provided by 24 V.S.A. § 5203(d), if the actual expense of the projects funded by
the impact fees established in this chapter is less than anticipated in the Study, the town will, upon
request by the current owner of the property for which a fee was paid, refund that portion of the fee
paid, with accrued interest, that was in excess of the amount that should have been charged. A request
for this type of refund must be filed within one year of the completion of the last of the projects listed
in Table 45.A.
45.4.4 Suppose I paid an impact fee, and then decided not to build. Can I get a refund? Anyone
who pays a transportation impact fee may request and receive a refund of that fee if the proposed
development was never begun. Where such a refund is requested, the approved administrative permit
will be voided and accrued interest will be retained to offset the town’s administrative expenses. A
new administrative permit, and if necessary, a new discretionary permit, and payment of all required
fees, including the transportation impact fee, will be required before any development activity is
permitted on the site.
45.5 In-Kind Contributions.
45.5.1 Can the construction of transportation improvements by an applicant be credited against
impact fees owed on the project? Yes. There may be times when a developer whose project will
Adopted by the Selectboard June 1, 2009 Amended: October 15, 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 5 - | 4
have to pay transportation impact fees will find it convenient to build or install one, or some part of
one, of the improvements listed in Table 45.A.
45.5.2 Credit for construction of improvements prior to development. Where an applicant constructs
or contributes to the construction of a transportation improvement that is or will be necessary to
directly serve trips created by their future development, that development shall receive “credit”
against its transportation impact fee liability up to 100% of the cost of the construction of the
improvement or the amount of the contribution toward the improvement made by the applicant.
How would “credit” for an impact fee work and how is it different from “prepaying” an impact fee, which
is not allowed? The actual construction (or contribution to the actual construction) or a listed transportation
improvement necessary to serve future development by the applicant is different from “prepaying” an impact fee
because the improvement is actually built. A good example is the “grid street” Zephyr Road, whose construction
was necessary to serve the Finney Crossing Development. Projects within the Finney Crossing development are
considered to have “paid” their impact fees by constructing a listed improvement, up to the total cost of constructing
Zephyr Road that was incurred by the applicant when it was constructed.
45.5.3 How will credits for construction be determined? Where an applicant proposes to build or to
contribute funds to build all or part of a listed improvement, the development agreement required by
Chapter 7 of this bylaw for any development the applicant proposes that is directly served by the
improvement may include language, approved by the DRB with the advice of the DPW, that
describes how the contribution or actual costs of building or installing the improvement will be
credited against the transportation impact fees. Where the credit will be less than the sum of the
transportation impact fees that would be paid, any development agreement shall establish a lesser
fee, to be paid when administrative permits are approved. Construction or installation of the listed
improvement will become a “required improvement” subject to all security, inspection, warranty,
and other standards established in Chapter 7 of this bylaw.
45.6 Appeals
45.6.1 Is it possible to appeal an impact fee? Yes. As required by 24 V.S.A. § 5203(f), anyone who
must pay a transportation impact fee may challenge the imposition of that fee or the amount of the
fee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal must be filed within
thirty days after payment of the impact fee (the fee must be paid before an appeal can be filed) and
must state the basis of the appeal as required by WDB 45.6.3,
45.6.2 Will there be a hearing on an appeal? Yes. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a notice
of appeal, the Selectboard shall hold a public hearing to receive oral and written evidence and
argument from the appellant, staff, and other interested parties.
45.6.3 On what basis could the Selectboard overturn the imposition of an impact fee and provide
a refund? The Selectboard’s first concern in hearing a request to avoid the payment of impact fees
must be equal treatment of all applicants. The appellant must, therefore, clearly demonstrate that it
should not pay the fee, or pay a reduced fee, because its circumstances are unique, not shared by
other applicants, and not adequately foreseen in the town’s determination of the transportation impact
fees adopted in this chapter.
45.6.4 How will notice of the Selectboard’s decision be reported? The Selectboard will provide the
appellant with a written notice of its decision within forty-five (45) days after the end of the hearing.
Adopted by the Selectboard June 1, 2009 Amended: October 15, 2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 5 - | 5
If that decision is to overturn the imposition of the fee, the notice of decision will be accompanied
by a refund check.
Table 45.A
Improvements Eligible for Transportation Impact Fee Funding
How will the Town update and use this table? This table contains the list of projects that the fee
is based upon. This table may be updated each fiscal year to reflect changes in estimated project
cost, and the fee adjusted accordingly.
SYSTEM PROJECT COST ($) TOWN
SHARE
Town Marshall Avenue Shared Use Path 200,000.00 100%
Town East-West Grid Street. (VT2A to Maple Tree Place) 1,500,000.00 100%
Town
Shared-Use Path along US2 Taft Corners to Village
(design)
100,000.00 100%
Town Mountain View Road Bike Lanes (design) 100,000.00 100%
Town Upgrade Maple Tree Place Roundabout 1,000,000.00 100%
Town Industrial Avenue Sidewalk and Bike Lane 846,100.00 100%
Town Extension of Trader Lane to US2 1,750,000.00 100%
Total eligible town projects >>> $ 5,496,000.00
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 1
Chapter 46
Definitions
This chapter defines important terms used in
this bylaw. It also presents a table of
abbreviations and acronyms that are used in
this bylaw.
46.1 Abbreviations. Abbreviations and acronyms used in this bylaw are defined in Table 46.A.
Table 46.A – Abbreviations & Acronyms
AICP American Institute of Certified Planners
ARZD Agricultural/Rural Residential Zoning District
BPZD Business Park Zoning District
CC Certificate of Compliance
COA Certificate of Appropriateness
TCC Temporary Certificate of Compliance
dbh diameter, at breast height
DRB Development Review Board
DPW Director of Public Works
GZDN Gateway Zoning District North
GZDS Gateway Zoning District South
HAAC Historic and Architectural Advisory Committee
IZDE Industrial Zoning District East
IZDW Industrial Zoning District West
MUCZD Mixed Use Commercial Zoning District
MURZD Mixed Use Residential Zoning District
NAICS North American Industrial Classification System
RZD Residential Zoning District
SF square feet
SFHA Special Flood Hazard Area
TCZD Taft Corners Zoning District
VSA Vermont Statutes, Annotated
VZD Village Zoning District
WDB Williston Development Bylaw
46.2 Use of the Definitions
46.2.1 Are there rules of construction for the terms used in this bylaw? Yes. Unless it is
otherwise clearly indicated by the context, the singular of any term defined here includes the plural
and vice versa.
46.2.2 What if I disagree with the Administrator’s use of a definition? Definitions may become
controversial. Williston has, for example, had a dispute about what is “customarily accessory” to a
golf course. The Administrator’s application of any of the definitions adopted here may be
appealed to the DRB using the appeal procedure established in Chapter 5 of this bylaw.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 2
46.3 Definitions A-D
46.3.1 Absorption. See ‘Visual Absorption” at WDB 46.8.4.
46.3.2 Accepted Agricultural Practices are defined by the Vermont Agency of Agriculture Food
and Markets as including, but not limited to: (a) the confinement, feeding, fencing, and watering of
livestock; (b) the handling of livestock wastes and by-products; (c)the collection of maple sap and
production of maple syrup; (d) the preparation, tilling, fertilization, planting, protection, irrigation
and harvesting of crops; (e) the ditching and subsurface drainage of farm fields and the
construction of farm ponds; (f) the stabilization of farm field streambanks constructed in
accordance with the USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service standards and specifications
or other standards approved by the Commissioner; (g) the construction and maintenance of farm
structures in accordance with Federal Flood Insurance Management Program standards, the
construction and maintenance of farm ponds, farm roads, walls, fences, structures to control the
grade and head cutting in natural or artificial channels, and an irrigation, drainage or other water
management system that conveys water, controls the direction or rate of flow, or maintains a
desired water surface elevation; (h) the on-site production of fuel or power from agricultural
products produced on the farm; (i) the on-site storage, preparation and sale of agricultural products
principally produced on the farm; and (j) the on-site storage of agricultural inputs including, but not
limited to, lime, fertilizer and pesticides.
46.3.3 Accessory structures and uses are found in association with the principal use of a lot, which
they support in some way. A detached garage is a typical example of an accessory structure. The
incidental sale of local craft items at a bed-and-breakfast is a typical example of an accessory use.
Chapter 17 of this bylaw provides standards that help define common nonresidential accessory
structures and uses. Chapter 20 provides standards that help define common residential accessory
structures and uses.
46.3.4 Accessory Dwelling. An ‘accessory dwelling’ is an independent efficiency or one or two
bedroom dwelling that is located within or appurtenant to and on the same lot as an owneroccupied
single family dwelling and that complies with the standards of WDB 20.1.
46.3.5 Acre. One acre equals 43,560 square feet.
46.3.6 Addition. An ‘addition’ is new space added to an existing building. Making an addition may
involve remodeling or repair, but these terms have different specific meanings.
46.3.7 Adjoining. An ‘adjoining’ property is one that is directly contiguous to a property on which
development review is required, or one that is separated from that property only by a public or utility
right-of-way, or by a stream.
46.3.8 Administrative Permit. An administrative permit is required for all development that is not
specifically exempted by WDB 4.2.1. Applications for administrative permits are reviewed and
approved or denied by the Administrator following the procedures of Chapter 5 of this bylaw.
Approval of an administrative permit authorizes development to begin. Approval of a
discretionary permit may be required before an application for an administrative permit is
submitted.
46.3.9 Affordable Housing consists of dwellings that will be made available for rent or for sale at
prices which allow them to be rented or acquired by households having incomes of no more than
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 3
the median household income for Chittenden County, as defined by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development, and adjusted for family size, without spending more than
thirty (30) percent of their incomes on housing costs. Housing costs for renters shall include rent
and utilities (heat, hot water, trash removal, and electricity). For homeowners, housing costs
include mortgage (interest and principal), property taxes, and property insurance. To qualify as
‘affordable,’ the future rent or price of resell of a unit must be restricted to a rate of appreciation
established by agreement with a housing trust or a public housing agency, as authorized by 27
V.S.A. § 610.
46.3.10 Agriculture consists of the “accepted agricultural practices” listed by the State of Vermont.
See WDB 46.3.2. Agriculture is NAICS Code 11.
46.3.11 Allocation. An ‘allocation’ is the right to build one or more dwelling units within the
residential growth target set by the Town Plan (see Chapter 5) and the growth management review
system established by Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
46.3.12 Applicant. The applicant for a permit is, by definition, the owner or owners of the property
on which the development is proposed. Owners need not appear in the proceedings required by this
bylaw. They may appoint representatives, but the owner or owners must sign the required
application form.
46.3.13 Arterial Road. The arterial roads in Williston are identified in Chapter 6 of the Town Plan.
46.3.14 Banner. Banners are signs whose message is painted or printed on a flexible material.
They are regulated as freestanding, suspended, or wall signs depending on how they are used.
46.3.15 Base Flood. For the purposes of Chapter 28 of this bylaw, the ‘base flood’ is the flood
having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood
elevation (BFE) is the height of the base flood, usually in feet, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, or other datum referenced in
the Flood Insurance Study report, or the average depth of the base flood, usually in feet, above the
ground surface.
46.3.16 Basement. For the purposes of Chapter 28 of this bylaw, a ‘basement’ is any area of a
building having its floor elevation subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
46.3.17 Bedroom. A ‘bedroom’ is a room of 80 or more SF, with minimum dimensions of eight (8)
and 10 feet, a window, a closet, and a door, and that is not fitted out as a bathroom, laundry or
mechanical room, or as a kitchen. A room does not have to be used as a bedroom to be considered
a bedroom for the purposes of determining how much wastewater treatment capacity is needed.
46.3.18 Boundary Adjustment. A ‘boundary adjustment’ is any revision to property lines,
including revisions to a plat that has been legally filed with the Town, which moves property lines,
but creates no new separate lots or parcels and has no adverse impact on access, the provision of
public services and utilities, or neighboring uses. A boundary adjustment may occur between two
or more adjacent parcels. Because a boundary adjustment is not a subdivision, it may be approved
by the Administrator.
46.3.19 Building. A ‘building’ is a structure that is permanently tied to the ground by footings or a
foundation and that has a roof.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 4
46.3.20 Building Bulk. See ‘Building Mass” at WDB 46.3.23. These terms are synonymous for the
purposes of this bylaw.
46.3.21 Building Envelope. A ‘building envelope’ is the space on a lot within which development
may occur. All development, including land clearing, but with the exception of driveways and
utility lines that serve development within the building envelope, is confined to the building
envelope. Where they are required by this bylaw, building envelopes will be shown on approved
plans and marked on the lot by permanent survey monuments.
46.3.22 Building Height is the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished
grade immediately adjacent to the building to the highest point of the roof. The height of antennae,
wind turbines with blades less than 20 feet in diameter, and rooftop solar collectors that rise less than
10 feet above the roofline is not included in ‘building height.’ Those structures may be regulated by
this bylaw, but they are not counted when calculating building height.
46.3.23 Building Mass is the perceived scale of a building or a group of buildings, considered in
three dimensions (height, depth, and width), and as seen from a given perspective. Building mass
includes the entire area within a building or group of buildings that is above grade. Building mass
cannot be readily quantified, but it has important physical and visual impacts that can be mitigated
using standards like those adopted wherever this bylaw addresses ‘building bulk’ (which is
synonymous) or mass.
46.3.24 Change in Use. A ‘change of use’ for which a permit is required by this bylaw occurs
when the use of a building, a space within a building, or a lot is changed and the new use is not in
the same four-digit NAICS category as the old use.
46.3.25 Child Care is occurring at any place operated as a business or service on a regular or
continuous basis, whether for compensation or not, whose primary function is the
protection, care, and supervision of children under sixteen years of age outside their homes
for periods of less than twenty-four hours a day by a person other than the children’s own
parents, guardians, or relatives. Child Care is NAICS Code 6244. This bylaw recognizes
two types of child day care facilities: 1) family child care homes, which are further defined
in WDB 46.4.1 and 2) all other child care facilities. While child care is permitted in most
zoning districts in Williston, this distinction is important because family child care homes
are a statutory use-by-right wherever dwellings are permitted, while all other child care
facilities require a discretionary permit.
46.3.26 Clearing is the cutting and/or removal of vegetation by chemical, mechanical, or any other
means that results in the exposure of bare rock or soil.
46.3.27 Cluster. A cluster is a group of lots in an open space development. If large enough, open
space developments may include more than one cluster.
46.3.28 Collector Road. The collector roads in Williston are identified in Chapter 6 of the Town
Plan.
46.3.29 Commercial is the generic term this bylaw uses to refer to the conduct of business,
including, but not limited to, retail sales and the provision of services. By itself, however, this term
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 5
tells one nothing about what uses either or are not permitted in a given zoning district. Please refer
to the table of uses allowed in the relevant zoning district to determine whether a particular
commercial use may be permitted.
46.3.30 Community Sewerage. A ‘community sewerage’ system is an on-site wastewater treatment
system that is installed by the developer to serve a cluster of homes in an open space or “invisible”
development permitted by Chapter 31 of this bylaw. Following its installation and the required
warranty period, a community sewerage system is owned and operated by an owners’ association.
Community sewerage systems must be sited, designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance
with a permit issued by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation, as well as in
compliance with this bylaw.
46.3.31 Complete. A ‘complete’ application is one that has been accepted as such by the
Administrator, as provided by WDB 5.1.6 or 6.4.6.
46.3.32 Completed. A ‘completed’ development is one for which a certificate of compliance
(CC) has been issued, as provided by WDB 7.2, or where a CC is not required, one on which all
work has been completed, as permitted.
46.3.33 Country parks are delineated in Chapter 13 – Open Space and Working Landscapes..
46.3.34 Conservation areas are described in WDB Chapter 27 and include: 1) significant wildlife
habitat areas; 2) areas containing uncommon, rare, threatened, or endangered species; 3) unique
natural communities; 4) farmlands of local importance, 5) scenic viewsheds, 6) special flood
hazard areas (see WDB Chapter 28), and 7) streams, wetlands, lakes, and ponds (see WDB Chapter
29).
46.3.35 Cumulative Substantial Improvement. For the purposes of Chapter 28 of this bylaw, this
term means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration or other improvement of a
structure, during any five (5) year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the state or local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to ensure safe conditions.
46.3.36 Customary. This adjective applies to accessory structures and uses that are typically or
commonly found in association with or appurtenant to a principal use. Where there is some
question about whether a proposed accessory use is ‘customary,’ the burden of proof rests with the
applicant, who must provide documentation that the proposed accessory use is, in fact, found
appurtenant to the principal use in multiple other locations in Vermont or, where the principal use
is unique (or nearly so) in Vermont, in multiple other locations in New England.
46.3.37 Days. For the purposes of this bylaw, ’days’ refers to calendar days unless it is preceded by
‘working,’ in which case it refers to the regular business days of the Town of Williston.
46.3.38 Degree of Nonconformity. The ‘degree of nonconformity’ is the extent to which a use is
nonconforming. For example, the degree of nonconformity of a sign that is 20 feet high instead of
the permitted 12 feet, is eight (8) feet.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 6
46.3.39 Density is the general term used to describe how intensively a parcel of land is, or may be,
used. See Chapter 19 of this bylaw for an explanation of how density is calculated and regulated.
46.3.40 Development. 24 V.S.A. § 4293(10) and WDB 4.1.2 define “land development” as “the
division of a parcel into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining,
excavation, or landfill, and any change in the use of any building or other structure, or land, or
extension of use of land.” This bylaw uses the term ‘development’ rather than land development,
but they are synonymous. For the purposes of Chapter 28 of this bylaw, the definition of
‘development’ is expanded to cover any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Still have a question about the definition of development? WDB 4.1.3-6 answer some specific ‘is ______
development?’ questions.
46.3.41 Dimensional Standard. A dimensional standard controls the location of a structure or use
on a lot and/or the dimensions of a structure. These standards include, but are not limited to,
buffers, setbacks, coverage, and clear vision triangles.
46.3.42 Directional Sign. Directional signs may be of any permitted type. They convey directions
(RESTROOMS →), regulations (NO PARKING), and similar information.
46.3.43 Directory Sign. Directory signs are used when more than one business shares a site or
structure. A directory sign may be of any of the sign types allowed in the zoning district in which it
is located.
46.3.44 Discretionary Permit. Discretionary permits are required for the developments listed in
WDB 4.3.3 and 4.3.4: basically all developments that may have a significant impact on the
environment, the Town’s infrastructure, or neighboring uses. Applications for discretionary permits
are reviewed and approved or denied by the DRB, following the procedures established in Chapter
6. Approval of a discretionary permit does NOT authorize development to begin, but allows the
developer to apply for one or more administrative permits.
46.3.45 Disturbance, or ‘land disturbance,’ includes all clearing, grading, and excavation.
Disturbed areas include all staging areas, materials stockpiles, and other areas affected by
construction and use of the site.
46.3.46 Dwelling. A ‘dwelling’ or dwelling unit is a building (typically a single-family home) or a
separate space within a larger building (typically an apartment, town home, or the like) that
contains complete housekeeping facilities for one household
46.4 Definitions: E-H
46.4.1 Family Child Care Home. A family child care home is a facility that provides child care
(see WDB 46.3.24) on a regular basis in the caregiver's own residence for not more than ten
children at any one time. Of this number, no more than six children may be provided care on a fulltime
basis. The remainder must be school-age children who are cared for on a part-time basis only.
These limits do not include children who reside in the residence of the caregiver. Also, the partAdopted
by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 7
time school-age children may be cared for on a full-day basis on school closing days, snow days,
vacation days during the school year, and during the school summer vacation. This limit is
expanded to 12 children if at least six of them are of school age and a second staff person is present
and on duty when the number of children in attendance exceeds six.
46.4.2 Farming is the conduct of agriculture. See WDB 46.3.2.
46.4.3 Farm Structure. A ‘farm structure’ that is exempt from the requirements of this bylaw (see
WDB 4.2.1.2) is any structure on a farm, including fences, that will be used to house livestock, to
raise plants, or to carry out other accepted agricultural practices. Dwellings are not farm structures
nor are commercial or industrial structures that are proposed on a farm.
46.4.4 Fiscal Year. July 1 through June 30.
46.4.5 Flood means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation
or runoff of surface waters from any source; and mudslides which are proximately caused by
flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land
areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; (b)
the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels
or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
46.4.6 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to that community.
46.4.7 Flood Insurance Study means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, evaluation
and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
46.4.8 Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of “flood”).
46.4.9 Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes,
or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
46.4.10 Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point.
46.4.11 Floor Area includes the entire building, all floors and all rooms. Different measures are
used for different purposes by others involved in real estate, but for the purpose of this bylaw it is
Gross Floor Area.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 8
46.4.12 Focal Point. A focal point serves as a community gathering place. It may be indoors –
Town Hall or the library would be examples – or outdoors, in the form of a green, a park or a
similar space.
46.4.13 Forest. A ‘forest’ is a plant community dominated by trees, which has a canopy cover of
≥60% at the peak of the growing season
46.4.14 Freestanding Sign. Freestanding signs are placed or posted on their own structures. They
are not attached to a building or any other structure and may be portable. Different types of
freestanding signs may be described in different ways, such as ground signs, monument signs, pole
signs, portable signs, etc., but they are all subject to the same standards, except where this bylaw
explicitly provides otherwise.
46.4.15 Garage. A garage is a building or a part of a building that houses, or at least is designed to
house, one or more motor vehicles, watercraft, snow machines, farm implements, or other vehicles.
46.4.16 Growth Target. The ‘growth target is the total number of new dwelling units that may be
approved by the Town of Williston for construction in any given fiscal year. The growth target is
established in Chapter 5 of the Town Plan and Chapter 11 of this bylaw.
46.4.17 Hazardous Tree refers to a tree that possesses a structural defect which poses an imminent
risk if the tree or part of the tree would fall on a target.
· Structural defect means any structural weakness or deformity of a tree or its parts. A tree with a
structural defect can be verified to be hazardous by the Administrator. A recommendation from
the County Forester may be required at the Administrators discretion. If the tree has been
determined to be hazardous, removal of the tree is permitted by WDB Chapter 29.9.5.1.
· A ‘target’ means a structure of an approved use. A tree may not be a hazard if a ‘target’ is absent
within the falling distance of the tree or its parts (e.g., a substandard tree in an area away from
approved structures may not be considered a hazard).
46.4.18 Historic Structure means any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National
Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a
state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (i) by an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (ii) directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
46.4.19 Home Business. A ‘home business’ is an industrial or commercial activity that is
conducted in a dwelling or in an accessory structure that is appurtenant to a dwelling, and that
complies with the standards of Appendix G of this bylaw.
46.4.20 Homestead. For the purposes of WDB 12.1.3.3, a homestead is an area that is part of, but
distinguished from a larger parcel of land by the presence of a home and related improvements.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 9
46.5 Definitions: I-L
46.5.1 Land Development.
46.5.2 Licensed Designer. A ‘licensed designer’ is a person authorized by the Vermont
Department of Environmental Conservation to design wastewater disposal systems.
46.5.3 Local. A ‘local’ product is one that is grown or crafted in Vermont or the adjoining portions
of the Champlain Basin.
46.5.5 Lot Frontage is the length, given in feet, of that portion of a lot that is directly adjacent to a
road (public or private).
46.5.6 Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided,
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
46.6 Definitions: M-P
46.6.1 Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational
vehicle”.
46.6.2 Marginally Suitable. This term refers to soils that have been designated as marginally
suitable for on-site wastewater disposal by the Natural Resources Conservation Service in the 2003
Ancillary Ratings for Residential On-Site Waste Disposal in Vermont.
46.6.3 Natural Function. This bylaw uses this term to indicate the state to which a disturbed area
must be restored or reclaimed. The ‘natural function’ of a disturbed area is not its pre-existing
condition, which may be difficult or even undesirable (if noxious weeds are present, for example)
to restore. Requiring the site to be restored to its ‘natural function,’ requires that a wetland be
restored as a functional wetland, that a woodland be restored as a functional woodland, a field or
meadow be restored as a field or meadow, etc.
46.6.4 New Construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or
after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
46.6.5 Nonconforming Lots or Parcels are lots or parcels that do not conform to the dimensional
standards of the current bylaws, but were in conformance with all applicable regulations prior to
the enactment of this bylaw, including a lot or parcel improperly authorized as a result of error by
the administrator.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 10
46.6.6 Nonconforming Structures are structures or parts of structures that do not conform to the
current bylaws, but were in conformance with all applicable regulations prior to the enactment of
this bylaw, including a structure improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrator.
46.6.7 Nonconforming Uses are uses of land that do not conform to the current bylaws, but did
conform to all applicable regulations prior to the enactment of the current bylaws, including a use
improperly authorized as a result of error by the administrator.
46.6.8 Nonconformity. This generic term includes nonconforming uses, structures and, lots.
46.6.8 Outdoor Sales includes the outdoor (not under a roof and within at least three walls) display
of merchandise or any other item or service for sale. Typical ‘outdoor sales’ include automobiles
and other vehicles and nursery plants and other landscaping materials.
46.6.9 Outdoor Storage is the outdoor (not under a roof and within at least three walls) placement,
stacking, or stockpiling of materials. Outdoor storage ranges from firewood stacked on residential
premises to the stockpiling of gravel, sand, and other quarry products.
46.6.10 Owners Association. An owners’ association is a nonprofit organization established by a
developer to fulfill certain functions that are specified in its articles of incorporation and a set of
covenants, including functions required of such associations by the town. Where one is required,
continuing membership in the homeowners association is mandatory upon purchase of a lot in the
subdivision.
46.6.11 Owner-Occupied. To be ‘owner-occupied,’ a dwelling must be the principal residence of at
least one of the owners listed on the current grand list.
46.6.12 Play Structure. A ‘play structure’ is designed for children’s play. It is distinguished from
play equipment by having footings or some other type of foundation. Play equipment is not a
building or structure for which a permit is required this bylaw. A permit is required to install most
play structures.
46.6.13 Portable Signs, such as sandwich board signs, are designed for easy placement, but given
their usual use, they are considered permanent and included in the total sign number and area
permitted by this bylaw.
46.6.14 Projecting Sign. A projecting sign extends outward from the wall of a building. It may be
perpendicular to the building wall or at an angle, but its message is intended to be read primarily by
people approaching from one or both sides.
46.6.15 Public Way. A ‘public way’ is any public road or trail.
46.6.16 Public Works Standards. This book of standards and specifications may be obtained from
Williston’s Department of Public Works.
46.7 Definitions: Q-T
46.7.1 Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (a) Built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square
feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) Designed to be self-propelled or
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 11
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
46.7.2 Scoreboard. A scoreboard is a structure on the same lot as and appurtenant to an athletic
field on which the score and other information regarding the progress of a game being played is
electronically or manually displayed. A scoreboard the complies with the standards WDB 17.7 is
not a sign.
46.7.3 Screening. This bylaw sometimes requires that development be effectively screened from
view from public ways. This does not mean that the development has to be completely invisible:
brief views of a part of a structure through the branches of screening vegetation or a break in
screening terrain are acceptable.
46.7.4 Setback. Required setbacks are ordinarily measured at grade from the nearest point on the
property or right-of-way line to the outside foundation wall of the structure or, where the setback is
to a parking area or similar surface, to the outer edge of that surface. This method of measurement
will not be used for structures that have an above-grade projection (bay window, deck, eaves, etc.)
that extends more than four (4) feet toward the property line.
46.7.5 Shed. This term includes all roofed accessory structures, including tool sheds, greenhouses,
etc., except detached garages and accessory dwellings, which are separately defined.
46.7.6 Special Flood Hazard Area is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated a Zone A on
the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in
preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined
into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/AI-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO or
V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.
46.7.7 Start of Construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
administrative permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, regardless whether that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
46.7.8 Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home. Structure, for insurance purposes, means: (a) a building with two or more outside rigid walls
and a fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; (b) a manufactured home (“a
manufactured home,” also known as a mobile home, is a structure: built on a permanent chassis,
transported to its site in one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or (c) a
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 12
travel trailer without wheels, built on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation, that is
regulated under the community’s floodplain management and bylaws. For the latter purpose,
“structure” does not mean a recreational vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as
described in (c) of this definition, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
46.7.9 Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its before damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
46.7.10 Subdivision. A ‘subdivision’ is land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to
be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, tracts, sites, plots, units, or interests for the purpose of
conveyance, transfer, offer for sale, lease, or development.
46.7.11 Suspended Sign. A suspended sign is hung under the ceiling of an arcade or other
overhanging structure, more or less perpendicular to the building. Its message is intended to be read
primarily by people approaching along the arcade.
46.7.12 Swimming Pool. A ‘swimming pool’ is any structure intended for swimming or
recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground,
and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
46.7.13 Town. This term refers to the Town of Williston, Vermont unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
46.7.14 Town Plan. This term refers to the 2016 Williston Comprehensive Plan, as adopted on
August 22, 2017.
46.7.15 Tree. A ‘tree; is any self-supporting perennial woody plant that is ordinarily characterized
by a single main stem or trunk of at least 6” diameter at breast height (4.5 feet above ground level).
46.8 Definitions: U-X
46.8.1 Unsuitable. As used in this bylaw, this term refers to soils that have been designated as
unsuitable for on-site wastewater disposal by the Natural Resources Conservation Service in the
2003 Ancillary Ratings for Residential On-Site Waste Disposal in Vermont.
46.8.2 Vested Rights. A ‘vested right’ is the right for a development to be completed in compliance
with the rules that were in effect on the date the application for a permit for that development was
deemed complete.
46.8.3 Violation. A ‘violation’ is the failure of a development to comply with any provision of this
bylaw. For the purposes of Chapter 28 of this bylaw, structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
46.8.4 Visual Absorption. These regulations sometimes require visual “absorption.” This means
that a structure, or structures, are sited and designed so that they blend into the background created
by a slope or a stand of trees. No part of a structure that is “absorbed” is ever outlined against the
sky, as seen from any public way. Further, there is low contrast, as measured by color and
reflectivity, between the structure and the background provided by the vegetation and terrain.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e 4 6 - | 13
46.8.5 Wall Sign. A wall sign is painted on or attached to a wall and runs parallel to that wall. Its
message is intended to be read primarily by people facing the building.
46.8.6 Wastewater Treatment Capacity. For a two-bedroom dwelling, this is the capacity to treat
135 gallons of sewage per day. For a three-bedroom dwelling, this is the capacity to treat 230
gallons of sewage per day. For all other uses, ‘wastewater treatment capacity’ is determined by the
DPW.
46.8.7 Window Sign. Window signs are posted within the glass area of a window.
46.8.8 Woodland. A ‘woodland’ is a plant community dominated by trees, but with an open canopy
of 20-60% cover at the height of the growing season.
46.8.9 Working Days refers to the regular business days maintained by the Town of Williston. It
excludes weekends and official holidays.
46.9 Definitions: Y-Z
46.9.1 Year. January 1 through December 31. Fiscal years as defined by 46.4.4 are always
referred to as such.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e A - | 1
Appendix A – Board Procedures
A.1. Purpose. This appendix establishes procedures for the organization and operation of the town boards that are
involved in the administration of this bylaw, including the Conservation Commission, the Development Review
Board, the Historic and Architectural Advisory Committee, and the Planning Commission. These procedures relate
primarily to the organization of the boards. The procedures for development review are established in Chapters 1-11.
A.2 Membership. The Conservation Commission, DRB, and Planning Commission are established by the Town
Charter. The HAAC is established by this bylaw. Each board consists of seven members appointed by the Selectboard
in accord with the following rules.
A.2.1 Residence. A majority of the members of each board must be residents of Williston.
A.2.2 Terms, Terms expire on May 1, or upon the removal (see A.2.6, below) or resignation of a member, and
are for three consecutive years, except when a new member is appointed to fill an unexpired term. There are
no term limits.
A.2.3. Reappointment. The Town Manager will contact members whose terms will expire before May.
Members who wish to be re-appointed by the Selectboard must notify the Manager in writing before the
Selectboard’s first meeting in May. There is no right to another term. The decision to re-appoint will be made
by the Selectboard based on its perception of the Town’s needs.
A.2.4. New Applicants. Any prospective board member must apply to the Selectboard using the form provided
by the Town. If an opening is available, the prospective member will be invited to interview with the
Selectboard.
A.2.5 Alternates. The Selectboard may appoint one alternate member to each board. The alternate will sit as a
voting member when necessary to ensure that a quorum is present.
A.2.6 Removal. Any member may be removed by majority vote of the Selectboard. Removal must be preceded
by written charges and a public hearing.
A.2.7 Attendance. Members are expected to attend all meetings, but it is understood that occasional conflicts
are inevitable. Members should notify the Administrator if they will be unable to attend a meeting.
A.3 Ethical Conduct. As provided by Chapter 3 of this bylaw, members must conduct themselves in accord with the
town’s Conflict of Interest Ordinance, which addresses both conflicts of interest and ex parte contacts. That ordinance
appears as Appendix B.
A.4 Officers. Each board shall annually elect a Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary. Elections shall be held at the board’s
first May meeting (or as soon as possible after that). Vacancies due to removal or resignation may be filled at any time
by a simple majority vote of the board. The Chair presides. The Vice-Chair presides in his or her absence. The
Secretary is responsible for keeping minutes in the absence of staff support.
A.5 Regular Meetings. Regular meetings shall be as set by the board. Any change in the regular meeting schedule
shall be preceded by at least 15 days notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in Williston, and by notices
posted in the offices of the Town Clerk.
A.6 Special Meetings. This bylaw requires that most business be transacted at regular meetings. The board may meet
at the call of the Chair, however, provided that notice of such a special meeting is posted at the offices of the Town
Clerk at least 24 hours in advance. A special meeting may also be held at the request of any two members. Notice to
members may be provided by telephone and or e-mail, again at least 24 hours before the meeting. Special meetings
must be confined to the advertised topic.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e A - | 2
A.7 Quorum. A quorum is necessary for any hearing or action set up by this bylaw. A quorum consists of a majority
of the members, i.e. four, including, if necessary, the appointed alternate. Members who abstain do not count as part
of a quorum for that vote. Only members who have attended all hearings or listened to the recordings of those hearings)
regarding a particular appeal or application may vote on that appeal or application.
A.8 Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings. Minutes shall include the minimum contents required by state
law. Recordings shall be made of all DRB meetings and of any meeting of the other boards at which a quasi-judicial
or other potentially litigable action will be taken. Minutes will be available for public review in the office of the
Administrator, and after approval by the board, the office of the Town Clerk.
Requirements for Minutes. From 1 V.S.A. § 312(b): (1) Minutes shall be taken of all meetings of public bodies. The
minutes shall cover all topics and motions that arise at the meeting and give a true indication of the business of the
meeting. Minutes shall include at least the following minimal information: (A) All members of the public body
present; (B) All other active participants in the meeting; (C) All motions, proposals and resolutions made, offered and
considered, and what disposition is made of same; and (D) The results of any votes, with a record of the individual
vote of each member if a roll call is taken.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e B - | 1
Appendix B - Town of Williston Conflict of Interest Ordinance
1. AUTHORITY
This civil ordinance is adopted pursuant to 24 V.S.A.§ 2081 (20) and Chapter 59.
2. POLICY STATEMENT
Accepting a position as a public official carries with it the acceptance of trust that the official will work to further the
public interest. Maintaining that public trust is critical to the continued operation of good government. In addition,
public decision-making should be open and accessible to the public at large. To preserve this public trust, there are
five principles to which public officials should adhere:
2.1. A public official should represent and work towards the public interest and not towards
private/personal interests.
2.2. A public official should accept and maintain the public trust (i.e. must preserve and enhance the
public's confidence in their public officials).
2.3. A public official should exercise leadership, particularly in the form of consistently demonstrating
behavior that reflects the public trust.
2.4. A public official should recognize the proper role of all government bodies and the relationships
between the various government bodies.
2.5. A public official should always demonstrate respect for others and for other positions.
3. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
No elected or appointed official of the Town, whether or not s/he is compensated for his/her service by the Town,
shall directly or indirectly (ie. by others on his/her behalf or at his/her request or suggestion):
3.1. engage in any private business, transaction or employment, or have any significant financial interest
therein, which is incompatible or in conflict with the proper and impartial discharge of his/her duties
on behalf of the Town. A “significant financial interest” is any direct or indirect benefit to the
decision-maker other than the interest that would accrue to him or her as a taxpayer or resident;
3.2. represent any private party before the public body on which the official sits or over which the official
has appointment or budgetary powers;
3.3. disclose without authorization or use to further a personal interest, confidential information acquired
in the course of official duties.
3.4. grant or influence the granting of any special consideration, advantage or favor, to any person,
group, firm or corporation, beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to
the public at large;
3.5. with the exception of occasional, non-pecuniary gifts, accept anything of economic value such as
money, service, gift, loan, gratuity, favor or promise thereof for the purpose and intent of which is
to influence any such official of the Town in the exercise of his/her official judgment, power or
authority;
3.6. make personal use of staff, vehicles, equipment, materials or property of the Town except in the
course of his/her official duties or as duly authorized by the proper Town Officer, Board or
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e B - | 2
Commission;
3.7. participate in the appointment, vote for appointment, or discussion of any appointment of an
immediate family member or business associate, or use his/her position, directly or indirectly, to
effect the employment status of an immediate family member or business associate to any Town
office or position, paid or unpaid; or
3.8. receive or have any financial interest in any sale to the Town of any real estate when such financial
interest was received under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to expect that the
Town intended to purchase, condemn or lease said real estate.
4. EX-PARTE COMMUNICATIONS: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
In any quasi-judicial matter (e.g. personnel hearings, road layouts and discontinuance’s condemnation proceedings,
hearings held under interim zoning rules, and matters involving the issuance of a permit or approval), or the award of
a contract, before a Town Board, Commission or Committee, a public official sitting on such Board, Commission or
Committee, shall not, outside of that Board, Commission or Committee, communicate with or accept a communication
from a person for which there are reasonable grounds for believing to be a party to the matter being considered, if
such communication is designed to influence the official's action on that matter. If such communication should occur,
the public official shall disclose it at an open meeting of the Board, Commission or Committee prior to its
consideration of the matter.
5. DISCLOSURE AND RECUSAL PROCEDURES
Whenever a matter comes before a Board, Commission or Committee, as to which any conflict of interest standard,
as described in Section 2 of this Ordinance, applies to one of its members, the following provisions shall apply:
5.1. The public official involved shall disclose to the relevant Board, Commission or Committee, in an
open public meeting, the nature of the conflict of interest, prior to any consideration of the matter
by said Board, Commission or Committee.
5.2. Following such disclosure, such public official shall not participate in any consideration, discussion
or vote on the matter before the Board, Commission or Committee. If the official wishes to address
the issue at an open public meeting, the official may participate as a member of the public. During
deliberation and vote on the matter, the official shall not be present. The official may attend an
executive session to discuss the matter at the invitation of the Board, Commission or Committee, if
such attendance complies with the statutory requirements of the Open Meeting Law.
5.3. The public official shall not, during any part of the Board, Commission, or Committee meeting
pertaining to the matter requiring the disclosure, represent, advocate on behalf of, or otherwise act
as the agent of the person or business entity in or with which the official has such an interest or
relationship.
5.4. The foregoing shall not be construed as prohibiting the official from testifying as to factual matters
at a hearing of the Selectboard, Planning Commission, Development Review Board, or any other
Committee.
6. HOW TO SUBMIT A COMPLAINT OF ETHICS VIOLATION
6.1. A person, who believes that an appointed public official of the Town has violated any portion of
this Ordinance, may send or deliver a signed, written complaint, signed under penalty of false
statement to the Clerk of the Board of Civil Authority. The complaint shall include the name of the
person alleged to have committed the violation and the specifics of the act(s) which constitute the
violation. The Clerk shall forward the complaint to the person alleged to have committed the
violation, the Chair of the Board of Civil Authority, and the Chair of the Board with appointing
authority over the position held by that person.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e B - | 3
6.2. A person, who believes that an elected public official of the Town has violated any portion of this
Ordinance, may send or deliver a signed, written complaint to the Chair of the Board upon which
the elected official sits. The complaint shall include the name of the person alleged to have
committed the violation and the specifics of the act(s) which constitute the violation. The Board
Chair shall forward the complaint to the person alleged to have committed the violation.
7. INVESTIGATING COMPLAINTS
7.1. Upon receipt of a formal complaint, the Board of Civil Authority (BCA) shall appoint a five-person
Committee from among its members, which shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine
if the complaint alleges sufficient acts to constitute a violation.
7.2. If the Board of Civil Authority Committee makes a finding of no violation, the complaint and the
record of its investigation shall remain confidential, except upon the request of the respondent. No
BCA Committee member or staff member shall disclose to any third party any information learned
from the investigation, including knowledge of the existence of a complaint, which the disclosing
party would not otherwise have known. The BCA shall inform the complainant and the respondent
of its finding by registered or certified mail not later than three business days after termination of
the hearing or investigation.
7.3. If the BCA Committee determines the complaint alleges sufficient acts, then within thirty (29) days
after so determining, the BCA Committee shall fix a date for the commencement of the hearing on
the allegations. The hearing date regarding the complaint shall not be more than sixty (60) days
after the filing of the complaint.
7.4. In the conduct of its investigation of an alleged violation of this ordinance, the BCA Committee
shall have the power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive oral and
documentary evidence, subpoena witnesses, and require the production for examination by the BCA
Committee of any books and papers which the BCA Committee deems relevant in any matter under
investigation or in question. In the exercise of such powers, the BCA Committee may use the
services of the municipal police, who shall provide the same upon the BCA Committee’s request.
7.5. The respondent shall have the right to appear and to be represented by legal counsel and to examine
and cross-examine witnesses.
7.6. The BCA Committee shall make no finding that there is a violation of any provision of the
Ordinance except upon the concurring vote of at least four of its members.
7.7. Any hearing conducted by the BCA Committee shall be governed by the administrative rules of
evidence.
8. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
After a finding of violation, The BCA Committee may take one or more actions in response to a violation of
this Ordinance:
8.1. Reconsideration - Ask any appointed board or commission or appointed official to reconsider a
matter that the BCA Committee believes involved a violation of this Ordinance by any member of
the board or commission or appointed official, if the law otherwise allows such reconsideration.
8.2. Recusal – request an appointed official to recuse himself or herself in proceedings having a direct
connection to the ethic complaint.
8.3. Admonishment – A reminder or warning that a particular type of behavior may be or is in violation
of law or this Ordinance and that if it occurs or is found to have occurred, could make an appointed
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e B - | 4
official subject to a more severe penalty.
8.4. Censure - Censure is a formal statement by the BCA Committee officially reprimanding an
appointed official. It is a punitive action, which serves as a penalty imposed for wrongdoing, but it
carries no fine or suspension of the rights of the member as a public official.
8.5. Restitution of any pecuniary benefits received because of the violation committed.
8.6. Removal or Suspension – remove or suspend any appointed member of any board or commission
from their position, the BCA Committee shall not impose censure on any public official for the
exercise of his or her First Amendment rights, no matter how distasteful the expression was to the
BCA Committee and the Town. However, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the BCA
Committee members from individually condemning and expressing their strong dislike of such
remarks.
9. SEVERABILITY
If any section of this ordinance is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall
not invalidate any other part of this ordinance.
10. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective 60 days after its adoption by the Williston Selectboard. If a petition
is filed under 24 V.S.A. § 1973, that statute shall govern the effective date of this ordinance.
Adopted by the Selectboard, Town of Williston, on September 18, 2006
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e C - | 1
Appendix C - Model Development Agreement
Each development agreement must be carefully crafted to ensure compliance with the Williston Development Bylaw.
This model and the accompanying annotations are a starting point.
-- Development Agreement --
This is an agreement between the Town of Williston (the Town) and (owner’s name), (the Developer), the owner of
(project name) (the Development), together known as the parties to this agreement.
1. What is the purpose of this agreement? The purpose of this development agreement, which is required by Section
7.1.5 of the Williston Development Bylaw, is to set forth in detail when and in accord with what plans and standards
the Developer will construct or install the required improvements in the Development. This development agreement
also addresses the inspection of those required improvements and establishes how the Developer will guarantee that
the promised improvements are in fact made.
2. What is the term of this agreement? The term of this agreement begins when it is signed by the Town Manager
and ends at the time the last promise is fulfilled by either of the parties. The Town Manager’s signature will follow
approval of the final plans for the Development by the Williston Development Review Board. This agreement must
be signed by the Town Manager and recorded before an administrative permit for work on the Development will be
approved.
When does the developer sign? The developer must provide a signed copy of the proposed development agreement with the final plans when they
are submitted for review by the DRB.
3. On what consideration is this agreement based? The basis for this development agreement is the approval of the
final plans submitted in compliance with the Williston Development Review Board’s approval of Discretionary Permit
___ - ______ . It is understood that the scope of this agreement is confined to the required improvements that are
shown on the approved final plans (see Item 4, below) and listed in Attachment A of this agreement. This development
agreement is not intended to address other conditions of approval.
Could a development agreement address other conditions of approval? It is possible that the town and a developer could use a development
agreement to address conditions of approval that are not related to required improvements. That possibility is not anticipated in this model, but the
language above could be revised and additional items addressing other types of conditions of approval could be added to a development agreement.
4. Are the approved final plans for the development part of this agreement? Yes.
4.A. the Simple Version: The final plans of the Development, as approved by the Williston Development Review
Board on (date) are hereby incorporated into this agreement by reference. It is understood that those approved final
plans are binding on the Developer and the Town, and that this creates a vested right for the Developer, as provided
by WDB 2.2. It is also understood that only the minor changes in plans permitted by WDB 5.6 are permitted without
renegotiation of this development agreement.
OR
4.B. the Phased Version: The final plans of the Phase/s I/I-n, approved by the Williston Development Review Board
are hereby incorporated into this agreement by reference. It is understood that those approved final plans are binding
on the Developer and the Town, and that this creates a vested right for the Developer, as provided by WDB 2.2. It is
further understood that the final plans for additional phases of the Development will be submitted to the Williston
Development Review Board for review in accord with the following schedule:
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e C - | 2
Phase Final Plans to be Submitted Between
earliest date latest date
III 1-May-10 1-May-11
IV-V 1-May-12 1-May-13
The blanks in this table are filled in to provide an example.
Changes in this schedule will require renegotiation of this development agreement, as provided for below. Finally, it
is also understood that only the minor changes in plans permitted by WDB 5.6 are permitted without renegotiation of
this development agreement.
5. What improvements are covered by this agreement? All proposed improvements that were approved by the
Williston Development Review Board in its approval of Discretionary Permit ___ - ______ and its subsequent
approval of the final plans for the Development are covered by this development agreement. Those improvements are
listed in Attachment A which includes cost estimates for each proposed improvement.
6. Which construction standards apply to the improvements covered by this agreement? Construction or installation
of the improvements listed in Attachment A shall be in accord with all applicable standards of the Williston
Development Bylaw and the Williston Public Works Standards, including the state or national standards referenced in
those documents, as they existed on the date the application for Discretionary Permit ___ - ______ was deemed
complete by the town.
7. When must the improvements shown on the final plans and listed in Attachment A be made?
the Simple Version: All improvements shown on the approved final plan and listed in Attachment A must be made
before a certificate of compliance will be issued. A temporary certificate of compliance may be requested, as provided
by WDB 7.3.3.
OR
the Phased Version: Discretionary Permit ___ - ______ permits the Development to be constructed in (number)
phases, which are shown on (reference to the map of phases from the approved final plans). Attachment A has also
been organized by phase so that the list and the costs of the improvements to be made in each phase are clear. It is
understood that all improvements shown on the approved final plan and listed in Attachment A for each phase must
be complete before a certificate of compliance will be issued for that phase. A temporary certificate of compliance
may be sought as provided by WDB 7.3.3, but any such certificate will be clearly conditioned on completion of the
required improvements as provided by this development agreement.
8. Will inspections be required? Yes. All work covered by this development agreement is subject to inspection by the
Town, as provided by WDB 7.1.7 and the Williston Public Works Standards.
8.A By the Town. It is understood that the signature of the Developer on this agreement constitutes permission
for representatives of the Town to enter onto the private property of Developer for the purpose of completing
these inspections. The Developer further agrees to provide the Town with entry into locked areas and to arrange
for safe inspections of potentially hazardous sites. The Developer will also, at his/her expense, provide the
opportunity for the Town to discuss work on the required improvements with contractors, designers, and
employees retained by the Developer.
8.B Scheduling Inspections. A final inspection schedule consistent with the Public Works Standards will be
set at the pre-construction meeting, the date, time, and place for which will be set by mutual agreement of the
Town and the Developer.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e C - | 3
8.C. By the Applicant. The Developer will provide (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly – insert a time frame here)
reports of inspections conducted by (list who – engineers, architects, landscape architects, etc.) to the
Administrator and/or DPW.
9. Will as-built drawings be required? Yes. As-built drawings must be provided to the Town as required by WDB
7.1.9 and the Williston Public Works Standards.
10. What happens if the Developer fails to construct or install the improvements covered by this agreement in a
timely manner? As provided by WDB 7.1.6.3, if the Developer fails to construct or install the improvements listed in
Attachment A within the time frames established by this development agreement, the Town may use the securities
provided in accord with 12 and 13, below, to complete the required improvements. If any funds remain in the escrow
account after the Town has completed the required improvements, those funds will be returned to the Developer.
12. What securities must be provided to guarantee the completion of improvements that will become the property
of the Town or another public agency? In accord with WDB 7.1.6.1, the Developer agrees to provide security by
depositing funds equal to 110% of the estimated cost of constructing or installing the improvements that are to become
publicly owned in an escrow account before an administrative permit for any work on the Development is approved.
Attachment B provides details on the amount, name and location of the escrow account. That Attachment also provides
details on how funds may be released as work proceeds, is inspected, and is found to be complete by the Town. It is
understood, however, that at least one-third of the funds deposited shall be retained in escrow and returned only after
a certificate of compliance is issued. It is further understood, that interest earned on the escrow account shall be
retained in the account to reflect the inflating cost of the improvements and to be used by the Town in case of default.
13. What securities must be provided to guarantee completion of improvement that will remain in private
ownership? In accord with WDB 7.1.6.2, the Developer agrees to provide security by providing an irrevocable letter
of credit, posting a performance bond, or depositing funds in escrow equal to 10% of the estimated cost of constructing
or installing the improvements that are remain in private ownership before an administrative permit for any work on
the Development is approved. Attachment C provides details on the amount, name and location of the escrow account.
It is understood, however, that the letter of credit, performance bond, or funds placed in escrow will be returned only
after a certificate of compliance is issued. It is further understood, that interest earned on an escrow account shall be
retained in the account to reflect the inflating cost of the improvements and to be used by the Town in case of default.
17. Must securities for phased developments be provided for the entire development or by phase? Securities for
phased developments will be provided by phase.
15. What happens to vested rights if the Town must complete required improvements? They may disappear. As
provided by WDB 7.1.2.9, if the Town is required to use a guarantee to complete required improvements, the Town
may declare this agreement void, thereby cancelling all vested rights granted by the Town’s approval of the
discretionary permit and the final plans. In its sole discretion, the Town may instigate a renegotiation of this agreement
by informing the Developer of its intention to do so within 180 days after the failure to initiate, implement, or complete
a phase as scheduled.
16. May this agreement be re-negotiated? The parties to this development agreement are committed to its provisions.
They recognize, however, that changes in regulatory or technical practices could necessitate changes in this
development agreement. Neither party is obliged to renegotiate the terms of this development agreement, but if both
parties agree to pursue changes, those changes shall be proposed in writing, either as an amendment to this agreement
or as an entirely new draft development agreement. All proposed changes must be approved by the Williston
Development Review Board and signed by the Town Manager following that approval.
17. Is this agreement binding on successors and assigns? Yes. This development agreement runs with the land to
which it applies. It is binding on the Developer and the Developer’s successors, heirs, and assigns, and on the Town’s
and the Town’s successors and assigns. If either party learns that an assignment, sale, conveyance, foreclosure, lease,
or any other event is likely to change the identity of any party, that party shall provide written notice to the other party
within 48 hours of such change, and shall provide the other party with copies of all documents relating to the transfer
of interest in the Development.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e C - | 4
18. At what address may the Developer be contacted when a formal notice must be given, as required by this
agreement? The Developer’s address is (full mailing address). This address constitutes the official contact for the
Developer until the Developer provides a changed address in writing and that change is acknowledged by the Town.
All notices required by this agreement will be sent to this address.
19. Is this agreement governed by the laws of Vermont? Yes, this agreement is governed by Vermont statute and
case law.
Dated this ___ day of _______________, 200__, at Williston, Vermont.
________________________________
Town Manager, Town of Williston
Dated this ___ day of _______________, 200__, at Williston, Vermont.
________________________________
Duly-appointed Agent of Developer
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e D - | 1
Appendix D - Road Name and Road Location Addressing Ordinance
Town of Williston, Vermont
Only relevant sections of this ordinance are reproduced here.
SECTION I - AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 24 VSA, Chapter 59, Chapter 61, Subchapter 11 and Chapter 117, and 24
VSA, Section 2081 (16). It shall constitute a civil ordinance within the meaning of 24 VSA, Chapter 59.
SECTION II - PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, welfare and convenience and in order to
develop a more uniform road naming, road renaming and road location addressing system throughout the Town
of Williston to enable people to locate roads and addresses and to effectively provide emergency services and
deliveries to Town citizens.
SECTION V - FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
A. Prior to the approval of a subdivision by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall furnish a plan
for road naming in accordance with this Ordinance to the E-911 Coordinator and the Development
Review Board. The subdivider shall be responsible for installation of road signs, per Town of Williston
specifications, prior to the issuance of any permits for construction on any of the subdivided lots.
B. Following the adoption of this Ordinance, the E-911 Coordinator shall give written approval for the
proposed road name and the Selectboard shall add it to Attachment A pursuant to the procedure set forth
above.
SECTION VI - GENERAL NUMBERING SYSTEM GUIDELINES
B. The Town of Williston shall assign each structure, as defined herein, a “location number” based upon
its distance (i.e.: the number of 5.28 foot segments) from the starting point of the road to the center of
the driveway or entrance from the road to the structure. The Town shall have the authority to assign a
location number utilizing other physical information regarding the structure, if appropriate and
necessary in order to effectively provide emergency services.
C. Each of the location numbers for structures must be at least four (4) inches high and two (2) inches wide.
Location numbers must be sharply contrasting in color from the background with no other markings or
symbols. Numbers must be clearly visible from the road if the location number signs are affixed to the
structure. If the location number affixed to the structure is not clearly visible from the road, the location
number shall be affixed on a board or plaque no smaller than 8 inches wide by 4 inches high and such
board or plaque is affixed to a post, pole, fence or other structure near the driveway entrance so as to be
clearly visible from the road during all seasons. Numbers may only be affixed to a mailbox if there is a
single mailbox located at the entrance to the structure from the road and, in such event, the location
number shall be on both sides of the mailbox. If there are multiple mailboxes at a single location or the
mailbox is on the opposite side of the road to the entrance to the structures, any identifying information
shall be marked on the front of the mailbox facing the road. The property owner is responsible for the
purchase and installation of numbers to be installed.
D. A multiple dwelling or use structure shall bear one number for each dwelling or use where possible. If
each dwelling or use does not have a separate number, then the Town shall determine the appropriate
numbering of each dwelling or use so as to effectively provide emergency services.
E. All location numbers shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the location number.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e D - | 2
SECTION VII - ROAD NAME SIGNS
A. The Public Works Department, upon adoption of this Ordinance, shall institute a program for the
installation and maintenance of municipal and private road name signs in accordance with this
Ordinance. All private roads shall also be properly signed. The cost of initial installation (purchase and
installing post and sign) shall be by the Town on existing Town roads listed on Attachment A. The
owners/users of roads which are not State or Town highways shall be responsible for the acquisition,
installation and maintenance, repair and replacement of such road signs for the private roads. The Town
shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of road signs on public highways.
B. All road signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways.
C. All signs shall be maintained so as to maintain clear visibility of the name of the road.
SECTION VIII - NUMBERING
All property owners of structures shall install their location numbers within sixty (60) days after the adoption of
the road name upon which the structure is located and numbers have been assigned by the Town.
Adopted this 24th day of April, 1997:
Amended this 4th day of December, 2006
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e E - | 1
Appendix E – Special Events Ordinance
RESERVED PENDING ADOPTION OF A NEW SPECIAL EVENTS ORDINANCE
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 1
Appendix F - Noise Control Ordinance
1. Authority: This ordinance is adopted under authority of 24 V.S.A. § 2491 and 24 V.S.A. chapters 59.
2. Purpose: This ordinance is intended to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, and peace
and quiet for the citizens of the Town of Williston through the reduction, control and prevention of noise.
This ordinance establishes controls that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary noises, which are physically
harmful or otherwise detrimental to the enjoyment of life, property and maintenance of business.
3. Definitions
3.1. “Average sound level” – A sound level during a given period of time (e.g. one hour) found by the
general rule of combination of sound levels. Also called equivalent sound level.
3.2. “Decibel” – Unit of measurement of the sound pressure level as prescribed by the American
National Standards Institute.
3.3. “Emergency” Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical
trauma or property damage.
3.4. “Emergency Work” Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical
trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
3.5. " Instantaneous maximum sound" means either a single pressure peak or a single burst (multiple
pressure peaks) that has duration of less than one second.
3.6. “Plainly audible" means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided
hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal
vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine
the title of a song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic
base component of the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
3.7. "Property line" means either (a) the imaginary line including its vertical extension that separates
one parcel of property from another; (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit
that is part of a multi-dwelling unit building; or (c) on a multi-use property, the interface between
the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity are being performed (e.g.,
if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs,
then the property line would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area).
3.8. “Receiving Property” – The location that is receiving the sound in question.
3.9. “Residential Property” - Property used for human habitation or sleeping
3.10. “Sound level” – In decibels measured by a calibrated ANSI type I or type II sound level meter,
using “A” frequency weighting (expressed in dBA)
3.11. “Sound measurement standards” – Sound shall be measured in accordance with standards
specified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
3.12. “Unoccupied Lands” – Lands without permanent structures used for human habitation or business.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 2
3.13. “Unreasonable Noise” Any excessive or unusually loud sound which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities within the Town of Williston. Elements to be considered in determining whether
noise is excessive in a given situation include, but are not limited to, the following: intensity of the
noise, whether the noise is usual or unusual, whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural,
the intensity of the ambient noise, the proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities, the zoning
district within which the noise emanates, the time of the day or night the noise occurs, the duration
of the noise, whether the noise is continuous or intermittent, and/OR whether alternate methods
are available to achieve the objectives of the sound producing activity.
4. General Prohibitions
No person or persons shall make, cause to be made, assist in making or continue any excessive, unnecessary,
unreasonably loud noise or disturbance, which disturbs, destroys, or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety
of others within the immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance. Without limitations, the commission of one or
more of the following acts, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be considered as a noise
disturbance and public nuisance, provided that the instrument, devices, vehicles or other noise source is plainly
audible from the receiving property Boundary line.
4.1. Defect in vehicle or operation of vehicle: The operation of any automobile, truck, motorcycle, allterrain
vehicle, snowmobile or boat in such a manner as to create squealing, or squealing of tires,
or loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, exploding-type, rattling, or other noises.
4.2. Dogs, cats, birds and other animals. The keeping of any dog, cat, bird or other animal, which shall
become a nuisance to another person in the vicinity where such dog, cat or other animal is kept, by
frequent or continued barking, howling, yelping, screaming or other animal noise and
vocalizations.
4.3. Vocal disturbances. Yelling, shouting, whistling, singing or making any other loud vocal or noise
disturbance, including parties and other social events so as to disturb, destroy, or endanger the
peace of persons in the immediate vicinity of the noise or disturbance. It shall be unlawful for any
person in charge of a party or other social event to allow that party or event to produce
unreasonable noise. A person shall be deemed to be in charge of a party or social event when that
event occurs on private property and the person is present at the event and resides on the premises
involved or is a person who lives in or on the premises involved and who has authorized the use of
the premises for such event.
4.4. Construction related activities: Noises emanating from the road construction or from the
excavation, demolition, alteration, construction, or repair of buildings, structures, property
between the hours of 9:00 PM and 6:00 AM.
4.5. Loud speakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets
for the purpose of commercial advertising, attracting the attention of the public, or communicating
to employees.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 3
4.6. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal on any automobile, motorcycle,
boat or other vehicle except as a danger warning; the creation, by means of any other signaling
device, of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound; and. the sounding of any such device for
unnecessary and/or unreasonable periods of time.
4.7. Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any
radio or television receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for
producing or reproducing of sounds in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
the neighboring inhabitants or any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such a
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
4.8. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion
engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
4.9. Trash Removal. The removal of household and commercial trash by authorized commercial trash
haulers utilizing mechanized conveyances within 500 feet from a residential property between the
hours of 9:00 PM. and 6:00 A.M.
4.10. Mobile. Portable or Outdoor Electronic Sound-producing Devices. The playing or use of a mobile,
portable or outdoor electronic sound-producing device in such manner or with such volume at any
time and place as to disturb, destroy or endanger the comfort, repose or peace of persons.
5. Prohibitions for Non-Residential Uses
5.1. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for anyone to create or allow the creation of noise not
otherwise specified under General Prohibitions, in excess of the following stated limits during the
stated time periods for noise generated on properties being used for other than residential
purposes.
5.2. Noise measurements shall be made at the property line.
5.3. This standard shall not apply to unoccupied receiving properties.
5.4. Sound level measurements shall be taken with a sound level meter meeting the minimum
American Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements for Type I or Type II accuracy, and shall use
the fast response setting.
5.5. Nothing in this Ordinance shall limit the Board from imposing additional noise control measures
beyond that needed to reach the limits set below.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 4
Time Period Receiving Property One hour Average dBA Instantaneous Maximum
dBA
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Industrial A 75 90
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Residential 55 to 65 80
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Industrial A 60 70
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Residential 45 60
7:00 am to 10:00 pm Other 65 50
10:00 pm to 7:00 am Other 60 70
6. Exemptions and Exclusions
Sounds from the following sources shall be exempt from the prohibitions specified in this ordinance:
6.1. Any person or organization that has obtained a noise waiver from the Town of Williston. (i.e.
parade, block party, fire works display, etc.)
6.2. Any vehicle and equipment owned by and operated by any governmental unit or a utility in the
performance of its duties.
6.3. Noise associated with routine snow removal activities where customary practices and equipment
are used and where the snow removal OR SNOW grooming equipment is operated within the
manufacturer's specifications and in proper operating condition.
6.4. Any construction activity that has obtained approval of the Town of Williston to occur between
the hours of 9:00 PM and 6:00 AM and that is deemed to be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare.
6.5. All safety signals and warning devices or any other device used to alert persons to any emergency
or used during the conduct of emergency work including but not limited to police, fire and
medical/rescue vehicle sirens, and backup alarms required by OSHA, VOSHA or other federal or
state agency.
6.6. Noise associated with a bona fide response to an emergency situation that poses a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
6.7. Musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by and on the site of a school or educational
facility or municipal facility or is sponsored by the municipal, state or federal government.
6.8. Equipment for maintenance of lawns and grounds during the hours of 6:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M.
(including but not limited to lawn mowers, hedge trimmers, weed trimmers, chain saws, snow
blowers and leaf-blowers) assuming they are properly muffled.
6.9. Vehicles or aircraft that meet state and federal standards operating on the public right-of-way or
air space and operated in a manner consistent with state and federal law.
6.10. Noise associated with standard agricultural operations.
6.11. Sound created by bells, carillons, or chimes associated with specific religious observances or the
Town Clock.
6.12. Natural phenomena including wind, rain, flowing water, and wildlife.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 5
6.13. The use of firearms when used for hunting in accordance with state Fish and Wildlife laws or
when used for sport shooting consistent with any permitting conditions placed on such use. For
sport shooting uses permitted prior to January 1, 2005, the hours of operation will be determined
through a written agreement with the Town.
6.14. Vocal disturbances, whether or not it is electronically amplified, by spectators or participants in a
political protest or rally, an athletic event or assembly sponsored by a public or private school, or
recognized organized recreational activities.
7. Variance
7.1. Residential Sources - Any person may apply to the Selectboard for a variance from the
requirements of this Ordinance prior to doing acts prohibited by this ordinance. The applicant shall
provide a list of property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the site(s) where the
activity is to occur. Ten (10) days advance written notice of the Selectboard meeting shall be
provided to the property owners and residents appearing on the list. For good cause shown, the
Selectboard may, in it sole discretion, either grant or deny the variance. If the variance is granted,
the Selectboard may impose reasonable conditions to it. For noise events lasting less than a 12-
hour period, the Board may waive or reduce the ten-day advance written notice of the Selectboard
meeting.
7.2. Non-Residential Sources – An application for variance from the provisions of this Ordinance may
be submitted to the Selectboard. Information the Selectboard may require includes:
¨ Information on the nature and location of the facility or process for which such
application is made;
¨ The reason for which the variance is required;
¨ A description of the interim noise control measures to be taken by the applicant to
minimize the impact caused by the noise;
¨ A statement of the length of time a variance will be required; and
¨ Any other relevant information requested by the Selectboard to make a determination
regarding the application.
¨ Information on ambient sound levels.
7.3. Delegation of Authority – The Selectboard may delegate its authority to grant variance requests
for events lasting less than a 12-hour period, if it so chooses, by a majority vote of the Board.
8. Enforcement
8.1. Enforcement - Any certified Vermont Law Enforcement officer shall be the designated
enforcement officer. Such Officer may issue complaints and may be the appearing officer at any
hearing.
8.2. An Enforcement officer may issue a Vermont Civil Violation Complaint to the individual
responsible for any sound in violation of this ordinance including the driver of a motor vehicle, or
the first registered owner of the vehicle, the owner of record or a resident of a single family home,
or apartment, the proprietor of a business or the person who is in physical control of the sound
emitting device or animal responsible for the unreasonable or excessive noise.
8.3. Violations - A violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil matter enforced in accordance with the
provisions of 24 V.S.A. § 1974a and § 1977 et seq. Anyone convicted of a violation or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, including the failure to make a required
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified P a g e F - | 6
report or to pay any fee, may be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $500 in addition to the
waiver fees outlined in Sections 9.1 and 9.2 below. Each day a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
8.4. Initial Administrative Appeal – Anyone in found in violation of this ordinance shall have the right
to appeal any waiver fee to the Police Chief. An appeal must be filed within 17 days of receipt of
the fee or violation notice. The decision of the Police Chief may be appealed to the Williston
Selectboard within 10 days of receipt of the Chief’s decision. In the event such appeal is not
satisfactorily resolved before the Selectboard, the Town pursuant to 24 V.S.A. § 1974(a) may
bring civil enforcement proceedings.
9. Penalties
9.1. First offense - A first offense of any provision of this ordinance by a person shall be deemed a
civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The
waiver fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
9.2. Second and subsequent offenses - A second offense during a twelve-month period from the date of
the first offense, shall be deemed to be a civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The waiver fine shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each
subsequent offense shall be deemed a civil violation and shall be punishable by a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The waiver fine shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00).
9.3. PAYMENT DEADLINE - ALL FEES MUST BE PAID WITHIN THIRTY (30) DAYS OF
RECEIPT OF NOTICE. IF FEES ARE PAID AFTER THIRTY DAYS, AN ADDITIONAL FEE
OF $10.00 WILL BE CHARGED.
9.4. EACH DAY ON WHICH A VIOLATION OCCURS OR CONTINUES AFTER RECEIVING A
VIOLATION COMPLAINT SHALL BE CONSIDERED A SEPARATE VIOLATION OF THIS
ORDINANCE.
10. SEVERABILITY:
IF ANY SECTION, SENTENCE, OR PHRASE OF THIS ORDINANCE SHALL FOR ANY REASON BE HELD INVALID OR
UNCONSTITUTIONAL BY A DECREE OR DECISION OF ANY COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION, SUCH DECREE
OR DECISION SHALL NOT AFFECT OR IMPAIR THE VALIDITY OF ANY OTHER SECTION OR REMAINING PORTION
OF THIS ORDINANCE.
11. EFFECTIVE DATE:
THIS ORDINANCE WAS ADOPTED OCTOBER 25, 2004 AND SHALL TAKE EFFECT ON JANUARY 1, 2005.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e G - | 1
Appendix G – Home Businesses
This appendix provides detailed standards for home businesses. The Administrator or DRB shall approve a permit
for a proposed home business that complies with all of these requirements.
1. Must the owner of a home business be in residence? Yes. The proposed home business must be owned and
operated by a current resident of the dwelling in which it is proposed. Should the owner move away, the right to
continue the home business ends.
2. How much space can be used for a home business? The space that can be used for a home business is limited as
follows:
a. in the MURZD and RZD: 25% of the floor area of the dwelling or 500 square feet, whichever is smaller;
b. in the VZD: 25% of the floor area of the dwelling or 750 square feet, whichever is smaller; and
c. in the ARZD: no more than 1,500 square feet within a building.
d. EXCEPTION FOR ADAPTIVE REUSE OF HISTORIC BARNS: The DRB may encourage the
preservation of historic barns in the VZD and ARZD via adaptive reuse for a home business by waiving the
area limitations established here. The DRB may not permit the expansion of an historic barn that is less
than the maximum area, but may permit the use of a larger, historic barn for a home business that otherwise
complies with the standards of this bylaw. See WDB 31.12.
Applicants must demonstrate compliance with this standard by submitting a scaled floor plan of the dwelling or
accessory structure that clearly delineates the area that will be used for the home business.
What is a Historic Barn? An historic barn is wood frame structure (which may have a masonry foundation or elements) that was
historically used for agricultural purposes, including the storage of feed and/or housing of livestock. Questions about whether a
particular structure qualifies as an historic barn will be referred to the Historic Preservation Commission.
3. Can a home business have work spaces or store materials outdoors? That depends on where it is located.
a. In the RZD, MURZD and VZD zoning districts, the space used for the proposed home business shall be
within the dwelling or in an accessory structure that complies with all requirements of this bylaw. Outdoor
work spaces and the outdoor storage of materials, supplies, equipment, vehicles, or goods for sale are
prohibited in the RZD, MURZD, and VZD.
b. Outdoor work spaces and the outdoor storage of materials supplies, equipment, vehicles, or goods for sale
associated with a home business in a one-family dwelling will be permitted in the ARZD, provided that
they fall within the required setbacks and are fully screened from view from public ways and adjoining
properties that are zoned for residential use.
c. The screening provided shall be a Type I or Type III landscaped buffer, as defined in Chapter 18, with a
width of at least 36 feet.
d. Applicants must demonstrate compliance with this standard by submitting a scaled drawing of their
property that clearly delineates the space (indoor and outdoor) that would be used for the proposed home
business. This drawing must also show proposed landscaped buffer. Where it is proposed to use existing
vegetation as the buffer, photographs of that existing vegetation must be submitted. Where the buffer will
be installed, a planting plan must be submitted.
4. Must a home business provide parking? Yes. Off-street parking must be provided at a rate determined by the
Administrator or the DRB. Where more than one additional parking space is required, the Administrator or DRB
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e G - | 2
may require that off-street parking for a home business meet the location (side or rear) and landscaping requirements
that would apply in a commercial or industrial zoning district.
5. Are there restrictions on traffic generation by home businesses? Yes. Traffic generation by home businesses
will be evaluated using the ITE Trip Generation manual. A home business generally should not generate more than
one P.M. peak hour trip of traffic generation in the RZD or two P.M. peak hours trips in the VZD or ARZD. The
DRB may permit exceptions where traffic flow from the proposed home business will not have an adverse impact on
neighboring homes. The Administrator may use potential traffic generation as cause to refer a proposed home
business that he/she would normally review to the DRB for discretionary review.
6. Are there restrictions on potential nuisances generated by home businesses?
a. No home business shall require an NPDES permit, as required by state law.
b. No home business shall require an air quality permit, as required by state law.
c. The storage, use, and disposal of hazardous materials by home businesses shall be permitted only to the
extent allowed for residential occupancies by NFPA 1, the 2006 Uniform Fire Code. The DRB may permit
an exception for a home business on a parcel of one or more acres in the ARZD upon finding that:
· the proposed home business will comply with all requirements of the National Fire Codes,
including the requirements for inspections by the fire department; and
· the proposed home business will comply with all buffering and screening requirements that
would apply to the same activity located in a commercial or industrial zoning district.
Hazardous Materials. While their use in small quantities may be permitted, you should not propose a home business that
uses flammable, combustible, corrosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials unless you are familiar with the fire code
requirements for the storage, use, and disposal of those materials.
d. This bylaw sets limits on the outdoor lighting permitted for dwellings. No home business shall result in
additional outdoor lighting.
e. No home business shall result in blowing dust, radiant heat, glare from welding equipment or other sources
of intense light, or smoke that affects adjoining properties. See also the applicable standards of Chapter 15.
f. No home business shall generate sound that exceeds the standards set in Chapter 15.
7. Can a home business have a sign? Yes. Home businesses may display a single sign of no more than four square
feet in size. This may be a freestanding, hanging, projecting, or wall sign. The application for a permit to establish a
home business must be accompanied by scaled drawings that show the placement of the sign on the property and/or
structure and the dimensions of the sign. There are additional restrictions on signs in the VZD.
8. Can commercial vehicles associated with the business be parked on residential premises? Only vehicles of
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or less can be parked overnight on residential premises in the RZD, MURZD, or
VZD. The overnight parking of larger vehicles is not a permitted part of home businesses.
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 1
Appendix H – Williston Village Historic District Design Review Guide
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 2
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 3
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 4
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 5
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 6
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 7
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 8
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 9
Adopted by the Selectboard: 6/1/2009 Amended: 10/15/2019 Williston Unified Development Bylaw
P a g e H - | 10
TOWN OF WILLISTON, VERMONT AND
CHITTENDEN COUNTY REGIONAL
PLANNING COMMISSION (CCRPC)
TRANSPORTATION
IMPACT FEE STUDY
Report │ September 17, 2019
180 Battery Street, Suite 350
Burlington, VT 05401
802.383.0118
www.rsginc.com
PREPARED FOR:
TOWN OF WILLISTON, VERMONT AND CHITTENDEN COUNTY
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION (CCRPC)
SUBMITTED BY:
RSG
Prepared for:
The Town of Williston, Vermont
The preparation of this report has been financed in part through grant[s]
from the Federal Highway Administration and Federal Transit
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, under the State
Planning and Research Program, Section 505 [or Metropolitan Planning
Program, Section 104(f)] of Title 23, U.S. Code. The contents of this
report do not necessarily reflect the official views or policy of the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
Town of Williston, Vermont and Chittenden County Regional Planning
Commission (CCRPC)
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE STUDY
i
CONTENTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 1
1.1 LEGAL BACKGROUND ...........................................................................1
2.0 GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT ...................................................... 3
2.1 POPULATION ..........................................................................................3
2.2 HOUSEHOLDS ........................................................................................3
2.3 EMPLOYMENT ........................................................................................5
3.0 TRANSPORTATION .......................................................................... 6
3.1 OVERVIEW ..............................................................................................6
3.2 IMPACT FEE BASIS ................................................................................6
4.0 FUTURE TRAVEL DEMAND ............................................................. 8
4.1 OVERVIEW ..............................................................................................8
4.2 OVERVIEW OF CHITTENDEN COUNTY TRANSPORTATION
MODEL ...................................................................................................8
4.3 TRIP GENERATION FORECASTS .........................................................8
ESTIMATING GROWTH FROM 2030 TO 2040 ................................... 11
5.0 PROJECTS ....................................................................................... 12
5.1 STANDARD OF SERVICE TESTS ........................................................ 12
RATIO EXPANSION OF CAPACITY .................................................... 12
PERSON MILES OF CAPACITY .......................................................... 13
6.0 BASE IMPACT FEE ......................................................................... 16
6.1 CREDITS ............................................................................................... 16
INFRASTRUCTURE CREDITS ............................................................ 16
REVENUE CREDITS ............................................................................ 16
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT .......................................................... 17
ii
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT .................................................. 20
6.2 FEE PER RESIDENTIAL UNIT .............................................................. 23
6.3 NON-RESIDENTIAL FEES .................................................................... 24
APPENDIX A. CAPACITY OF INFRASTRUCTURE ............................. 25
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1: HISTORICAL POPULATION GROWTH RATES ............................................. 3
FIGURE 2: AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD SIZE (1940–2016) .................................................. 4
FIGURE 3: GROWTH AND DIVERSITY LAND USE ZONES IN WILLISTON ................. 10
FIGURE 4: 2030 TRAFFIC GROWTH CHANGES ........................................................... 11
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 1: BEDROOMS BY HOUSEHOLD UNIT (5-YEAR ACS) ...................................... 5
TABLE 2: DISTRIBUTION OF EMPLOYMENT SECTORS IN WILLISTON ....................... 5
TABLE 3: LAND USE CHANGES ANTICIPATED IN WILLISTON BY 2030 ..................... 9
TABLE 4: LOCAL VS. TOTAL VMT CHANGE .................................................................. 9
TABLE 5: LAND USE CHANGES BY 2040 ..................................................................... 11
TABLE 6: WILLISTON TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE PROJECTS ......................... 12
TABLE 7: EXISTING SUPPLY OF TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES ............................. 13
TABLE 8: RATIO EXPANSION OF CAPACITY .............................................................. 13
TABLE 9: PERSON MILES CAPACITY IN WILLSTON - 2015 ........................................ 14
TABLE 10: VMT TO PMT - 2015 ..................................................................................... 14
TABLE 11: PMT SYSTEM CAPACITY AND FUTURE DEMAND .................................... 14
TABLE 12: COST PER PM PEAK HOUR TRIP ............................................................... 16
TABLE 13: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR PREDEVELOPMENT TAX
PAYMENTS ............................................................................................................. 17
TABLE 14: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
TAX PAYMENTS ..................................................................................................... 19
TABLE 15: NONRESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR PREDEVELOPMENT
TAX PAYMENTS ..................................................................................................... 20
TABLE 16: 2017 CONSTRUCTION VALUES FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES
BY CONSTRUCTION TYPE (VALUE PER SQUARE FOOT) .................................. 22
TABLE 17: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
TAX PAYMENTS ..................................................................................................... 22
TABLE 18: BASE FEE PER RESIDENTIAL UNIT ........................................................... 23
TABLE 19: NET RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES FOR TRANSPORTATION
CAPITAL EXPENSES .............................................................................................. 23
Table of Abbreviations
ACS American Community Survey
CCRPC Chittenden County Regional Planning Commission
CLA Common Level of Appraisal
ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers
PMT Person miles traveled
TDM Transportation demand management
VMT Vehicle miles traveled
TAZ Traffic Analysis Zone
CIP Capital Improvement Program
1
1.0 INTRODUCTION
This impact fee study report summarizes the need for future infrastructure and identifies a fair,
rational connection for new development to pay for the additional demands placed on that
infrastructure.
Vermont statute (24 V.S.A., Chapter 131) authorizes municipalities to levy impact fees on new
development as a means of allocating the cost of new capital facilities to the development that
will benefit from those facilities. This can include fees to offset the costs of facilities built in the
past with excess capacity for anticipated future development; it can also include facilities
planned to be built to accommodate future development. The costs of such infrastructure shall
only include the portion associated with new capacity to accommodate the future development’s
demand.
This impact fee study report outlines the future growth anticipated for the Town of Williston and
documents the basis for implementing a transportation impact fee to pay for additional capacity
associated with the increased demand for transportation mobility while conforming to the
conditions imposed by 24 V.S.A., Chapter 131.
1.1 LEGAL BACKGROUND
Basic impact fee standards according to the American Planning Association
• The imposition of a fee must be rationally linked (the "rational nexus") to an impact
created by a particular development and the demonstrated need for related capital
improvements pursuant to a capital improvement plan and program.
• Some benefit must accrue to the development as a result of the payment of a fee.
• The amount of the fee must be a proportionate fair share of the costs of the
improvements made necessary by the development and must not exceed the cost of the
improvements.
• A fee cannot be imposed to address existing deficiencies except where they are
exacerbated by new development.
• Funds received under such a program must be segregated from the general fund and
used solely for the purposes for which the fee is established.
• The fees collected must be encumbered or expended within a reasonable timeframe to
ensure that needed improvements are implemented.
• The fee assessed cannot exceed the cost of the improvements, and credits must be
given for outside funding sources (such as federal and state grants, developer initiated
improvements for impacts related to new development, etc.) and local tax payments
which fund capital improvements, for example.
2
• The fee cannot be used to cover normal operation and maintenance or personnel costs,
but must be used for capital improvements, or under some linkage programs, affordable
housing, job training, child care, etc.
Typical management activities
• The fee established for specific capital improvements should be reviewed at least every
two years to determine whether an adjustment is required, and similarly the capital
improvement plan and budget should be reviewed at least every 5 to 8 years.
• Provisions must be included in the ordinance to permit refunds for projects that are not
constructed, since no benefit will have manifested.
• Impact fee payments are typically required to be made as a condition of approval of the
development, either at the time the building or occupancy permit is issued.
Vermont’s impact fee statute does not preclude the use of funds for administrative duties
associated with the management of the impact fee program. Nationally, it is common practice to
collect and expend impact fees to cover time and expenses associated with the creation,
management, and other administration of the impact fee program. These funds often cover the
salary portion of the impact fee administrator, staff time in the preparation and review of impact
fee studies, consultant or staff time preparing impact fee needs reports and ordinance support.
3
2.0 GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
2.1 POPULATION
The Town of Williston has 9,341 persons as of the 2017 American Community Survey (5-year
estimates) making it the 6th most populous community within Chittenden County.
The Town has seen consistent demand for housing, originally as a bedroom community for the
larger employment centers in Burlington, South Burlington, and Essex. However, since the
1990s, Williston diversified its land use to become a major commercial destination in the Taft
Corners area. The population continued to grow at rates far higher than those experienced
within Vermont and Chittenden County. Figure 1 shows the 10-year growth rates for Williston,
Chittenden County, and Vermont.
FIGURE 1: HISTORICAL POPULATION GROWTH RATES
source: Williston Town Plan
2.2 HOUSEHOLDS
The Town of Williston has traditionally assessed residential impact fees at a household unit. The
American Community Survey estimates that as of 2017, there are 3,897 households.
4
The majority of the households, 78%, are owner occupied with an average of 2.42 persons per
household. The remaining 22% of households are renter occupied with 2.21 persons per
household1.
There have been attempts nationally to reduce the effect that transportation impact fees may
have on housing costs, and especially, “affordable housing.” Changing the assessment on the
square footage of the home or on the number of bedrooms provides a stronger relationship to
the number of occupants and the quantity of travel consumed.
Nationally, over the past half century the average size (number of persons) of the household
has dropped from 3.67 persons per household in 1940 to 2.53 in 2016 as shown in Figure 2.
FIGURE 2: AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD SIZE (1940–2016)
source: US Census Data
Williston is no different. According to the Town Plan, the average size of the household has
come down in-line with national trends.
source: US Census Data–Williston Town Plan (Figure 2.G)
1 2015 American Community Survey 5-year estimates
5
The 2017 breakdown of households and the number bedrooms is shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1: BEDROOMS BY HOUSEHOLD UNIT (5-YEAR ACS)
HOUSEHOLD BEDROOM COUNT COUNT PERCENT
No bedroom 0 0%
1 bedroom 362 9%
2 bedrooms 1,121 29%
3 bedrooms 1,286 33%
4 bedrooms 986 25%
5 or more bedrooms 142 4%
Total housing units 3,897 100%
2.3 EMPLOYMENT
The Town of Williston is a significant destination for commercial and industrial activity. As of
2015 there were 13,154 persons employed within the Town. Of these, 92.7% live outside of
Williston and commute in. 960 live and work in Williston. The 2017 5-year ACS summarizes the
jobs within Williston.
TABLE 2: DISTRIBUTION OF EMPLOYMENT SECTORS IN WILLISTON
NAICS DESCRIPTION
% OF WORKERS IN TOWN OF
WILLISTON
Accommodation and Food Services 5%
Administrative, Support, Waste Management, Remediation 7%
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting 0%
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation 1%
Construction 14%
Educational Services 3%
Finance and Insurance 5%
Health Care and Social Assistance 7%
Information 2%
Manufacturing 8%
Other Services (except Public Administration) 3%
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services 13%
Public Administration 3%
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing 1%
Retail Trade 15%
Transportation and Warehousing 4%
Utilities 0%
Wholesale Trade 7%
Employed individuals within Williston contribute to the demand for travel to, from, and within
Williston. During the workday various activities are carried out to support the commercial
activities but also there are recreation and health trips that are also generated. Employees
require a multimodal transportation infrastructure.
6
3.0 TRANSPORTATION
3.1 OVERVIEW
The Town of Williston is expected to continue to experience a population growth and land use
development at pace exceeding both Vermont and Chittenden County averages. The Exit 12
Growth Center is the hub of the commercial activity and is becoming increasingly diverse in land
use, particularly east of VT2A with a large residential area being constructed over the past
decade. The Town’s Comprehensive Plan articulates a vision with several land use and
transportation goals to manage and facilitate the growth to meet the needs of the community.
The Town’s Plan states a vision to:
• Concentrate and limit high intensity development to areas within the Town’s designated
Growth Center in and around Taft Corners.
• Permit the flexibility and intensity of use necessary to foster creation of a designconscious,
mixed use, pedestrian-friendly commercial center around Taft Corners.
• Encourage and support the use of mass transit and non-motorized modes of
transportation through mixed use development policies and transportation facilities
planning.
The Town plans to achieve this vision by:
• Working with Developers to Build Grid Streets.
• Working with VTrans on Other Circulation Improvements.
• Developing a Master Transportation Plan comprised of a Major Road Plan, Sidewalks,
paths and Trail Network, a Public Transportation Plan, and Connectivity between
networks and land use.
Impact fees are an important tool that the Town can leverage by assessing fees on new land
use development that would generate additional traffic and transportation demands placing a
burden on the existing facilities and would benefit from additional transportation capacity.
3.2 IMPACT FEE BASIS
It is understood that future development generates additional new local demand for travel that
begins and/or ends within the Town. Additional growth in population throughout the county and
state generates additional demand for travel, although those trips begins and ends outside of
the Town; and therefore, not directly associated with future development in the Town. These
trips are considered “through trips”.
The impact fee analysis focuses on local traffic generated by anticipated future development.
The basic unit of analysis is the Peak Hour Trip End, which is either the origin or the destination
of a trip. Any given trip has two trip ends—an origin and a destination. Any trip that either begins
or ends within the Town is considered to be a local trip.
7
The impact fee will also be assessed on a trip, regardless of mode. The Vermont State
Legislature under Act 34 of 2011 identified the “complete street” principles that defined
transportation capacity consistently regardless of travel mode. The projects in Table 6 add
multimodal capacity – offering residents, employees, patrons a variety of modal travel options.
The PM peak hour is the analysis hour in which the fee is assessed on the number of peak hour
vehicle trips. The PM peak hour is the typical design hour2 in the Town of Williston. It is noted
that specific developments may generate a significant number of vehicle trips outside the design
hour. Some uses (a church, for example) may have different peak hours of traffic generation.
Cumulatively however, the highest traffic volume at most locations in Williston is during the PM
peak design hour, as defined here.
Traffic impact fees are not assessed on trips that occur outside of the PM peak design hour.
Limiting the period of assessment to the PM peak hour creates a common hour of analysis and
provides the rational nexus required to assess impact fees. By assessing a fee during a
particular hour of analysis the fee also acts as a transportation demand management (TDM)
technique. This can encourage the development of land uses that generate travel demand
outside of the peak hours to more efficient use of the existing transportation infrastructure by
using available capacity at other times of the day. This same principle goes for shifting modes.
As congestion may rise for one mode of travel, some users will shift modes to utilize spare
capacity.
2 Design Hour is defined as the 30th highest hour of volume during the year.
8
4.0 FUTURE TRAVEL DEMAND
4.1 OVERVIEW
The Town of Williston is anticipated to continue to receive a higher share of the county growth
than other towns and communities within Chittenden County. The CCRPC Regional Travel
Demand Model is a comprehensive tool to forecast the number of trips and traffic to be
generated by future growth and land use development within Willison and the County. The tool
was used to estimate the amount of traffic growth likely by 2030. The future year 2040 was
forecast only after the initial base impact fees were calculated and after considering the
feasibility of constructing the projects identified for impact fee funding.
4.2 OVERVIEW OF CHITTENDEN COUNTY
TRANSPORTATION MODEL
In 2015 the CCRPC initiated a significant update to the regional travel demand model that
included population and employment projections for each municipality for five year increments
out to 2050. The CCRPC forecasts were used as the initial base that the Town amended given
more recent information on land use and anticipated changes. The land use changes were
entered back into the CCRPC Regional Travel Demand Model and run to generate estimates of
new traffic generation, vehicle miles traveled, and percentage of growth in traffic that is through
vs. local (see Section 3.0 above).
The model is a traditional four-step trip based travel demand model. The four steps are iterated
to achieve an optimized routing pattern with stable travel times. The steps are defined as follows:
• Trip Generation – estimates the number of person trips produced and attracted to each
Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ). The land use inputs were established with each community
by allocated future households and employees manually to the TAZs.
• Trip Distribution – connects person trips between TAZs.
• Mode Choice – splits person trips into single occupant vehicles, shared vehicle trips,
transit trips, or walk/bike trips.
• Assignment – Selects the shortest route for each vehicle and transit trip traveling from one
TAZ to another based on distance and travel time.
4.3 TRIP GENERATION FORECASTS
This study identified the anticipated changes to occur in Williston by 2030. The land use
changes included household growth and increases in specific sectors of the economy. In total,
an estimated 612 new households would be constructed by 2030 and 2,584 new employees
would be based in Williston.
9
TABLE 3: LAND USE CHANGES ANTICIPATED IN WILLISTON BY 2030
2015 - 2030 LAND USE CHANGES
Residential Growth Housing Units
New households 612
Employment Growth Employees
Accommodations 24
Commercial 974
Industrial 735
Institutional 164
Educational 15
Retail 672
Total Employment Growth 2,584
These land use changes were evaluated in the travel model in addition to all the other growth
and changes in land uses within the county by 2030. The regional travel model accounts for
growth in other communities within Chittenden County as well as estimated growth for trips that
originate outside the county and for trips that may only pass through the county. While the
model accounts for walking, biking, and transit, the trips that are outputs of the model are
vehicle trips only.
The local land use growth in Williston and the growth occurring within Chittenden County and
the state all increase the total vehicle miles traveled (VMT) on the roads in Williston. Table 4
shows the portion of VMT growth associated with land use (origin or destination) in Williston and
total VMT using Williston’s roads, excluding any VMT on the I-89 freeway. The local share of the
change in VMT is 69%.
TABLE 4: LOCAL VS. TOTAL VMT CHANGE
Local VMT (Non-Highway) Total VMT (Non-Highway)
PM Daily PM Daily
2015 16,471 191,043 2015 23,631 262,920
2030 18,382 213,678 2030 26,422 293,397
Change in VMT 1911 22,634 2,792 30,477
Additional adjustments are necessary to convert the travel model analysis into a multimodal
forecast of total trip making in Williston. The number of vehicle trips forecast from the travel
model is the net result after the model accounts for a variety of considerations. Much like a
traffic study using the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation manual has to
adjust for density, site location (e.g. urban, suburban), proximity to transit, and mix of nearby
uses – the travel model accounts for all these factors. Specifically, the factors: TDM and nonauto
travel, internal capture (mix of complementary land uses within a travel analysis zone), and
pass-by (trips that detour to a location en route to their primary destination).
10
These adjustments are applicable in a large part of Williston that has seen rapid growth and
development as well as increase in the diversity and mix of land uses. The density, diversity,
and design (the three D’s) of the land uses in the highlighted areas of Williston enable
individuals to travel between land uses without using major roads, are close enough to allow for
walking, biking, and are the locations primarily served by transit. The effect of the three D’s in
this area reduces the net number of vehicle trips by 45%.
The land use changes in the area shown in Figure 3 includes 543 housing units and 2,295 new
employees by 2030. The ITE trip
generation for these land uses indicates
that around 2,449 trips would be
generated. After accounting for the
three D’s, the net number of new
vehicle trips from the area in Figure 3 is
forecast to be 1,347.
FIGURE 3: GROWTH AND DIVERSITY
LAND USE ZONES IN WILLISTON
The remaining areas of Williston will experience more modest growth of 69 new housing units
and 286 new employees by 2030. These land uses are expected to be located in areas that will
not benefit from diversity of land uses or proximity to avoid traveling by car and therefore
expected to generate 196 new peak hour vehicle trips.
By 2030, the Town is anticipated to generate an additional 1,542 new vehicle trips during the
PM peak hour. The combination of vehicle trips, non-motorized trips, and trips that pass through
11
Williston are shown in Figure 4, resulting in 2,635 new total PM peak hour trips in Williston by
2030.
FIGURE 4: 2030 TRAFFIC GROWTH CHANGES
Estimating Growth from 2030 to 2040
The travel demand model provided forecasts for the transportation demand associated with the
land use changes from 2015 to 2030. It was determined during the course of the study that the
projects being pursued would benefit from extending over a longer time period – stretching to
2040. The growth forecasts developed by the CCRPC estimates that households and
employment would grow by 9.8% between 2030 and 2040. The person trips for 2040 was
forecast by extrapolating the growth from 2015 to 2030, resulting in an 8% increase from 2030.
The difference is that not all land uses generate trips at the same quantity during the PM peak
hour.
TABLE 5: LAND USE CHANGES BY 2040
TOTAL UNITS BY 2040
CHANGE
(2015 – 2040
Households 4,913 1,050
Employment 17,389 4,146
Trips 9,806 2,845
12
5.0 PROJECTS
The Town has identified seven number of projects eligible for impact fee expenditures. Table 6
shows the transportation capital projects identified for local funding.
All the projects have been developed over many years through the course of several
transportation studies, plans, and community conversations. There is evidence that the standard
of service of transportation will deteriorate in the absence of these improvements.
TABLE 6: WILLISTON TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE PROJECTS
PROJECT DESCRIPTION LOCAL PORTION OF PROJECT
Shared-Use Path along US 2 Taft Corners to Village
Local portion for preliminary design and engineering.
$100,000
Marshall Avenue Shared-Use Path. The Williston segment would
start where Marshall Ave and Kimball St meet, follow the south side
of Marshall Ave, and end at the existing path on Marshall Ave.
$200,000
East-West Grid Street (VT-2A to Maple Tree Place). New road
with bike lanes, and sidewalks that is south of the State Police
Barracks then curves to the north, running along the east side of
Dick's Sporting Goods.
$1,530,000
Upgrade Maple Tree Place Roundabout. Geometric changes and
connect to the new East-West Grid Street.
$1,000,000
Industrial Avenue Sidewalk and Bike Lanes. $846,800
Extension of Trader Lane to US-2 $1,750,000
Mountain View Road Bike Lanes. Local portion for preliminary
design and engineering.
$100,000
Total projects $5,526,800
5.1 STANDARD OF SERVICE TESTS
An impact fee fundamental tenant is that the growth and development does not pay for more
than their proportion of impact, or their ‘fair share’. This can be evaluated by comparing the
current standard of service to the standard of service with and without the impact fee projects.
There are two methodologies used in this test.
a) Ratio of linear miles.
b) Person miles of capacity.
Ratio Expansion of Capacity
The Town of Williston has a diverse and widespread transportation network. Excluding the I-89
Interstate, there are 164 lane miles of roads, 3.64 miles of bike lanes, and 4.6 miles of shared
use paths. There is also an extensive sidewalk network.
13
The existing supply of transportation infrastructure within the Town of Williston is summarized in
Table 7. GIS data and aerial imagery were used to calculate the supply. The existing number of
households and employees were used to develop a ratio of users per mile of infrastructure.
TABLE 7: EXISTING SUPPLY OF TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES
MILES
RATIO:
HH PER MILE
RATIO:
EMPLOYEES PER
MILE
Vehicle miles 164.514 23.5 80
Bike lanes 3.64 1,061.5 3,638
Shared use path 4.6 840 2,879
The ratio of users per mile of infrastructure is used to calculate the supply (miles) of new vehicle
lanes, bike lanes, and shared use paths by 2040. The supply necessary to maintain the current
ratios (miles per unit of growth) is shown next to the supply being provided in the impact fee
projects.
TABLE 8: RATIO EXPANSION OF CAPACITY
HH
CHANGE
2040
[A]
EMPLOYEE
CHANGE
2040
[B]
CHANGE
IN MILES
DUE TO
HH
[C]
CHANGE IN
MILES DUE TO
EMPLOYMENT
[D]
RATIO BASED
CAPACITY
EXPANSION
AVG. CHANGE
IN MILES
E =AVG [C:D]
CAPACITY
OF
IMPACT FEE
PROJECTS
[F]
Vehicle
miles
1,050 4,146 45 52 48 1.46
Bike lanes 1,050 4,146 .99 1.14 1.06 9.20
Shared use
path
1,050 4,146 1.25 1.44 1.34 1.95
Table 8 shows high number of lane miles suggested by the current ratio of lane miles to unit of
growth, especially compared to the number of lane miles planned in the impact fee projects
(column F).
The Town of Williston is looking to provide residents and guests the opportunity to change the
way travel is done rather than continue the status quo. A ratio based expansion in the number of
linear miles of infrastructure retains the existing proportions and doesn’t easily translate to
shifting capacity from vehicle miles to bike lane miles, for example.
Person Miles of Capacity
Vermont’s Complete Street legislation in 2011 (Act 34 H.198) directed that all users of the
transportation system (regardless of mode) are considered in all state and municipally managed
transportation projects. The recognition that all users of the system are equally valued in the
development of projects provides the context for developing a mode-agnostic person miles
14
capacity analysis of the transportation system in Williston. The existing transportation system
has a capacity for nearly 157,000 person miles during the PM peak hour.
TABLE 9: PERSON MILES CAPACITY IN WILLSTON - 2015
INFRASTRUCTURE MILES
PERSON CAPACITY3
(TARGET V/C RATIO ~.5)
PERSON MILES
CAPACITY
Vehicle Miles 164.5 900 148,063
bike lanes 3.64 800 2,912
shared use path 4.6 1,250 5,750
Total Person Miles Capacity 156,725
The VMT analyzed in the regional travel demand model is converted to person miles traveled
(PMT) using the data in the 2009 National Household Travel Survey data Vermont add-on for
the Williston census blocks. The VMT to PMT factor is 1.38.
TABLE 10: VMT TO PMT - 2015
2015 peak hour PM VMT 23,631
VMT to PMT factor 1.38
2015 peak hour PM PMT 31,322
Converting the capacity of the existing transportation system in Williston to PMT enables a
mode-agnostic analysis of future capacity and demand for mobility.
Table 11 shows the translation from existing capacity, existing capacity to demand ratio (5.0),
and using that ratio to assess what future capacity is needed to meet the needs of future
residents, and lastly what portion of that future demand is met by the impact fee projects.
TABLE 11: PMT SYSTEM CAPACITY AND FUTURE DEMAND
Person miles capacity
(pm pk hr)
Vehicle Miles (1 direction) 148,063
Bike lanes 2,912
Shared use path 5,750
2015 Person Miles Capacity 156,725
2015 Person Miles Traveled (PM pk hr) 31,322
2015 Capacity to Demand Ratio (capacity / PMT) 5.0
2040 Person Miles Traveled (PM pk hr) 37,097
2040 Capacity to Demand Ratio 5.0
New Capacity - demanded (2015-2040) (new PMT x 5) 28,900
Impact Fee Supplied Person Miles Capacity 12,933
Table 11 indicates that the standard of service test is past
3 NACTO, TRB, HCM 6th Edition (see appendix TBD)
15
• There is a deterioration of the existing standard experience within the Town of Williston
due to future growth and land use development. In the absence of the impact fee
projects the standard (supply to demand) ratio falls from 5.0 to 4.22.
• The fee projects funded by impact fees levied on future growth and land use
development does not improve conditions above what is experienced today. Adding the
new capacity to the existing capacity would result in a slight deterioration of overall
standards of service (supply to demand) ratio of 5.0 to 4.57.
16
6.0 BASE IMPACT FEE
Base impact fees are the raw, unadjusted fees which are later discounted for credits and other
incentives. The fee will be charged on a PM peak hour per trip basis. This is consistent with the
current ordinance in Williston. The trip basis is consistent with the Vermont Agency of
Transportation’s Statewide impact fee enabling legislation, per Act 145 of 2014-Transportation
Impact Fees (10 VSA Sections 6101-6111).
The base fee is described by the following equation:
The base impact fee is calculated as the cost of projects divided by the number of new trips
during the PM peak hour as shown in Table 12.
TABLE 12: COST PER PM PEAK HOUR TRIP
Cost of Impact Fee Projects (Table 6) $5,526,800
Number of new PM Peak Hour Trips (Table 5) 2,845
Cost per PM Peak Hour Trip $1,943
6.1 CREDITS
Credits are adjustments to the base impact fee that a land use would be assessed. Within the
Town of Williston two credits are possible; infrastructure credit and revenue credits.
Infrastructure Credits
Any land use development that physically constructs any project identified in Table 6 is eligible
for a reduction in impact fees, up to the total amount of the impact fee liability. If the cost of the
project exceeds the impact fee liability, the Town has the latitude to allow that credit to offset
future impact fees imposed on the entity that constructed the infrastructure project. The credit is
also applicable even if the project was a condition of the land use development during the
review process. This reduces the perception of double payments and incentivizes development
in areas identified for transportation infrastructure.
Revenue Credits
Revenue credits discount the base impact fee to reduce the chance that a land use
development in the Town would be funding the same capital improvement through two different
funds. This frequently occurs when a land to be developed pays property taxes (prior to the
development of the land and after the development), when a portion of which goes to fund the
capital project that the impact fee contributed toward. In this case, it is necessary to offset the
impact fee by a credit value to eliminate the double payment toward the same capacity. The
credits equal the discounted present value of the stream of tax payments used for those
expenditures.
Impact Fee = (Cost per PM Peak Hour Trip) x (New PM Peak Hour trips) – (Applicable Credits)
17
The Town of Williston’s impact fee is based on the total number of new PM peak hour trips that
will consume transportation capacity. Not all new trips are associated with changes in land use
development – roughly 32% of the new trips are associated with trips that neither originate nor
are destinated for points in Williston. Therefore, $1,768,576, or 32% of the cost of the impact fee
projects will be borne by other, non-impact fee funds – namely the property tax. This equates to
$84,218 annually to be raised by the property tax.
The stream of tax payments is broken into two parts – that which occurs before the land use
development occurs (called past tax payments), and that which occurs after the development
comes onto the grand list (called future tax payments). The past tax payment determines the
amount of tax payments on the raw land made prior to the payment of the impact fee. The future
tax payment accounts for the stream of future tax payments made on the new development
after the impact fee was paid.
Residential Development
Past Tax Payments
The predevelopment tax payments for any given residential development. For example, a
dwelling constructed in 2022 includes tax payments made in years 2019 through 2021. This
stream of payments is converted to the net present value in the year of construction, using a
discount rate of 5%. Table 13 summarizes the value of predevelopment credits for a housing
unit
TABLE 13: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR PREDEVELOPMENT TAX PAYMENTS
DWELLING YEAR
ANNUAL
EXPENSE
TAX RATE
NEEDED
TAX ON
SINGLE
FAMILY UNIT
TAX ON MULTIFAMILY
UNIT
2019 $0 0.000000 $0.00 $0.00
2020 $84,218 0.003968 $1.98 $0.99
2021 $84,218 0.003890 $1.95 $0.97
2022 $84,218 0.003814 $1.91 $0.95
2023 $84,218 0.003739 $1.87 $0.93
2024 $84,218 0.003666 $1.83 $0.92
2025 $84,218 0.003594 $1.80 $0.90
2026 $84,218 0.003523 $1.76 $0.88
2027 $84,218 0.003454 $1.73 $0.86
2028 $84,218 0.003387 $1.69 $0.85
2029 $84,218 0.003320 $1.66 $0.83
2030 $84,218 0.003255 $1.63 $0.81
2031 $84,218 0.003191 $1.60 $0.80
18
2032 $84,218 0.003129 $1.56 $0.78
2033 $84,218 0.003067 $1.53 $0.77
2034 $84,218 0.003007 $1.50 $0.75
2035 $84,218 0.002948 $1.47 $0.74
2036 $84,218 0.002890 $1.45 $0.72
2037 $84,218 0.002890 $1.45 $0.72
2038 $84,218 0.002834 $1.42 $0.71
2039 $84,218 0.002778 $1.39 $0.69
2040 $84,218 0.002724 $1.36 $0.68
Once the dwelling is constructed, it pays annual taxes on its new value as a dwelling (building
and land). A review of the Town’s Grand List data revealed that average assessed value of new
single family detached dwellings is $400,000. New multiple family dwellings, the average
assessed value is $250,000. The Town’s Common Level of Appraisal (CLA) is nearly 1.04 and
therefore the current assessed value is very close to market value.
Table 14 identifies the annual payments for future years from when the dwelling comes onto the
grand list through the end of the programmed expenditures (2040). The credit for the tax
payment is the current value of the future stream of tax payments, assuming a discount rate of
5%.
4 ftp://ftp.act60.tax.state.vt.us/EQ%20STUDY%202018%20CERTIFIED/Williston/
19
TABLE 14: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT TAX PAYMENTS
DWELLING
YEAR
ANNUAL
EXPENSE
TAX RATE
NEEDED TAX ON TAX ON
2019 $0 0.000000 $0.00 $0.00
2020 $84,218 0.003968 $15.87 $9.92
2021 $84,218 0.003890 $15.56 $9.73
2022 $84,218 0.003814 $15.26 $9.53
2023 $84,218 0.003739 $14.96 $9.35
2024 $84,218 0.003666 $14.66 $9.16
2025 $84,218 0.003594 $14.38 $8.98
2026 $84,218 0.003523 $14.09 $8.81
2027 $84,218 0.003454 $13.82 $8.64
2028 $84,218 0.003387 $13.55 $8.47
2029 $84,218 0.003320 $13.28 $8.30
2030 $84,218 0.003255 $13.02 $8.14
2031 $84,218 0.003191 $12.77 $7.98
2032 $84,218 0.003129 $12.52 $7.82
2033 $84,218 0.003067 $12.27 $7.67
2034 $84,218 0.003007 $12.03 $7.52
2035 $84,218 0.002948 $11.79 $7.37
2036 $84,218 0.002890 $11.56 $7.23
2037 $84,218 0.002834 $11.34 $7.08
2038 $84,218 0.002778 $11.11 $6.95
2039 $84,218 0.002724 $10.90 $6.81
2040 $84,218 0.002670 $10.68 $6.68
The net fee charged per unit comprises the base impact fee minus the predevelopment credit
and the post development credit. RSG used the following assumptions to develop the residential
revenue credit analysis:
• Average value of empty residential land per acre = $100,000. Assessed with the input
from town assessor by looking at an array of land values for smaller sites planned for
development as well as more rural and larger sites that could be subdivided in the future.
The higher value provides a protection to the Town by creating a larger credit which
should avoid any chance of double counting the impact fee revenue.
20
• Average annual growth of the grand list is 2%. Derived from a long-run average.
• 2019 Town Grand list value is $2,040,000,000. Taxable value is $20,000,000 (tax rate on
every $100 of value).
Nonresidential Development
The value of impact fee credits for the nonresidential development is split into two categories:
predevelopment and post development. Given the variety of nonresidential construction types,
locations, and overall variation in the value that nonresidential land uses have within the grand
list, the credit mechanism is based not on an average property value, but based on a unit of
$1,000 property value. The predevelopment credit is to be calculated on the assessed value of
the land upon which the development has occurred or will occur. This requires some judgment
in terms of how a fractional use of a parcel is defined for the value of the nonresidential
development. For instance, a five-acre parcel could be 20% for each one-acre subdivision; or,
due to concentration within the five acres, the limited development footprint may be closer to
40%.
TABLE 15: NONRESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR PREDEVELOPMENT TAX PAYMENTS
DWELLING
YEAR
ANNUAL
EXPENSE
TAX RATE
NEEDED
TAX ON
$1,000 OF VALUE
CREDITS PER $1,000 OF
ASSESSED VALUE
2019 $0 0.000000 $0.00 $0.00
2020 $84,218 0.004047 $0.04 $0.00
2021 $84,218 0.003968 $0.04 $0.04
2022 $84,218 0.003890 $0.04 $0.09
2023 $84,218 0.003814 $0.04 $0.13
2024 $84,218 0.003739 $0.04 $0.18
2025 $84,218 0.003666 $0.04 $0.23
2026 $84,218 0.003594 $0.04 $0.28
2027 $84,218 0.003523 $0.04 $0.33
2028 $84,218 0.003454 $0.03 $0.39
2029 $84,218 0.003387 $0.03 $0.45
2030 $84,218 0.003320 $0.03 $0.51
2031 $84,218 0.003255 $0.03 $0.57
2032 $84,218 0.003191 $0.03 $0.64
2033 $84,218 0.003129 $0.03 $0.71
2034 $84,218 0.003067 $0.03 $0.78
2035 $84,218 0.003007 $0.03 $0.85
2036 $84,218 0.002948 $0.03 $0.93
21
2037 $84,218 0.002890 $0.03 $1.01
2038 $84,218 0.002834 $0.03 $1.10
2039 $84,218 0.002778 $0.03 $1.19
2040 $84,218 0.002724 $0.03 $1.28
The post development credit is calculated based on the development value of the structure,
which also uses $1,000 units of value. The credit is developed as a value per $1,000 of
development value. The development value is often included in local development permits and
State Act 250 applications. Table 16 assists in the estimation of development property
assessment values based on different construction methods, building types, and uses. RSG
created the table using an online subscription to RSMeans Square Foot Cost Estimator, which
is available for the Burlington Vermont metropolitan area based on 2017 Q2 data. The estimates
include general contractor and architectural fees, basic site work elements, and structural
building elements. Four generalized types and typical forms of construction often found here in
Vermont are included in this analysis.
22
TABLE 16: 2017 CONSTRUCTION VALUES FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES BY CONSTRUCTION
TYPE (VALUE PER SQUARE FOOT)
Construction Type
Reinforced
Concrete or Steel
Frame
Masonry or
Concrete
Bearing Wall
Wood
Frame
PreFABRICATED
Steel
Accommodation
(hotels, shared and group housing)
$187 $181.50 $145.50 $179.50
Commercial
(office, professional)
$216.50 $203.50 $171.50 $174
Industrial/factory/warehouse $136 $124 -- $99
Educational (K–12) $183 $184.50 -- $154.50
Retail $145 $156 $110 $119
TABLE 17: RESIDENTIAL REVENUE CREDIT FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT TAX PAYMENTS
DWELLING
YEAR
ANNUAL
EXPENSE
TAX RATE
NEEDED
TAX ON
$1,000 OF VALUE
CREDITS PER $1,000 OF
ASSESSED VALUE
2019 $0 0.000000 $0.00 $0.00
2020 $84,218 0.004047 $0.04 $0.43
2021 $84,218 0.003968 $0.04 $0.41
2022 $84,218 0.003890 $0.04 $0.39
2023 $84,218 0.003814 $0.04 $0.37
2024 $84,218 0.003739 $0.04 $0.36
2025 $84,218 0.003666 $0.04 $0.34
2026 $84,218 0.003594 $0.04 $0.32
2027 $84,218 0.003523 $0.04 $0.30
2028 $84,218 0.003454 $0.03 $0.28
2029 $84,218 0.003387 $0.03 $0.27
2030 $84,218 0.003320 $0.03 $0.25
2031 $84,218 0.003255 $0.03 $0.23
2032 $84,218 0.003191 $0.03 $0.21
2033 $84,218 0.003129 $0.03 $0.19
2034 $84,218 0.003067 $0.03 $0.17
2035 $84,218 0.003007 $0.03 $0.14
2036 $84,218 0.002948 $0.03 $0.12
23
2037 $84,218 0.002890 $0.03 $0.10
2038 $84,218 0.002834 $0.03 $0.08
2039 $84,218 0.002778 $0.03 $0.05
2040 $84,218 0.002724 $0.03 $0.03
6.2 FEE PER RESIDENTIAL UNIT
Table 12 summarizes the base cost per PM peak hour trip at $1,943. Non-residential and
residential land use can be assessed on the trip basis determined by a traffic impact study or
other trip generation studies.
To simplify the administration of the impact fees the trip generation for the residential uses can
be summarized by the following table.
TABLE 18: BASE FEE PER RESIDENTIAL UNIT
LAND USE
(ITE LAND USE CODE: #)
COST PER
TRIP
ITE TRIP GENERATION 10TH
EDITION
DURING PM PEAK HOUR
BASE FEE PER UNIT
Single family detached
(ITE LUC: 210)
$1,943 1.00 $1,943
Multifamily attached
(ITE LUC: 221)
$1,943 0.52 $1,010
The net impact fee is the base impact fee (Table 18) minus any revenue credits for new
residential development is shown below in Table 19.
TABLE 19: NET RESIDENTIAL IMPACT FEES FOR TRANSPORTATION CAPITAL EXPENSES
DWELLING
YEAR
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLINGS
Base
Fee
Credit for
Past
taxes
Credit for
Future
taxes
Net
Fee per
Unit
Base
Fee
Credit for
Past
taxes
Credit for
Future
taxes
Net
Fee per
Unit
2019 $1,943.00 $0.00 $165.73 $1,777.27 $1,010.00 $0.00 $103.58 $906.42
2020 $1,943.00 $0.00 $174.02 $1,768.98 $1,010.00 $0.00 $108.76 $901.24
2021 $1,943.00 $2.08 $166.85 $1,774.07 $1,010.00 $1.04 $104.28 $904.68
2022 $1,943.00 $4.23 $159.63 $1,779.14 $1,010.00 $2.11 $99.77 $908.12
2023 $1,943.00 $6.44 $152.36 $1,784.20 $1,010.00 $3.22 $95.22 $911.55
2024 $1,943.00 $8.73 $145.02 $1,789.25 $1,010.00 $4.36 $90.64 $915.00
2025 $1,943.00 $11.09 $137.61 $1,794.30 $1,010.00 $5.54 $86.00 $918.45
2026 $1,943.00 $13.53 $130.11 $1,799.36 $1,010.00 $6.77 $81.32 $921.92
2027 $1,943.00 $16.06 $122.52 $1,804.42 $1,010.00 $8.03 $76.58 $925.39
2028 $1,943.00 $18.67 $114.83 $1,809.50 $1,010.00 $9.34 $71.77 $928.89
2029 $1,943.00 $21.39 $107.03 $1,814.59 $1,010.00 $10.69 $66.89 $932.42
2030 $1,943.00 $24.20 $99.10 $1,819.71 $1,010.00 $12.10 $61.94 $935.97
2031 $1,943.00 $27.12 $91.03 $1,824.85 $1,010.00 $13.56 $56.89 $939.55
2032 $1,943.00 $30.15 $82.82 $1,830.04 $1,010.00 $15.07 $51.76 $943.17
24
2033 $1,943.00 $33.30 $74.44 $1,835.26 $1,010.00 $16.65 $46.53 $946.82
2034 $1,943.00 $36.57 $65.89 $1,840.53 $1,010.00 $18.29 $41.18 $950.53
2035 $1,943.00 $39.98 $57.16 $1,845.86 $1,010.00 $19.99 $35.73 $954.28
2036 $1,943.00 $43.53 $48.23 $1,851.25 $1,010.00 $21.76 $30.14 $958.10
2037 $1,943.00 $47.22 $39.07 $1,856.70 $1,010.00 $23.61 $24.42 $961.97
2038 $1,943.00 $51.10 $29.69 $1,862.21 $1,010.00 $25.55 $18.56 $965.89
2039 $1,943.00 $55.14 $20.06 $1,867.79 $1,010.00 $27.57 $12.54 $969.89
2040 $1,943.00 $59.36 $10.17 $1,873.47 $1,010.00 $29.68 $6.36 $973.96
6.3 NON-RESIDENTIAL FEES
The non-residential land uses do not have the benefit of a summary document like this given the
variety of construction methods and post-construction values.
The steps for non-residential impact fees are:
1. Calculate the number of new trips generated during the PM peak hour.
2. Multiply the number of trips by the cost per trip $1,943 (Table 12) to obtain the base
impact fee.
3. Determine pre-development revenue credits based on the year of development and
value of the property (Table 15).
4. Use Table 16 to multiply the nonresidential value by the future tax credit for occupancy
year.
5. Determine the post-development revenue credits based on the year of development and
value of the development (Table 17).
6. Calculate the final impact fee using Step 2 and subtract Step 3 and Step 4.
25
APPENDIX A. CAPACITY OF INFRASTRUCTURE
PERSON MILES CAPACITY PER MILE
TYPE OF FACILITY
PERSON CAPACITY5
(TARGET V/C RATIO ~.5)
Bicycle Boulevard/cycle track 1,400
Sharrows 150
Bike Lanes 800
Buffered Bike Lanes 1,200
Paved Shoulder 200
Protected Bike Lane 1,320
Shared Use Path 1,250
Road lane (1 lanes) 900
Sidewalk (5 feet wide) 880
Sidewalk (10 feet wide) 1,760
5 NACTO, TRB, HCM 6th Edition
.
180 Battery Street, Suite 350
Burlington, VT 05401
802.383.0118
www.rsginc.com
White River Junction &
Burlington, VT
Arlington, VA Chicago, IL Evansville, IN Portland, OR Salt Lake City, UT San Diego, CA
RSG promotes sustainable business practices that minimize negative impacts on the environment. We
print all proposals and reports on recycled paper that utilizes a minimum of 30% post-consumer waste.
RSG also encourages recycling of printed materials (including this document) whenever practicable.
For more information on RSG’s sustainability practices, please visit www.rsginc.com.