Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.01         Code Adoption (Reserved)
1.04         General Provisions (Reserved)
1.06         Wards
1.08         Elections
1.12         General Penalty—Civil Violations
1.16         Chartering Authority for Public Corporations
1.20         Infraction Procedures

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION (RESERVED)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS (RESERVED)

Chapter 1.06 WARDS

Sections:
1.06.010     Division of city into wards.
1.06.020     First Ward.
1.06.030     Second Ward.
1.06.040     Third Ward.
1.06.050     Fourth Ward.
1.06.060     Fifth Ward.
1.06.070     Sixth Ward.

1.06.010 Division of city into wards.
The City of Aberdeen is divided into six wards, the boundaries of which are designated in the following sections.
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.020 First Ward.
The first ward shall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.030 Second Ward.
The second ward shall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.040 Third Ward.
The third ward shall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.050 Fourth Ward.
The fourth ward s hall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.060 Fifth Ward.
The fifth ward shall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

1.06.070 Sixth Ward.
The sixth ward shall include all of that part of the City of Aberdeen within the boundaries depicted upon the Municipal Ward Map dated March 11, 2002, which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
(Ord. 6332, Added, 09/04/2002)

Chapter 1.08 ELECTIONS

Sections:
1.08.010     Annual general municipal election.
1.08.020     Elected officers—Terms of office.
1.08.030     Conduct of elections.
1.08.040     Public notice of primary election.

1.08.010 Annual general municipal election.
No less than fifteen (15) days prior to the general municipal election held on the first Saturday in December of each year, the mayor and city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the date of such general election, the names of nominees chosen at the previous primary election for the various municipal offices to be filled at the general election and the terms thereof, the propositions, if any, to be submitted to the voters of the city and such other matters as may properly be submitted to the voters of the city at such general election. The city comptroller shall certify a copy of such resolution to the county election board.
(Prior code § 1.16.010)

1.08.020 Elected officers—Terms of office.
The several officers so elected shall, being duly qualified, hold their respective offices, for the terms succeeding, as is provided by the laws of the state of Washington.
(Prior code § 1.16.020)

1.08.030 Conduct of elections.
The primary and general municipal elections shall be held and conducted in the manner pursuant to general law.
(Prior code § 1.16.030)

1.08.040 Public notice of primary election.
Not more than forty-five (45) days and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of any city primary election, the mayor and city council shall adopt a resolution setting forth the date thereof, the respective city offices to be filled and the terms thereof, the propositions, if any, to be submitted to the voters of the city and such other matters as may properly be submitted to the voters of the city at such primary election. The city comptroller shall certify a copy of such resolution to the county election board.
(Prior code § 1.16.040)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY—CIVIL VIOLATIONS

Sections:
1.12.010     Purpose.
1.12.020     Definitions.
1.12.030     Order to correct violation.
1.12.040     Notice of civil violation.
1.12.050     Appeal.
1.12.060     Collection of monetary penalty.
1.12.070     Additional enforcement procedures.
1.12.080     Conflicts.
1.12.090     Meaning of terms.

1.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system to enforce the development regulations of the city, to provide an opportunity for a prompt hearing and decision on alleged violations of these regulations, and to establish monetary penalties for violations.
(Prior code § 1.26.010)

1.12.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:
“Act” means doing or performing something.
“Applicable department director” means:
    1. Fire chief in the case of Chapter 15.60;
    2. Public works director in the case of Title 15 (Building Code) and Title 13 (Utility Code); and
    3. Director of planning and economic development in the case of Title 17 (Zoning).
“Board” means either the building code commission (Chapter 2.32) or the land use hearing examiner (Chapter 2.30).
“Civil violation” means a violation of a provision of a city development regulation for which a monetary penalty may be imposed under this chapter. Each day or portion of a day during which a violation occurs or exists is a separate violation. Traffic infractions pursuant to Title 10 and Shoreline Management pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of this code are specifically excluded from the application of this chapter.
“Development” means the erection, alteration, enlargement, demolition, maintenance or use of any structure or the alteration or use of any land above, at or below ground or water level, and all acts authorized by a city development regulation.
“Development regulation” means and includes the following:
    1. Aberdeen Municipal Code, Title 15 (Building Code), Chapter 15.70 (Fire Code), Title 13 (Utility Code), Title 17 (Zoning and Platting);
    2. All standards, regulations and procedures adopted pursuant to the above; and
    3. The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued pursuant to the above.
“Emergency” means a situation which in the opinion of the applicable department director requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the health or safety of persons or property.
“Omission” means a failure to act.
“Person” includes any natural person, any corporation or any unincorporated association or partnership.
“Violation” means an act or omission contrary to a city development regulation including an act or omission at the same or different location by the same person.
(Ord. 6592 § 2, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 1.26.020)

1.12.030 Order to correct violation.
A. Issuance. Whenever the applicable department director determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, he/she shall pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction, failing which he/she may issue an order to correct violation to the property owner or to any person causing, allowing or participating in the violation.
B. Content. The applicable department director shall include the following in the order to correct violation:
    1. The name and address of the property owner or other person to whom the order to correct violation is directed; and
    2. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and
    3. A description of the violation and a reference to that provision of a city development regulation which has been violated; and
    4. A statement of the action required to be taken to correct the violation as determined by the applicable department director and a date or time by which correction is to be completed; and
    5. A statement that a monetary penalty in an amount per day for each violation as specified by Section 1.12.040(E) shall be assessed against the person to whom the order to correct violation is directed for each and every day, or portion of a day, on which the violation continues following the date set for correction.
C. Service of Order. The applicable department director shall serve the order to correct violation upon the person to whom it is directed, either personally or by mailing a copy of the order to correct violation by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to such person at his/her last known address or by posting a copy of the order to correct violation conspicuously on the affected property or structure. Proof of service shall be made at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service and the manner by which service was made.
D. Extension. Upon written request received prior to the correction date or time, the applicable department director may extend the date set for correction for good cause. The applicable department director may consider substantial completion of the necessary correction or unforeseeable circumstances which render completion impossible by the date established as good cause.
(Prior code § 1.26.030)

1.12.040 Notice of civil violation.
A. General. Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct violation, the applicable department director shall determine whether such correction has been completed.
B. Issuance. 
    1. If the required correction has not been completed by the correction date or time as specified in the order to correct violation, the applicable department director may issue a notice of civil violation to each person to whom an order to correct violation was directed.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.12.030, the applicable department director may issue a notice of civil violation without having issued an order to correct violation where an emergency exists or when a repeated violation occurs.
C. Content. The applicable department director shall include the following in the notice of civil violation:
    1. The name and address of the property owner or other persons to whom the notice of civil violation is directed; and
    2. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and
    3. A description of the violation and a reference to that provision of a city development regulation which has been violated; and
    4. A statement that the monetary penalty in the amount per day for each violation as specified in Section 1.12.040(E) is assessed against the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed for each and every day, or portion thereof during which the violation continues beyond the date and time established for correction in the order to correction violation; and
    5. A statement that the person to whom the notice of civil violation was directed must complete correction of the violation and may pay the monetary penalty imposed to the city clerk or may appeal the notice of civil violation as provided in Section 1.12.050.
D. Service of Notice. The applicable department director shall serve the notice of civil violation upon the person to whom it is directed, either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice of civil violation by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to such person at his/her last known address or by posting the notice of civil violation conspicuously on the affected property or structure. The person who effected personal service shall make proof of service at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury declaring the time and date and the manner in which service was made.
E. Monetary Penalty. The amount of the monetary per day or portion thereof for each violation is as follows:
    1. First violation, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
    2. Second violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00);
    3. Third violation, three hundred dollars ($300.00);
    4. Additional violations in excess of three, five hundred dollars ($500.00).
F. Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve a person of the duty to correct the violation as ordered by the applicable department director.
(Prior code § 1.26.040)

1.12.050 Appeal.
A. General. A person to whom a notice of civil violation is directed may appeal the notice of civil violation including to the building code commission in the case of violations of Titles 13 and 15 and the hearing examiner in the case of violations of Title 17. A person to whom a notice of civil violation is directed may not appeal the amount of the monetary penalty imposed.
B. How to Appeal. A person may appeal the notice of civil violation by filing a written notice of appeal with the public works director in the case of violations of Titles 13 and 15 and the director of planning and economic development in the case of violations of Title 17, within seven calendar days from the date of service of the notice of civil infraction.
C. Monetary Penalty. The monetary penalty for a continuing violation does not accrue during the pendency of the appeal unless the appeal is found to be frivolous or intended solely to delay compliance.
D. Hearing. 
    1. Notice. Notice of the hearing before the board shall be given to the appellant ten calendar days before such hearing.
    2. Procedure. The board shall conduct a hearing on the appeal pursuant to the rules of procedure of the board. The city and the appellant may participate as parties in the hearing and each may call witnesses. The city shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred.
    3. Action of Board. 
        a. The board shall determine whether the city has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred.
        b. The board shall consider the following in making its determination:
            (i) Whether the intent of the appeal was to delay compliance; or
            (ii) Whether the appeal is frivolous; or
            (iii) Whether there was a written contract or agreement with another party which specified the securing by the other party of the applicable permit or approval from the city; or
            (iv) Whether the appellant exercised reasonable and timely effort to comply with applicable development regulations; or
            (v) Any other relevant factors.
    4. Notice of Decision. The board shall mail a copy of its decision to the appellant.
E. Appeal to Superior Court. An appeal of the decision of the board must be filed with Superior Court within twenty-one calendar days of the date of mailing of the decision of the board to the appellant or is thereafter barred.
(Ord. 6592 § 3, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6503, Amended, 08/25/2010. Prior code § 1.26.050)

1.12.060 Collection of monetary penalty.
A. The monetary penalty constitutes a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed. Any monetary penalty assessed must be paid to the city clerk within seven calendar days from the date of service of notice of civil violation or, if an appeal was filed pursuant to Section 1.12.050 within seven calendar days of the board's decision.
B. The corporation counsel, on behalf of the city, is authorized to collect the monetary penalty by use of appropriate legal remedies, the seeking a granting of which shall neither stay nor terminate the accrual of additional per diem monetary penalties so long as the violation continues.
(Prior code § 1.26.060)

1.12.070 Additional enforcement procedures.
The provisions of this chapter may be used in addition to other enforcement provisions authorized by this code including criminal prosecutions except as precluded by law.
(Prior code § 1.26.070)

1.12.080 Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other provision of this code or city ordinance providing for a civil penalty, this chapter shall control.
(Prior code § 1.26.090)

1.12.090 Meaning of terms.
Whenever the terms "civil infraction" and "civil penalty" are used in any code, ordinance or regulation of the city, those terms shall be deemed to have the same meaning as the terms "civil violation" and "monetary penalty," respectively, as used in this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.26.100)

Chapter 1.16 CHARTERING AUTHORITY FOR PUBLIC CORPORATIONS

Sections:
1.16.010     Authorization.
1.16.020     Definitions.
1.16.030     Powers—Generally.
1.16.040     Limitation of powers.
1.16.050     Corporate structure.
1.16.060     Application for Charter.
1.16.070     Charter contents.
1.16.080     Review of application.
1.16.090     Issuance of Charter.
1.16.100     Effect of issuance of Charter.
1.16.110     Organizational meeting.
1.16.120     Corporate name.
1.16.130     Membership.
1.16.140     Board review and concurrence.
1.16.150     Membership concurrence.
1.16.160     Bylaws.
1.16.170     Proposing Charter amendments.
1.16.180     Code of ethics—Conflict of interest.
1.16.190     Discrimination prohibited.
1.16.200     Composition of the board.
1.16.210     Access to records.
1.16.220     Meetings of the board.
1.16.230     Meetings of the membership.
1.16.240     Quorum and concurrence.
1.16.250     Tenure in office.
1.16.260     Deposit of public funds.
1.16.270     Establishment and maintenance of office and records.
1.16.280     Reports and information.
1.16.290     Audits and inspections.
1.16.300     Charter amendments.
1.16.310     Board removal.
1.16.320     Trusteeship.
1.16.330     Dissolution.
1.16.340     Dissolution—Statement.
1.16.350     Dissolution—Disposition of assets.
1.16.360     Insurance.
1.16.370     Unauthorized representation.
1.16.380     Ancillary authority.
1.16.390     Construction.

1.16.010 Authorization.
The city authorizes the establishment and chartering of one or more public corporations, commissions and/or authorities (in this chapter called "public corporations"), each as an independent legal entity, to conduct activities as provided in RCW 35.21.730 through 35.21.755.
(Prior code § 1.98.010)

1.16.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless context requires otherwise, the following definitions will apply:
"Board" or "board of directors" means the group of persons vested with the management of the affairs of the public corporation, irrespective of the name by which such group is designated. It includes, but is not limited to, such designations as "board of directors," "board," "trustees," "managers," "directorate," "commission" or "council."
"Bonds" means any bonds, promissory notes, interim certificates, debentures, certificates of indebtedness or other obligations issued by the public corporation pursuant to its charter and this chapter.
"Bylaws" means the code or codes of rules adopted for the regulation or management of the affairs of the public corporation irrespective of the name or names by which such bylaws are designated.
"Charter" means the articles of organization of the public corporation irrespective of the name applied thereto and all amendments thereto.
"City" means the city of Aberdeen.
"City finance director" means the city finance director or a person authorized to act on his or her behalf; and in the event of reorganization of the office of city finance director, the successor official performing such duties or a person authorized to act on his or her behalf.
"City council" means the legislative body of the city.
"Corporate" shall refer or pertain to a public corporation.
"Corporate official" means members of the board of directors and such employees as the board shall designate.
"Director" means a member of the board of directors.
"Immediate family" means: a spouse; any dependent parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or any parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sibling, uncle, aunt, cousin, niece or nephew residing in the household of a corporate official or employee.
"Insolvent" or "insolvency" means an inability of a public corporation to pay debts as they become due in the usual course of its affairs.
"Mayor" means the mayor of the city of Aberdeen.
"Membership" means the class of persons entitled to participate (whether in a voting or advisory capacity) in the internal processes of the public corporation in accordance with its charter or bylaws.
"Member" means a member of the membership.
"Public corporation" shall mean a corporation, commission, or authority organized under this chapter.
"Real property" includes all lands, including improvements and fixtures thereon and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith, and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms for years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise and the indebtedness secured by such liens.
"Resolution" means an action of the board with the quorum required in Section 1.16.240.
"State" shall mean the state of Washington.
"Voting membership" means the total number of voting positions on the board authorized by the charter, whether filled or vacant.
(Prior code § 1.98.020)

1.16.030 Powers—Generally.
Except as otherwise limited by the State Constitution, the City Charter, this chapter, or the charter of the public corporation, a public corporation shall have and exercise all lawful powers necessary or convenient to effect the purposes for which the public corporation is organized and to perform authorized corporate functions, including, without limitations, the power to:
1. Own and sell real and personal property;
2. Contract for any corporate purpose with the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, and with individuals, associations and corporations;
3. Sue and be sued in its name;
4. Lend and borrow money;
5. Do anything a natural person may do;
6. Perform all manner and type of community services and activities;
7. Provide and implement such municipal services and functions as the city council may by ordinance direct;
8. Transfer any funds, real or personal property, property interests, or services;
9. Receive and administer federal or private funds, goods, or services for any lawful public purpose;
10. Purchase, lease, exchange, mortgage, encumber, improve, use, or otherwise transfer or grant security interests in real or personal property or any interests therein; grant or acquire options on real and personal property; and contract regarding the income or receipts from real property;
11. Issue negotiable bonds and notes in conformity with applicable provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code and state law in such principal amounts, as in the discretion of the public corporation, shall be necessary or appropriate to provide sufficient funds for achieving any corporate purposes; or to secure financial assistance, including funds from the United States, a state, or any political subdivision or agency of either for corporate projects and activities; provided, however, that all bonds and notes or liabilities occurring thereunder shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets, properties or credit of such public corporation, and no creditor or other person shall have any recourse to the assets, credit or services of the city thereby, unless the city council shall by resolution expressly guarantee such bonds or notes;
12. Contract for, lease, and accept transfers, gifts or loans of funds or property from the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, including property acquired by any such governmental unit through the exercise of its power of eminent domain, and from corporations, associations, individuals or any other source, and to comply with the terms and conditions therefor;
13. Manage, on behalf of the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, any property acquired by such entity through gift, purchase, construction, lease, assignment, default, or exercise of the power of eminent domain;
14. Recommend to appropriate governmental authorities public improvements and expenditures in areas of the city in which the public corporation by its charter has a particular responsibility;
15. Recommend to the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either any property which, if committed or transferred to the public corporation, would materially advance the public purpose for which the public corporation is chartered;
16. Initiate, carry out, and complete such improvements of benefit to the public consistent with its charter as the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either may request;
17. Recommend to the United states, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either such tax, financing, and security measures as the public corporation may deem appropriate to maximize the public interest in areas of the city in which the public corporation by its charter has a particular responsibility;
18. Lend its funds, property, credit or services for corporate purposes, or act as a surety or guarantor for corporate purposes;
19. Provide advisory, consultative, training, educational, and community services or advice to individuals, associations, corporations, or governmental agencies, with or without charge;
20. Control the use and disposition of corporate property, assets, and credit;
21. Invest and reinvest its funds;
22. Fix and collect charges for services rendered or to be rendered, and establish the consideration for property transferred;
23. Sponsor, lease, manage, construct, own, or otherwise participate in housing projects, where such activity furthers the purpose for which the public corporation is chartered;
24. Maintain books and records as appropriate for the conduct of its affairs;
25. Conduct corporate affairs, carry on its operations, and use its property as allowed by law and consistent with this chapter, its charter and its bylaws; name corporate officials, designate agents, and engage employees, prescribing their duties, qualifications, and compensation; and secure the services of consultants for professional services, technical assistance, or advice;
26. Identify and recommend to the United States, a state, and any political subdivision or agency of either, the acquisition by the appropriate governmental entity; for transfer to or use by the public corporation; of property and property rights, which, if so acquired, whether through purchase or the exercise of eminent domain, and so transferred or used, would materially advance the purpose for which the public corporation is chartered; and exercise and enjoy such powers as may be authorized by law.
(Prior code § 1.98.040)

1.16.040 Limitation of powers.
A public corporation, organized under this chapter, in all activities and transactions shall be limited in the following respects:
A. A public corporation shall have no power of eminent domain nor any power to levy taxes or special assessments;
B. A public corporation may not incur or create any liability that permits recourse by any contracting party or member of the public to any assets, services, resources, or credit of the city;
C. No funds, assets, or property of any public corporation shall be used for any partisan political activity or to further the election or defeat of any candidate for public office; nor shall any funds or a substantial part of the activities of any public corporation be used for publicity or educational purposes designed to support or defeat legislation pending before the Congress of the United States, or the legislature of the state or the city council; provided, however, that funds may be used for representatives of a public corporation to communicate with members of Congress, state legislators or city council members concerning funding and other matters directly affecting the public corporation, so long as such activities do not constitute a substantial part of the corporation's activities and unless such activities are specifically limited in its charter;
D. All funds, assets, or credit of the public corporation shall be applied toward or expended upon services, projects, and activities authorized by its charter. No part of the net earnings of a public corporation shall inure to the benefit of, or be distributable as such to, the board members, officers of a public corporation or other private persons, except that a public corporation is authorized and empowered to:
    1. Compensate corporate officials and others performing services for the public corporation a reasonable amount for services rendered, and reimburse reasonable expenses actually incurred in performing their duties;
    2. Assist corporate officials as members of a general class of persons to be assisted by a corporate approved project or activity to the same extent as other members of the class as long as no special privileges or treatment accrues to such corporate official by reason of his or her status or position in the public corporation;
    3. Defend and indemnify any current or former board member or employee and their successors against all costs, expenses, judgments, and liabilities, including attorneys' fees, reasonably incurred by or imposed upon him or her in connection with or resulting from any claim, action, or proceeding, civil or criminal, in which he or she is or may be made a party by reason of being or having been a corporate official, or by reason of any action alleged to have been taken or omitted by him or her as such official, provided that he or she was acting in good faith on behalf of the public corporation and within the scope of duties imposed or authorized by law. This power of indemnification shall not be exclusive of other rights to which corporate officials may be entitled as a matter of law;
    4. Purchase insurance to protect and hold personally harmless any of its officials (including its employees and agents) from any action, claim, or proceeding instituted against the foregoing individuals arising out of the performance, in good faith, of duties for, or employment with, the public corporation and to hold these individuals harmless from any expenses connected with the defense, settlement, or monetary judgments from such actions, claims, or proceedings. The purchase of such insurance and its policy limits shall be discretionary with the board, and such insurance shall not be considered to be compensation to the insured individuals. The powers conferred by this subsection shall not be exclusive of any other powers conferred by law to purchase liability insurance; and
    5. Sell assets for a consideration greater than their reasonable market value or acquisition costs, charge more for services than the expense of providing them, or otherwise secure an increment in a transaction, or carry out any other transaction or activity, as long as such gain is not the object or purpose of the public corporation's transactions or activities and is applied to or expended upon services, projects, and activities as aforesaid.
E. A public corporation organized under this chapter shall not issue shares of stock, pay dividends, make private distribution of assets, make loans to its board members or employees or otherwise engage in business for private gain.
(Prior code § 1.98.040)

1.16.050 Corporate structure.
A. A public corporation shall have two or more corporate officers. The corporate officers shall manage the daily affairs and operations of the public corporation. If the charter so provides, corporate officers may be members of the board. The same persons shall not occupy both the chief executive office of the corporation and the office responsible for the custody of funds and maintenance of accounts and finances.
B. Unless the charter provides otherwise, the chief executive officer shall be the agent of the public corporation for service of process; the bylaws may designate additional corporate officers as agents to receive or initiate process.
C. The board shall oversee the activities of corporate officers, establish and/or implement policy, and participate in corporate activities to the extent provided by Section 1.16.140, its charter and bylaws.
(Prior code § 1.98.050)

1.16.060 Application for Charter.
A. To initiate proceedings to charter a public corporation under this chapter, any person or group of persons shall apply in duplicate to the city finance director therefor. The application shall set forth:
    1. The charter requested;
    2. The proposed initial bylaws;
    3. The name, occupation, place of employment, business and home addresses and business and home telephone numbers of persons nominated as the initial board members;
    4. The funds and other assets necessary to undertake the activities or functions contemplated within the coming year; the anticipated sources of such funds and assets; a projected first-year operating budget; and any other supporting data the applicants deem appropriate and necessary to evaluate their application; and
    5. The name and address of each applicant. The applicant(s) may amend, correct or supplement the application during review and processing thereof. No applicant shall be an official or employee of the city.
B. One copy of the application shall be filed with the city finance director as a public record open to public inspection and one copy shall be forwarded to a responsible city official designated by the mayor. To allow for public inspection and review, at least thirty (30) days shall elapse between filing of an application and issuance of a charter.
(Prior code § 1.98.060)

1.16.070 Charter contents.
A. The Charter shall set forth the following.
    1. The name of the public corporation;
    2. The period of duration of the public corporation, which may be perpetual or for a fixed period;
    3. This statement in a prominent place:(Name of Public Corporation) is organized pursuant to Aberdeen Municipal Code Chapter 1.16 and RCW 35.21.730-.755. RCW 35.21.750 provides as follows:
    "[A]ll liabilities incurred by such public corporation, commission, or authority shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets and properties of such public corporation, commission, or authority and no creditor or other person shall have any right of action against the city, town, or county creating such corporation, commission, or authority on account of any debts, obligations or liabilities of such public corporation, commission, or authority."
    4. The purpose or purposes of the public corporation;
    5. The composition of the board;
    6. The composition of the membership, if any;
    7. Any provisions, not inconsistent with law, which the applicants elect to set forth in the Charter for the regulation of the internal affairs of the public corporation.
B. The Charter shall require that any corporate official responsible for accounts and finances shall file with the public corporation a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the public corporation to be adequate and appropriate, and may hold the corporate office only as long as such a bond continues in effect.
(Prior code § 1.98.070)

1.16.080 Review of application.
The mayor's designee shall review all applications for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and RCW 35.21.730-.755 and shall refer to the mayor his or her findings and recommendations with respect to:
A. Approval of, denial of, or modifications to the proposed charter or the proposed initial bylaws for compliance with this chapter and state law, and for furtherance of the best interests of the city; and
B. Qualifications of the initial board members.
(Prior code § 1.98.080)

1.16.090 Issuance of Charter.
A. The mayor, in his or her discretion, shall issue a Charter:
    1. Upon his or her concurrence in affirmative findings and favorable recommendations by his or her designee; or
    2. Upon acceptance by the applicants of changes, revisions, modifications, conditions, restrictions or contingencies suggested by the mayor; or
    3. Upon satisfactory resolution of differences between the applicant and the mayor.
B. A Charter establishing a public corporation shall be issued in duplicate originals, each signed by the mayor and bearing the city seal attested by the city finance director. One original shall be retained by the city finance director and filed as a public record, and a duplicate original shall be delivered to the applicant(s). The city finance director shall give notice of the issuance of the charter to the Secretary of State and furnish a copy of the charter and this Chapter upon request therefor.
(Prior code § 1.98.090)

1.16.100 Effect of issuance of Charter.
The public corporation shall commence its existence effective upon filing of its Charter as issued and attested, unless a different time be specified therein. Except as against the state or the city in a proceeding to cancel or revoke the Charter, or to compel compliance with a representation made in the application, filing of an original Charter and delivery of a duplicate original Charter shall conclusively indicate that all conditions precedent have been fulfilled and that the public corporation has been established in compliance with the procedures of this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.98.100)

1.16.110 Organizational meeting.
Upon issuance of the Charter, the applicant(s) shall call an organizational meeting of the persons nominated as board members in the application as approved within thirty (30) days, giving at least ten days advance written notice to each, unless waived in writing; provided, that the organizational meeting may be postponed to a more appropriate time when the Charter provides for a corporate existence contingent on certain events or occurrences or commencing at a future time. At such meeting, the board shall organize itself, may appoint interim officers and nonvoting members of the board to serve until the selection processes provided in or by the Charter be complied with, select the temporary place of business, and assist in organizing the membership, if any.
(Prior code § 1.98.110)

1.16.120 Corporate name.
The corporate name shall not:
A. End with "incorporated," "company," or "corporation" or any abbreviation thereof or use the term "grange," "bank," "banking," "trust," or "savings" therein, or any combination of words that are restricted from its usage by state law; and
B. Adopt or appear deceptively similar to the name of any corporation, existing or organized under the laws of the state or authorized to transact business or conduct affairs in the state, or a corporate name reserved or registered as permitted by the laws of the state.
(Prior code § 1.98.120)

1.16.130 Membership.
A. A public corporation may have one or more classes of members or may have no members, as set forth in the charter. If a membership be provided, the board or a committee thereof shall report to the membership at a meeting held at least once a year and receive such advice, counsel or directions as the Charter shall designate.
B. If no membership be provided, the board or a committee thereof shall hold a public meeting at least once a year to report on public corporation activities and receive public comment thereon. Notice of such meetings shall be given in the same manner as that required for membership meetings.
(Prior code § 1.98.130)

1.16.140 Board review and concurrence.
A. At least quarterly, the board shall review monthly statements of income and expenses which compare budgeted expenditures to actual expenditures. Boards of public corporations with annual operating budgets in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall also review, at least quarterly, balance sheets and statements of changes in their financial position for the previous three months. Boards shall review all such information at regular meetings, the minutes of which shall specifically note such reviews and include such information.
B. General or particular authorization or review and concurrence of the board by resolution shall be necessary for any of the following transactions:
    1. Transfer or conveyance of an interest in real estate other than release of a lien or satisfaction of a mortgage after payment has been received and the execution of a lease for a current term less than one year;
    2. The contracting of debts, issuances of notes, debentures, or bonds, and the mortgaging or pledging of corporate assets to secure the same;
    3. The donation of money, property or other assets belonging to the public corporation;
    4. An action by the public corporation as a surety or guarantor;
    5. All capital expenditures in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and all other transactions in which:
        a. The consideration exchanged or received by the public corporation exceeds the greater of one percent of the previous year's operating budget or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00);
        b. The performance by the public corporation shall extend over a period of one year from the date of execution of an agreement therefor; or
        c. The public corporation assumes duties to the city, the state, the United States or other governmental entity;
    6. Any project or activity outside the limits of the city;
    7. Adoption of an annual budget and a separate capital budget;
    8. Certification of annual reports and statements to be filed with the city finance director as true and correct in the opinion of the board and of its members except as noted;
    9. Proposed amendments to the Charter and bylaws; and
    10. Such other transactions, duties, and responsibilities as the charter shall repose in the board or require board participation by resolution.
(Prior code § 1.98.140)

1.16.150 Membership concurrence.
If the Charter provides for a membership, it may require membership concurrence over certain matters as provided in its Charter or bylaws.
(Prior code § 1.98.150)

1.16.160 Bylaws.
A. The initial bylaws of a public corporation shall be adopted by its initial board and shall be submitted with its application for Charter. The power to alter, amend, or repeal the bylaws or adopt new ones shall be vested in the board unless otherwise provided in the Charter or the bylaws. The bylaws may contain any provisions for the regulation and management of the affairs of a public corporation not inconsistent with law or the Charter.
B. Amendments to the bylaws shall not take effect until ten days after filing of the same with the city finance director, unless such amendment(s) shall have been passed by unanimous vote of the board and the membership (if any and if affected by the amendment), and an earlier effective date be set.
(Prior code § 1.98.160)

1.16.170 Proposing Charter amendments.
A. A public corporation may propose to the mayor that its charter be amended by resolution of its board passed by a procedure outlined in its Charter and in conformity with Section 1.16.240 at a regular or special meeting of which thirty (30) days advance written notice was given; and where concurrence of the membership, if any, be required by the Charter, by approval of the membership through either written ballots by mail or a vote of members at a regular or special meeting at which consideration of the proposed amendment was scheduled and thirty (30) days advance written notice given.
B. Information regarding a proposed Charter amendment shall be provided to members of the board and to members, if any, two weeks prior to the meeting at which a vote will be taken and shall include the proposed amendment and a statement of its purpose and effect. If the membership is larger than one hundred (100) persons, the information to be provided to the members need only be a summary of the proposed amendment and a summary of its purpose and effect. A copy of the proposed amendment and statement of its purpose and effect shall be available for public inspection at the public corporation offices two weeks prior to the meeting at which a vote will be taken.
(Prior code § 1.98.170)

1.16.180 Code of ethics—Conflict of interest.
A. Except as provided in this section, a board member or employee of a public corporation may not participate in a decision of the public corporation in which that person or a member of that person's immediate family has a financial interest unless the financial interest is a remote financial interest and participation is approved under subsection (B) of this section.
B. A board member or employee may participate in a decision if that person or a member of that person's immediate family has only a remote financial interest, the fact and extent of the interest is disclosed to the board in a public meeting and is noted in the minutes of the board before any participation by the member in the decision, and thereafter in a public meeting the board by vote authorizes or approves the participation. If the person whose participation is under consideration is a board member, that person may not vote under this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, "remote financial interest" means:
    1. That of a nonsalaried officer of a nonprofit corporation;
    2. That of an employee or agent of a contracting party where the compensation of the employee or agent consists entirely of fixed wages or salary and the contract is awarded by bid or by other competitive process;
    3. That of a landlord or tenant of a contracting party, except in cases where the property subject to the lease or sublease is owned or managed by the public corporation;
    4. That of a holder of less than one percent of the shares of the corporation or cooperative that is the contracting party;
    5. That of an owner of a savings and loan or bank savings or share account or credit union deposit account if the interest represented by the account is less than two percent of the total deposits held by the institution; or
    6. Other interests that are defined as remote by bylaws adopted by the public corporation.
C. A board member or employee is not considered to be financially interested in a decision when the decision could not affect that person in a manner different from its effect on the public.
D. The board may adopt additional conflict of interest and ethical rules it considers appropriate.
E. For purposes of this section, "participate in a decision" includes all discussions, deliberations, preliminary negotiations, and votes.
F. The board may recommend to the city council the removal of a board member who intentionally violates this section or a rule adopted hereunder. In addition, violation of any provision of this section constitutes an infraction for which a monetary fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), may be assessed by Aberdeen Municipal Court or another court of competent jurisdiction. Violation may be proven by a preponderance of evidence and need not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
(Prior code § 1.98.180)

1.16.190 Discrimination prohibited.
A. Neither board membership nor any general membership may directly or indirectly be based upon or limited by age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, or the presence of any physical handicap.
B. To ensure equality of employment opportunity, the public corporation shall not discriminate in any matter related to employment because of age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, or the presence of any physical handicap. The public corporation shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the public corporation, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, or the presence of any physical handicap.
(Prior code § 1.98.190)

1.16.200 Composition of the board.
A. The board shall have three or more members. No term of a position on the board shall exceed four years. If no duration of term be provided by the Charter, the term of a position on the board shall be three years.
B. All appointments to the board shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
(Prior code § 1.98.200)

1.16.210 Access to records.
A public corporation shall keep an official journal containing the minutes of proceedings at all meetings of the board and any meetings of any membership and the resolutions of the board.
B. Any person shall have access to records and information of the public corporation to the extent required by state law.
(Prior code § 1.98.210)

1.16.220 Meetings of the board.
A. The board shall meet at least eight times each year; special meetings of the board may be called as provided by the Charter, the bylaws or RCW 42.30.010 et seq.
B. The board of a public corporation shall be the governing body of a public agency as defined in RCW 42.30.020, and all meetings of the board shall be held and conducted in accordance with RCW 42.30.010 et seq.
C. All board meetings, including executive, all other permanent and ad hoc committee meetings and membership meetings shall be open to the public, to the extent required by RCW 42.30.010 et seq. The board and committees may hold executive sessions to consider matters enumerated in RCW 42.30.010 et seq., or privileged matters recognized by law, and shall enter the cause therefor upon its official journal.
(Prior code § 1.98.220)

1.16.230 Meetings of the membership.
A. Meetings of the membership, if any, shall be held at least once a year or at more frequent intervals as provided in the Charter. Special meetings of the membership, if any, may be called by the board or by petition of the members as provided by the Charter or the bylaws.
B. Notice of any membership meeting, stating the place, day and hour, shall be mailed to members entitled to be present at least ten days and not more than thirty (30) days before the meeting, provided that, notice may be made by publication of notice for three days in a newspaper of general circulation in the area together with posting in a prominent place in the public corporation's offices.
(Prior code § 1.98.230)

1.16.240 Quorum and concurrence.
A. The Charter or bylaws shall establish the requirements for a quorum, The act of a majority of the board present at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board; provided, however, that:
    1. A quorum to commence a board meeting shall be no fewer than a majority of the board's total voting membership.
    2. Any resolution authorizing or approving an action described in Section 1.16.140 shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the board members voting on the issue, provided that such majority equals not less than one-third of the board's total voting membership.
B. Where the Charter provides for concurrence of the membership, such concurrence shall require an affirmative vote representing a majority of the members voting on the issue and at least (1) twenty (20) percent of any membership comprising less than one hundred (100) persons, or (2) ten percent of any membership comprising one hundred (100) persons or more.
(Prior code § 1.98.240)

1.16.250 Tenure in office.
A. A board member shall serve for the term designated and until his or her successor shall have been elected or appointed and qualified.
B. Any board member may be removed from any corporate office or position in such manner as the charter or bylaws shall prescribe. Upon removal from an office or position or upon the abrogation or extinction thereof, such board member shall have no power of office.
(Prior code § 1.98.250)

1.16.260 Deposit of public funds.
All moneys belonging to or collected for the use of the public corporation, coming into the hands of any corporate official or officer thereof, shall be deposited in a qualified public depositary as determined by the Washington Public Deposit Protection Commission.
(Prior code § 1.98.260)

1.16.270 Establishment and maintenance of office and records.
The public corporation shall:
A. Maintain a principal office at a location within the limits of the city;
B. File and maintain with the city finance director a current listing of all corporate officials, their positions and their home addresses, their business and home phone numbers, the address of its principal office and of all other offices used by it, and a current set of its bylaws; and
C. Maintain all of its records in a manner consistent with the Preservation and Destruction of Public Records Act, RCW Chapter 40.14.
(Prior code § 1.98.270)

1.16.280 Reports and information.
The public corporation shall within three months after the end of its fiscal year, file an annual report with the city finance director, the city council and the mayor's designee containing a certified statement of assets and liabilities, income and expenditures and changes in its financial position during the previous year; a summary of significant accomplishments; a list of depositaries used; a projected operation budget for the current fiscal year; a summary of projects and activities to be undertaken during the current year; a list of corporate officials; and a list of corporate officials bonded pursuant to Section 1.16.070.
(Prior code § 1.98.280)

1.16.290 Audits and inspections.
The public corporation shall, at any time during normal business hours and as often as the mayor, the city finance director or the state auditor deem necessary, make available to the mayor, the city finance director and the state auditor for examination all of its financial records, and shall permit the mayor, city finance director and state auditor to audit, examine and make excerpts or transcripts from such records, and to make audits of all contracts, invoices, materials, payrolls, records of personnel, conditions of employment and other data relating to all the aforesaid matters.
(Prior code § 1.98.290)

1.16.300 Charter amendments.
A. After adoption of a proposed Charter amendment, a public corporation shall file two complete copies of the Charter with the mayor. One copy shall be in a format that strikes over material to be deleted and underlines new material. The mayor may approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. If the mayor approves the proposed amendment, he or she shall cause to be issued duplicate originals of the revised charter, each signed by the mayor and bearing the city seal attested by the city finance director. One original and the underlined and overstricken copy shall be retained by the city finance director as a public record and the other original shall be delivered to the public corporation. A charter amendment proposed by a public corporation shall take effect and become a part of the charter upon the filing of the mayor's approval with the city finance director.
B. When required by law, each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall propose to the mayor an amendment to the public corporation's Charter that will conform with said law. Any membership approval shall not be required for any proposed Charter amendment required by law.
(Prior code § 1.98.300)

1.16.310 Board removal.
If it is determined for any reason that any or all of the board members should be removed from office, after a full public hearing, and after selection of appropriate replacements by the mayor and city council pursuant to this section, the mayor and city council may by ordinance remove any or all voting board members from office. The term of any board member removed pursuant to this section shall expire when the member receives a copy of the ordinance removing him or her from office and a letter signed by the mayor advising him or her that he or she has been removed pursuant to this section. Any person appointed to the board pursuant to this section shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council in the same way other persons appointed to positions requiring city council approval are appointed and confirmed. The term of any person appointed and confirmed pursuant to this section shall begin at the expiration of the term of the person being replaced and shall continue until the regular expiration of the term of the position being filled.
(Prior code § 1.98.310)

1.16.320 Trusteeship.
A. If it is determined for any reason that a trusteeship should be imposed over a public corporation organized pursuant to this chapter, the city, by resolution of the city council, after a public hearing held with notice to the public corporation, may petition the superior court to impose a trusteeship over the public corporation and to appoint the trustees therefor.
B. The trustees appointed by the superior court shall take such actions as necessary during the trusteeship to achieve the object thereof as reasonable. The trustees shall have the power and authority to reorganize the public corporation and recommend amendment of its Charter and/or its bylaws; suspend and/or remove corporate officials, and manage the assets and affairs of the public corporation; and exercise any and all corporate powers as necessary or appropriate to fulfill outstanding agreements, to restore the capability of the public corporation, to perform the functions and activities for which it is chartered, to reinstate its credit or credibility with its creditors or obligees, and, if so authorized by the superior court, to oversee its dissolution.
(Prior code § 1.98.320)

1.16.330 Dissolution.
If the city council makes an affirmative finding that dissolution is warranted for any reason, the existence of a public corporation may be terminated by resolution of the city council at or after a public hearing, held with notice to the public corporation and affording it a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence.
(Prior code § 1.98.330)

1.16.340 Dissolution—Statement.
A. Upon enactment of a resolution by the city council for dissolution of the public corporation or by the public corporation for its own dissolution, the public corporation shall file a dissolution statement signed by its chief executive officer setting forth:
    1. The name and principal office of the public corporation;
    2. The debts, obligations and liabilities of the public corporation, and the property and assets available to satisfy the same; the provisions to be made for satisfaction of outstanding liabilities and performance of executory contracts, and the estimated time for completion of its dissolution;
    3. Any pending litigation or contingent liabilities;
    4. The board resolution providing for such dissolution and the date(s) and proceedings leading toward its adoption, whenever the dissolution be voluntary; and
    5. A list of persons to be notified upon completion of dissolution.
B. The mayor shall review the statement filed and oversee the dissolution to protect the public interest and prevent impairment of obligation, or if so authorized by law, authorize or initiate proceedings in the superior court for the appointment and supervision of a receiver for such purposes. Upon satisfactory completion of dissolution proceedings, the mayor shall indicate such dissolution by inscription of "charter cancelled" on the original Charter of the public corporation, on file with the city finance director and, when available, on the duplicate original of the public corporation, and the existence of the public corporation shall cease. The city finance director shall give notice thereof to the secretary of state and other persons requested by the public corporation in its dissolution statement.
(Prior code § 1.98.340)

1.16.350 Dissolution—Disposition of assets.
Upon dissolution of a public corporation and the winding up of its affairs, all of the rights, assets and property of the public corporation shall pass to and be distributed according to the terms of the applicable grant agreements or covenants with the federal government, or agreements with donors, or other parties made at the time of acquisition, or to a qualified entity as determined by the city council.
(Prior code § 1.98.350)

1.16.360 Insurance.
Each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in an amount sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death or disability and for property damage, which may arise from or be related to projects and activities of the public corporation, naming the city as an additional insured.
(Prior code § 1.98.360)

1.16.370 Unauthorized representation.
All persons who assume to act for the public corporation without authority to do so shall be jointly and severally liable for the debts and liabilities incurred or arising as a result thereof.
(Prior code § 1.98.370)

1.16.380 Ancillary authority.
The mayor and city finance director are granted all such power and authority as reasonably necessary or convenient to enable them to administer this chapter efficiently and to perform the duties imposed in this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.98.380)

1.16.390 Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes and the purposes of RCW 35.21.730-.755.
(Prior code § 1.98.390)

Chapter 1.20 INFRACTION PROCEDURES

Sections:
1.20.010     Purpose and scope.
1.20.020     Notice of infraction—Issuance.
1.20.030     Notice of infraction—Determination final unless contested—Form.
1.20.040     Response to notice of infraction—Contesting determination—Hearing.
1.20.050     Hearings—Contesting determination that infraction committed—Appeal.
1.20.060     Hearings—Explanation of mitigating circumstances.
1.20.070     Monetary penalties.
1.20.080     Order of court—Civil nature—Waiver, reduction, suspension of penalty—Community service in lieu of penalty.
1.20.090     Costs and attorney's fees.
1.20.100     Failure to respond or appear.
1.20.110     Setting aside judgment upon failure to appear.
1.20.120     Failure to pay or complete community service—Contempt.
1.20.130     Misdemeanors—Penalties.
1.20.140     Severability.

1.20.010 Purpose and scope.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for the handling of offenses designated as infractions under the Aberdeen Municipal Code. These procedures shall apply to all infractions except where in conflict with rules established by statute, ordinance, or supreme court rule.
(Prior code § 6.60.010)

1.20.020 Notice of infraction—Issuance.
A. A notice of infraction may be issued based upon probable cause to believe an infraction has been or is being committed by:
    1. A law enforcement officer;
    2. The corporation counsel or deputy corporation counsel; or
    3. Other city officers or employees authorized by the chief of police or ordinance to issue either infractions or criminal citations.
B. With the consent of the corporation counsel, the court may issue a notice of infraction based upon the sworn statement of any other person demonstrating probable cause to believe that an infraction has been or is being committed.
(Prior code § 6.60.020)

1.20.030 Notice of infraction—Determination final unless contested—Form.
A. A notice of infraction represents a determination that an infraction has been committed. The determination will be final unless contested as provided in this chapter.
B. The notice of infraction shall be in substantially the same form and content as the notice of traffic infraction prescribed by state law and/or court rule, except that the provisions relating to nonrenewal of a driver's license will not apply unless authorized by state law.
(Prior code § 6.60.030)

1.20.040 Response to notice of infraction—Contesting determination—Hearing.
A. Any person who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such notice as provided in this section within fifteen days of the notice.
B. If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not contest the determination, the person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the Aberdeen Municipal Court. A check or money order in the amount of the penalty prescribed for the offense must be submitted with the response. When a response which does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court's records.
C. If the person determined to have committed the infraction wishes to contest the determination the person shall respond by completing the portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court specified on the notice. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall not be sooner than seven days from the date of the notice, except by agreement.
D. If the person determined to have committed the infraction does not contest the determination but wishes to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the infraction the person shall respond by completing the portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing for that purpose and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court specified on the notice. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing.
(Ord. 6459, Amended, 03/26/2008. Prior code § 6.60.040)

1.20.050 Hearings—Contesting determination that infraction committed—Appeal.
A. A hearing held for the purpose of contesting the determination that an infraction has been committed shall be without a jury.
B. The court may consider the notice of infraction and any other written report made under oath submitted by the officer who issued the notice or whose written statement was the basis for the issuance of the notice in lieu of the officer's personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the notice may ask the court to subpoena witnesses, including the officer, and has the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.
C. The burden of proof is upon the city to establish the commission of the infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.
D. After consideration of the evidence and argument the court shall determine whether the infraction was committed. Where it has not been established that the infraction was committed an order dismissing the notice shall be entered in the court's records. Where it has been established that the infraction was committed an appropriate order shall be entered in the court's records.
E. An appeal from the court's determination or order shall be to the superior court as provided in the court rules.
(Prior code § 6.60.050)

1.20.060 Hearings—Explanation of mitigating circumstances.
A. A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of an infraction shall be an informal proceeding. The person may not subpoena witnesses. The determination that an infraction has been committed may not be contested at a hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances.
B. After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the infraction an appropriate order shall be entered in the court's records.
C. There may be no appeal from the court's determination or order.
(Prior code § 6.60.060)

1.20.070 Monetary penalties.
A. A person found to have committed an infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty. No penalty may exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense unless specifically authorized by ordinance.
B. The court may prescribe a schedule of monetary penalties for designated infractions.
C. There shall be a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for failure to respond to a notice of infraction, unless a lesser amount is set by ordinance for a particular infraction. The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to the maximum penalty provided for in subsection (A) of this section.
D. Whenever a monetary penalty is imposed by a court under this chapter it is immediately payable. If the person is unable to pay at that time the court may, in its discretion, grant an extension of the period in which the penalty may be paid.
(Prior code § 6.60.070)

1.20.080 Order of court—Civil nature—Waiver, reduction, suspension of penalty—Community service in lieu of penalty.
A. An order entered after the receipt of a response which does not contest the determination, or after it has been established at a hearing that the infraction was committed, or after a hearing for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances is civil in nature.
B. The court may include in the order the imposition of any penalty authorized by the provisions of the city code for the commission of an infraction. The court may, in its discretion, waive, reduce, or suspend the monetary penalty prescribed for the infraction. At the person's request the court may order performance of a number of hours of community service in lieu of a monetary penalty, at the rate of the then state minimum wage per hour.
(Prior code § 6.60.080)

1.20.090 Costs and attorney's fees.
Each party to an infraction case is responsible for costs incurred by that party. No costs or attorney fees may be awarded to either party in an infraction case.
(Prior code § 6.60.090)

1.20.100 Failure to respond or appear.
If a person receiving a notice of infraction fails to respond to said notice as directed, of if a person fails to appear for a mitigation hearing or contested hearing set by the court, the court shall enter an order finding that the person has committed the infraction and shall assess any penalties provided for by law.
(Prior code § 6.60.100)

1.20.110 Setting aside judgment upon failure to appear.
For good cause shown and upon terms the court deems just, the court may set aside a judgment entered upon a failure to appear in accordance with procedures established by the court rules for setting aside judgments for failure to appear in traffic infraction cases. A motion to set aside the judgment must be made within ninety (90) days after entry of the judgment.
(Prior code § 6.60.110)

1.20.120 Failure to pay or complete community service—Contempt.
A. The failure of any person to pay a monetary penalty imposed by the court for an infraction, or the failure to meet a time payment authorized by the court, or the failure to complete community service approved by the court shall constitute the violation of a court order and shall be contempt of court.
B. No person shall be punished for contempt under subsection (A) of this section, until an opportunity shall have been given to him to be heard in his defense; and for that purpose the court may issue a bench warrant to bring the offender before the court.
(Prior code § 6.60.120)

1.20.130 Misdemeanors—Penalties.
Any person who fails to exercise one of the options in a timely manner after receiving a statement of the options provided in the chapter for responding to a notice of infraction and the procedures necessary to exercise these options shall be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of notice of infraction.
(Ord. 6459, Amended, 03/26/2008. Prior code § 6.60.130)

1.20.140 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remaining of this chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.
(Prior code § 6.60.140)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.04         Bonds – Public Officials
2.08         City Inventory
2.10         City Administrator
2.12         Contingency Fund
2.14         City Council Projects Fund
2.16         Municipal Court
2.18         Rules for Administrative and Quasi-Judicial Hearings
2.20         City Council
2.24         Code of Ethics
2.28         Working of Prisoners
2.30         Land Use Hearing Examiner
2.32         Building Code Commission
2.40         Planning Commission
2.44         Bureau of Fire Prevention
2.46         Hazardous Materials Incident Command Agency
2.48         Civil Service
2.52         Personnel Plan
2.58         Aberdeen Library Board
2.60         Park Board
2.62         Community Service Center Board
2.64         Board of Museum and History
2.66         Art Commission
2.68         Police Department
2.72         Police Reserve
2.76         Sinking Fund Board
2.80         Standing Committees
2.84         Traffic Safety Commission
2.86         Civil Emergencies
2.92         Employee Indemnification
2.96         Municipal Office Hours
2.104        Development Coordinator
2.108        Traffic Engineer
2.112        Public Records
2.114        Corrections Department
2.120        Local Improvement Procedure
2.124        Issuance of Local Improvement Warrants
2.128        Engineer as Purchasing Agent for Local Improvements

Chapter 2.04 BONDS – PUBLIC OFFICIALS

Sections:
2.04.010     Individual bonds.
2.04.020     Blanket bonds.
2.04.030     Payment of bonds.
2.04.040     Effective date.

2.04.010 Individual bonds.
Each of the following officers, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall file their oath of office and an individual surety bond conditioned for the faithful performance of their respective duties as follows:
+------------------+----------------+
| Title of Officer | Bond Penal Sum |
+------------------+----------------+
| City Comptroller | $25,000.00     |
+------------------+----------------+
| Treasurer        | $50,000.00     |
+------------------+----------------+
(Prior code § 1.05.010)

2.04.020 Blanket bonds.
A blanket bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be obtained for such other city officials, officers, or employees whom this council may, by motion or appropriation, from time to time authorize. Said blanket bond shall, at the minimum, cover the offices of police judge, chief of police, corporation counsel, city engineer, building inspector, and street commissioner.
(Prior code § 1.05.020)

2.04.030 Payment of bonds.
The blanket bond and individual bonds shall be paid for by the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 1.05.030)

2.04.040 Effective date.
The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be January 14, 1977, except in the case of the bond for the city comptroller, in which case the current bond of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall apply until the expiration of the existing bond or the election or appointment of another individual for the office of city comptroller, whichever occurs first.
(Prior code § 1.05.040)

Chapter 2.08 CITY INVENTORY

Sections:
2.08.010     Inventory to be kept.
2.08.020     Failure to take inventory.

2.08.010 Inventory to be kept.
All city departments shall conduct a physical inventory of fixed assets annually. The physical inventory shall be completed no later than April 30 of each year. An inventory report shall be filed in the office of the Finance Director no later than May 31. The report shall be in a format approved by the Finance Director. The term "fixed assets" means land of any value, improvements to land, buildings, improvements other than buildings, artwork and historic collections, and vehicles, machinery, and equipment. "Fixed assets" does not include expendable supplies and other items excluded by state accounting standards. The Finance Director shall prepare a system for use by all departments in conducting the inventory required by this section.
(Ord. 6435, Amended, 03/28/2007)

2.08.020 Failure to take inventory.
It shall be the duty of the finance director to notify the mayor of the failure of any city officer to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.06.020)

Chapter 2.10 CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sections:
2.10.010     Office created.
2.10.020     Duties.
2.10.030     Appointment – Removal.
2.10.040     Salary.

2.10.010 Office created.
The city hereby creates the office of city administrator of the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6623 § 2, Added, 03/14/2018)

2.10.020 Duties.
The city administrator, under the direction and control of the mayor, shall be the individual responsible for administration of city personnel, and for the implementation, administration and enforcement of city ordinances and resolutions, and the policies and directives of the city council, which shall remain the legislative and policy-making body of the city. The city administrator, under the direction of the mayor, shall have the authority to draft, revise and enforce by whatever actions are necessary and lawful a set of administrative rules and procedures that will ensure the efficient and proper operation of city government and will carry out the ordinances and policies established by the city council. The city administrator shall also perform all duties and obligations of a city administrator as required by law, and such other duties as are set forth in city code, or as assigned from time to time by the mayor. The city administrator shall attend all special and regular meetings of the city council, unless excused, and such other meetings as requested by the mayor.
(Ord. 6623 § 3, Added, 03/14/2018)

2.10.030 Appointment – Removal.
The city administrator shall be an at-will employee appointed by the mayor, subject to council confirmation, and terminable at will, subject to the provisions of any employment agreement regarding severance compensation. The position of city administrator shall not be required to be filled and may remain vacant at the discretion of the mayor. During periods of vacancy all duties generally performed by the city administrator shall be performed by the mayor.
(Ord. 6623 § 4, Added, 03/14/2018)

2.10.040 Salary.
The salary for the position of city administrator shall be set at the rate provided for in the job description adopted by the city council. The city council may approve an employment agreement with the city administrator.
(Ord. 6623 § 5, Added, 03/14/2018)

Chapter 2.12 CONTINGENCY FUND

Sections:
2.12.010     Personnel benefits and contingency fund created.
2.12.020     Funding.
2.12.030     Withdrawal from fund.

2.12.010 Personnel benefits and contingency fund created.
There is created a personnel benefits and contingency fund to provide moneys to city funds and departments for supplemental appropriation of those personnel expenses which are generally nonrecurring and which are not included in departmental budgets. Examples of these expenses include death benefits, unemployment benefits and unfunded termination costs.
This fund will also be available to provide moneys with which to meet municipal expenses, the necessity or extent which could not have been foreseen, or from which to provide moneys for those emergencies described in RCW 35.33.081 and 35.33.091.
(Prior code § 1.07.010)

2.12.020 Funding.
The personnel benefits and contingency fund may be supported by appropriations from revenue sources not restricted in use by law or by transfer from unexpended funds. Moneys used for personnel benefit supplemental appropriations shall be returned to this fund during the ensuing year.
(Prior code § 1.07.020)

2.12.030 Withdrawal from fund.
No money shall be withdrawn from the fund except by transfer to the appropriate operating fund authorized by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of the entire city council. Such resolution shall clearly state the facts constituting the reason for the withdrawal.
(Prior code § 1.07.030)

Chapter 2.14 CITY COUNCIL PROJECTS FUND

Sections:
2.14.010     Fund created – Source.
2.14.020     Use of fund.

2.14.010 Fund created – Source.
There is created and established within the budget of the city of Aberdeen a fund to be known and designated as the “city council projects fund,” Fund No. 004, into which may be transferred general fund revenues as available and at the discretion of the city council, with an approximate balance of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The initial source of this fund is the 2017 year ending surplus. Interest derived from Fund No. 004 investments shall be deposited into the general fund.
(Ord. 6622 § 1, Added, 02/14/2018)

2.14.020 Use of fund.
Expenditures from this fund shall be used to fund future one-time operational and capital needs or to support city services on a one-time basis pending the development of a longer term financial solution. All expenditures from this fund shall require prior city council approval, unless previously specifically authorized by the city council for expenditures in the annual budget.
(Ord. 6622 § 1, Added, 02/14/2018)

Chapter 2.16 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:
2.16.010     Aberdeen Municipal Court.
2.16.020     Violations bureau authorized.
2.16.030     Liability for costs incurred in municipal court.
2.16.040     Witness and jury fee revolving fund.
2.16.050     Restitution revolving fund.
2.16.060     Disposition of restitution payments.
2.16.070     Court rules.
2.16.080     Fees, costs and restitution.
2.16.090     Payment of fines.
2.16.100     Suspended or deferred sentences—Duration.
2.16.110     Payment of fines—Default.
2.16.120     Confinement in general.

2.16.010 Aberdeen Municipal Court.
The municipal court of the city of Aberdeen is operating under the authority of RCW 3.50 and shall have jurisdiction and shall exercise all powers vested in the municipal court by ordinance, together with such other powers and jurisdiction as are generally conferred upon such courts in the state of Washington either by common law, court rule, or statute. The judge of the Aberdeen Municipal Court shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.
(Prior code § 1.12.010)

2.16.020 Violations bureau authorized.
The municipal court of the city of Aberdeen is authorized to establish a violations bureau to assist the court in the processing of traffic cases. The violations bureau is vested with all authority express or implied in the statutes of the state of Washington for such bureaus. Personnel and procedure of the violations bureau shall be under the control of the Judge of the Aberdeen Municipal Court.
(Prior code § 1.12.020)

2.16.030 Liability for costs incurred in municipal court.
Whenever the city of Aberdeen shall be liable for the payment of costs in any criminal action or proceeding in municipal or superior court, a cost bill shall be prepared and certified by the officers hereinafter mentioned, specifying the different items of cost for which the city is liable; and where witness or jury fees are included in such cost bill the name, address, per diem and mileage of each witness or juror shall be specified. In all criminal cases in the municipal court, cost bills shall be prepared and certified to by the municipal court judge. In all such criminal cases in the superior court, brought there on appeal from the municipal court, the cost bill showing all costs for which the city of Aberdeen shall be liable shall be reviewed by the city attorney. It shall be duty of the city of Aberdeen to issue to the several parties, jurors and witnesses, shown by said cost bill to be entitled thereto, their respective costs and fees to which such cost bill shows them to be entitled.
(Prior code § 1.12.030)

2.16.040 Witness and jury fee revolving fund.
There is created a revolving fund in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be used solely for the purpose of paying witness fees and jury fees in the Aberdeen municipal court. The revolving fund will be maintained in a bank as a checking account and payments to jurors and witnesses shall be by check from that account. The fund will be replenished by a warrant which must be supported by a cost bill as provided in Section 2.16.030. This fund shall be maintained by the Aberdeen municipal court.
(Prior code § 1.12.040)

2.16.050 Restitution revolving fund.
There is created a revolving fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying restitution ordered by the judge of the Aberdeen Municipal Court. The fund will be maintained in a bank as a checking account. Defendants ordered to pay restitution will be required to make payments which shall be deposited into the account and payment to victims shall be by check from the account. This fund will be maintained by the Aberdeen Municipal Court.
(Prior code § 1.12.045)

2.16.060 Disposition of restitution payments.
All payments received by the court from defendants who have been ordered to pay restitution in addition to other fines, penalties, or assessments shall first be credited to their restitution obligation. When restitution has been paid in full, additional payments received from defendants shall be credited next to reimbursement of costs and then to all other fines, penalties and statutory assessments. If a defendant has paid restitution pursuant to court order and the victim entitled to restitution cannot be found or has died, the court may direct that the amount of restitution unable to be paid to the victim be credited against any other court-ordered financial obligations of the defendant in the Aberdeen Municipal Court. If the defendant has paid all court-ordered financial obligations, or if no fine, penalty, or other statutory assessment was imposed, the amount of restitution unable to be paid to the victim shall be deposited with the finance director and disposed of in the same manner as fines.
(Prior code § 1.12.047)

2.16.070 Court rules.
The municipal court may prescribe such rules as it may deem appropriate for the operation of its court; provided, that such rules are not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city of Aberdeen, laws of the state of Washington, or court rules adopted by the Supreme Court.
(Prior code § 1.12.050)

2.16.080 Fees, costs and restitution.
A. Upon conviction or a plea of guilty, a defendant in a criminal case shall be liable for restitution and such other costs, including repayment of court-appointed attorney fees, as are imposed by the court, to the same extent as would a person convicted in a district court of this state.
    1. Costs shall be limited to expenses specially incurred by the city in prosecuting the defendant, including witness costs and fees. Costs cannot include expenses inherent in providing a constitutionally guaranteed jury trial or expenditures in connection with the maintenance and operation of governmental agencies that must be made by the public irrespective of specific violations of law.
    2. The court shall not sentence a defendant to pay costs unless a defendant is or will be able to pay them. In determining the amount and method of payment of costs, the court shall consider the financial resources of the defendant and the burden that payment of costs will impose.
    3. A defendant who has been sentenced to pay costs who is not in contumacious default in the payment thereof may at any time petition the court for remission of the payment of costs or any unpaid portion thereof. If it appears to the satisfaction of the court that the payment of the amount due will impose manifest hardship upon the defendant or his immediate family, the court may remit all or a part of the amount due in costs, or modify the schedule of payment.
    4. In setting costs for the repayment of court-appointed attorney fees, the court may assess the actual costs incurred or may establish a schedule of repayment for various types of services. In any case the court may require repayment of all or a portion of the attorney fees in accordance with this section.
B. Unless otherwise directed by the court, in any case where fees or costs are imposed, such fees and costs shall be charged against the first monies paid by the defendant into the registry of the court, after payment for any court-ordered restitution.
(Prior code § 1.12.060)

2.16.090 Payment of fines.
Upon sentencing, all costs, fines and restitution imposed by the court shall be immediately due and payable unless the court, in its sole discretion, shall grant the defendant permission to defer payment to a later date or to make payments over a period of time; provided, however, that if the defendant fails to make any payment as scheduled the entire amount shall be immediately due and payable unless the court directs otherwise.
If a defendant who is granted deferred or time payment of costs, fines and restitution is unable to make any payment when due, the defendant shall appear in person before the court on or before the date when the payment is due and state the reasons for his or her inability to make payment. The court shall inquire into the inability of the defendant to make payment. If the court is satisfied that the defendant is unable to pay all or a part of the payment, the court may conditionally or unconditionally amend or suspend all or a part of the payment schedule.
(Prior code § 1.12.070)

2.16.100 Suspended or deferred sentences—Duration.
The duration of any deferred or suspended sentence for any violation of the criminal ordinances of the city of Aberdeen shall be for a period of two years from the date of conviction unless the court, in its discretion, shall set a shorter period of time.
(Prior code § 1.12.080)

2.16.110 Payment of fines—Default.
A. When a defendant sentenced to pay a fine, costs or restitution defaults in the payment thereof or of any installment, the court on the motion of the corporation counsel or upon its own motion, may require the defendant to show cause why his or her default should not be treated as contempt of court, and may issue a show cause citation or a warrant of arrest directing the defendant's appearance.
B. Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or a failure on the defendant's part to make a good-faith effort to make the payment, the Court may find that the defendant's default constitutes contempt and may order the defendant committed until the fine, costs and restitution, or a specified part thereof, is paid.
C. When a fine, assessment of costs, or order to pay restitution is imposed upon a corporation or unincorporated association, it is the duty of the person authorized to make disbursement from the assets of the corporation or association to pay the fine, costs, or restitution from those assets, and his or her failure to do so may be held to be contempt unless the showing required in subsection (B) of this section is made.
D. The term of imprisonment for contempt for nonpayment of a fine, costs or restitution shall be set forth in the commitment order and shall not exceed one day for each fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fine or costs, or thirty (30) days, whichever is the shorter period. A person committed for nonpayment of a fine, costs, or restitution shall be given credit toward the payment for each day of imprisonment at the rate specified in the commitment order.
E. If it appears to the satisfaction of the court that the default in the payment of a fine, costs or restitution is not contempt, the court may enter a order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount thereof or of each installment or revoking the fine or costs or the unpaid portion thereof in whole or in part.
F. A default in the payment of a fine, costs or restitution, or any installment thereof may be collected by any means authorized by law for the enforcement of a judgment. The levy of execution for the collection of fines, costs, or restitution shall not discharge a defendant committed to imprisonment for contempt until the amount of the fine or costs has actually been collected.
(Ord. 6381, Amended, 08/10/2005. Prior code § 1.12.090)

2.16.120 Confinement in general.
Any person sentenced by the municipal court for a commitment or period of confinement at the Aberdeen corrections facility, and who serves such commitment or confinement at the Aberdeen corrections facility, may, pursuant to Aberdeen corrections facility policies, be eligible for corrections facility programs or incarceration alternatives as set forth in Chapter 2.114 AMC; provided, the municipal court may, in its discretion, or upon the motion of any party and for good cause shown, prohibit the inmate from participating in one or more programs or incarceration alternatives.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

Chapter 2.18 RULES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE AND QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARINGS

Sections:
2.18.010     Purpose and applicability.
2.18.020     Definitions.
2.18.030     Nature of hearings.
2.18.040     Commencement of proceedings.
2.18.050     Referral to administrative body.
2.18.060     Notice – Postponement or continuance.
2.18.070     Quasi-judicial hearings.
2.18.080     Ex parte communication – Appearance of fairness – Conflict of interest.
2.18.090     Preserving order – Limitations.
2.18.100     Presiding officers – Powers.
2.18.110     Enforcement of subpoenas.
2.18.120     Witness fees.
2.18.130     Administrative notice.
2.18.140     Legal officer – Appointment – Functions.
2.18.150     Final decision – Reconsideration – Judicial review.
2.18.160     Reconsideration.

2.18.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of the rules of procedure contained in this chapter is to provide uniform rules for the conduct of all hearings held before the city council, or any board, commission or official of the city, to ensure compliance with the State Open Public Meetings Act, the appearance of fairness doctrine, and due process. A board, commission or official may supplement the provisions of this chapter by adopting additional rules that are consistent with this chapter. All rules adopted to supplement the provisions of this chapter by any board, commission or official shall be in writing and copies of the rules shall be available to the public. The sole purpose of this chapter is to establish procedural rules for hearings required by the provisions of other laws. No rule or procedure established by this chapter shall be construed or interpreted as granting to any person a right to appeal to the city council or to any board, commission or official of the city, or to have a hearing before the same, unless the provision of an applicable state statute, the city charter, or a city ordinance grants such a right.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.020 Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter:
    1. “Administrative body” shall mean the city council or any board, commission or official of the city.
    2. “Clerk” shall mean the finance director or the secretary or recording clerk of any board or commission or other appropriate person.
    3. “Applicant” or “application” shall mean the petitioner, appealing party or complainant.
    4. “Opponent” shall mean any person in interest opposing the applicant.
    5. “Interested party” shall mean any person having a direct and substantial interest in the outcome of an administrative act, or any person having a right of appeal therefrom by virtue of any state statute, charter provision, or ordinance.
    6. “Moving party” shall mean the party upon whom falls the burden of proving the issue before the administrative body. In disciplinary matters before the civil service commission, the moving party shall be the department head from whose order the matter is appealed. In matters concerning the revocation or suspension of licenses, the moving party shall be the enforcement officer or the city.
B. Department heads or authorized officials or employees of the city may be an applicant, an opponent or an interested party, as the case may be.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.030 Nature of hearings.
A. Quasi-Judicial Hearings. The provisions of AMC 2.18.070 shall be applicable only to those hearings where the administrative body is called upon to exercise a power of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature which, for purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to consist only of the following:
    1. Hearings before City Council. 
        a. Upon ordinances which zone or rezone site-specific parcels of real property, as opposed to zoning of general application (legislative hearings);
        b. Upon subdivision ordinances;
        c. Appeals relating to issuance, suspension or revocation of licenses or permits; and
        d. Upon all appeals from the decisions of any city official, board or commission, where such an appeal is otherwise authorized, and which requires an evidentiary hearing to determine such appeal.
    2. Hearings before the Board of Adjustment, Building Code Commission and Board of Appeals. 
        a. Upon appeals from any decision of the department, building official, or code enforcement officer; and
        b. Upon requests for a variance or exception from the terms of any ordinance.
    3. Hearings before the civil service commission upon grievances and upon appeals from disciplinary action imposed upon employees.
    4. Hearings before any administrative body respecting the issuance, suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued by the city.
B. Legislative Hearings. All other hearings before an administrative body shall be deemed to be administrative hearings, the purpose of which is to obtain information to enable the city council to determine legislative policy, to enable any board or commission to make recommendations to the city council upon proposed or pending legislation, or to promulgate authorized rules and regulations. Such hearings shall be conducted in compliance with the State Open Public Meetings Act, provisions of AMC 2.18.040, 2.18.050 and 2.18.060, and in such a manner so as to enable all persons desiring to be heard a reasonable opportunity for the presentation of their views, but there shall be no requirement for compliance with the provisions for quasi-judicial hearings under AMC 2.18.070.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.040 Commencement of proceedings.
All proceedings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be commenced in the manner provided by the charter, statute or ordinance governing the matter. An appeal must be in writing and shall contain the following:
A. A brief statement as to how the appellant is significantly affected by or interested in the appeal.
B. A brief statement containing specific exceptions and objections to the decision being appealed.
C. The requested relief, such as reversal or modification.
D. The signature, mailing address, and telephone number of the appellant. A specific agent shall be designated if the appellant is not an individual.
E. Any other information required by the ordinance governing the matter.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.050 Referral to administrative body.
Upon receipt by the clerk of any application, petition, notice of appeal or other instrument initiating a hearing, the same shall be referred to the administrative body which shall set a date, time and place for a hearing; provided, however, that the administrative body may authorize its clerk to set a date, time and place for a hearing upon receipt of specified instruments. Notice of hearings shall be given to the initiating party and to all other parties to whom notice is required by law to be given.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.060 Notice – Postponement or continuance.
A. If required, public notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be given in the manner provided by the law under which the hearing is being held.
B. In the event a hearing is continued or postponed, notice shall be given of the date, time and place to which the hearing shall be continued or postponed, either by causing further notice to be published or by publicly announcing such postponement or continuance at the date, time and place set in the original notice.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.070 Quasi-judicial hearings.
A. Rights of Participants. Quasi-judicial hearings shall be conducted under procedures designed to ensure all interested parties due process of law and shall, in all cases, provide the following:
    1. The administration of oaths of all parties or witnesses who appear for the purpose of testifying upon factual matters.
    2. The cross-examination of witnesses by the interested parties.
    3. The audio or other verbatim reproduction of all testimony presented in said hearing.
    4. A written decision by the hearing body which shall set forth the factual basis and reasons for the decision rendered.
B. Order of Procedure. In quasi-judicial hearings, the following order of procedure shall be observed:
    1. First, the official city file concerning the action, including the written appeal and any written response by the city official whose action is appealed, shall be entered in the record of the hearing.
    2. Next, the presiding officer shall call for the disclosure of any ex parte communications, conflicts of interest, or violations of the appearance of fairness under AMC 2.18.080.
    3. Next, the administrative body shall call for the presentation of testimony and evidence from the moving party.
    4. Upon completion of the presentation of the moving party's evidence, the administrative body may call upon any other persons present to offer additional evidence and information as may be relevant and material in support of the moving party’s position.
    5. Thereafter, the administrative body shall call for the presentation of testimony and evidence from any person present at the hearing who desires to oppose the evidence of the moving party.
    6. The moving party shall then be given an opportunity to present any further matter in opposition or rebuttal to the matters presented by the opponents.
    7. All documents, or other items of physical evidence, shall be marked as exhibits with such identifying symbols as may be necessary to determine the exhibit referred to by any witness or other person.
C. Rules of Evidence. The administrative body shall not be required to observe formal rules of evidence, but may consider any matter which a majority concludes is reasonably reliable and calculated to aid the hearing body in reaching a fair and accurate determination of the issues involved.
D. Cross-Examination. Cross-examination of witnesses shall be limited to interested parties.
E. Deliberations and Notice of Decision. Each administrative body is authorized to deliberate upon the issues presented at the hearing in private, nonpublic sessions; provided, that no decision shall be effective except upon a vote of the members of the administrative body conducted in an open session, which vote shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the administrative body. All decisions shall be in writing and a copy of the same shall be delivered to the applicant and other interested parties, in person or by certified mail at the address set forth in the application, petition, complaint or notice of appeal, unless said decision is to be embodied in an ordinance or unless the statute, charter or ordinance under which the hearing is being conducted requires notice of the decision to be given in a different manner.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.080 Ex parte communication – Appearance of fairness – Conflict of interest.
A. The appearance of fairness doctrine, as specified in Chapter 42.36 RCW, shall apply to quasi-judicial proceedings and shall result in disqualification when necessary. A member of an administrative body or the official acting as an administrative body shall not participate in any proceeding in which he or she has a prohibited personal interest. In the event of a disqualifying conflict of interest, the hearing shall be conducted by the remaining members of the administrative body or a duly appointed pro tem official.
B. A member of an administrative body or the official acting as an administrative body shall not engage in ex parte communications, directly or indirectly, with any person, or the agent or representative of any person, having an interest in an application before the administrative body or official acting as the administrative body.
C. If a prohibited ex parte communication occurs, it shall be publicly disclosed in accordance with Chapter 42.36 RCW and the member of the administrative body or the official acting as an administrative body shall decide whether to disqualify himself or herself for that application.
D. Any party to a quasi-judicial proceeding may challenge the partiality and appearance of fairness of any member of the administrative body or the official acting as the administrative body during the hearing. A challenge must include the facts relied on by the challenging party, relating to the alleged bias, prejudgment, or personal interest, or other basis by which the party has concluded that the member or official cannot participate in a recommendation in an impartial manner.
    1. In the event of a challenge under subsection (D) of this section, the challenged member or official shall respond in a statement, which shall be part of the record, or step down from participating in the hearing on the matter. The statement shall respond to the challenge and include the reasons why the member or official should be allowed to participate.
    2. The statement regarding continuing to participate in the hearing shall not be subject to examination by the administrative body but shall be subject to rebuttal by the challenging party.
    3. In the event of a rebuttal, the member or official shall be given an opportunity to respond making special reference to the facts alleged in rebuttal, or shall disqualify him or herself and state the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.090 Preserving order – Limitations.
A. Each administrative body shall have the right to preserve order during any hearing. If any person appearing before the body or attending any meeting or hearing, in the immediate presence of the administrative body or within its sight or hearing, while the administrative body is in session, disobeys a lawful order of the body or engages in any speech, gesture or conduct which is so disrespectful to the body that it tends to bring the body into public ridicule, disrupt the proceedings, or otherwise impair good order, the administrative body may take appropriate action against the responsible person, as may be necessary, including but not limited to: public censure; ejection from the hearing room and its environs; a prohibition on the presentation of further testimony or evidence; entry of an order striking testimony or evidence; or entry of a default.
B. The administrative body may, prior to any presentations and as a condition to the taking of testimony or information from any person, require the registration of all persons desiring to be heard during the hearing.
C. The administrative body may restrict the testimony of any person to the material issues pending before it and, to prevent duplicative or cumulative presentations, it may limit the presentation of evidence and cross-examination and may impose reasonable time limitations upon all parties.
D. The administrative body may issue reasonable orders to preserve order, ensure safety, protect the record and promote the truth-finding process, including but not limited to orders related to:
    1. The screening of persons entering the building or hearing room for weapons, concealed or carried openly, including but not limited to firearms, knives, pepper spray, bear spray, batons, and objects or substances that may be used to disrupt the proceedings.
    2. A prohibition on the presence of weapons, objects and substances that may be used to assault anyone or disrupt the proceedings in the hearing room. The prohibition shall not apply to any firearm that is possessed and carried lawfully. Nothing contained in this provision shall prohibit the screening of a person carrying a concealed firearm or requiring such person to produce the permit to carry a concealed weapon and the firearm for inspection by screeners.
    3. The number of people who may be present in the hearing room.
    4. Where the parties and other persons may stand or be seated.
    5. Identification and residence of persons speaking.
    6. Sequestration of witnesses.
    7. The mode, manner and order for presentation of evidence and arguments.
    8. The use of obscene speech, fighting words or gestures.
    9. The presence and use of projection screens, computer screens, laser pointers, displays, graphics, models, computers, cell phones, pagers and other devices.
    10. Conduct of persons present in the hearing room.
    11. The presence and use of cameras, lights, video and audio devices.
    12. The exclusion from the hearing room, building, or their environs of persons who are or appear to be intoxicated.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.100 Presiding officers – Powers.
Subject to appeal by a majority of the administrative body, the presiding officer shall have authority to:
A. Administer oaths and affirmations.
B. Sign and issue subpoenas upon application of any interested party. In the case of an application for a subpoena duces tecum, the application shall identify with particularity the items sought to be produced and contain a brief statement indicating the materiality of the items sought for the proceeding.
C. Rule upon offers of proof and receive evidence.
D. Dispose of motions relating to the discovery and production of relevant documents and things for inspection, copying or photographing.
E. Regulate the course of the hearing, set the time and place for continued hearings, and fix the time for the filing of briefs and other documents.
F. Direct the parties to appear and confer to consider the simplification of the issues, admissions of fact or documents to avoid unnecessary proof, and limitation of number of expert witnesses.
G. Dispose of motions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter or parties or for any other ground, motions to amend applications and other proceedings, motions to intervene, procedural requests, and similar matters.
H. Make initial or preliminary decisions.
I. Take any other action authorized by rule of the administrative body.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.110 Enforcement of subpoenas.
A. Action for the enforcement of or to quash a subpoena shall be commenced by filing a petition with the municipal court, which shall forthwith issue an order commanding the appropriate individual to appear in response and show cause why the requested relief should not be granted. The municipal court shall sustain such subpoena to the extent that it is found to be in accordance with law and shall issue an order requiring the appearance of witnesses or the production of data within a reasonable time, under penalty of punishment for contempt of court.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person without good cause to fail or refuse to comply with a subpoena issued by any administrative body of the city. Conviction of such failure shall not relieve the person under subpoena from the obligation to comply with the subpoena or relieve the person from contempt proceedings for failure to comply.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.120 Witness fees.
Witnesses under subpoena shall receive the same fees for appearance before an administrative body as before the municipal court.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.130 Administrative notice.
An administrative body may take notice of general, technical or scientific facts within its knowledge, and its own records of matters pending or previously determined by the administrative body concerning the same property, the same persons or the same issues, without further proof thereof, but only if such fact or record so noticed is specified in the record or is brought to the attention of the parties before final decision, and every party is afforded an opportunity to controvert the fact or record so noticed. In like manner, and without specifying the same in the record, an administrative body may take notice of the constitution, state law, and the charter and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.140 Legal officer – Appointment – Functions.
In any quasi-judicial hearing, the administrative body may retain an attorney to act as legal officer during the hearing. The legal officer shall exercise all the functions and powers of the presiding officer of the administrative body, as set forth in AMC 2.18.100. At the close of testimony the legal officer shall advise the administrative body of the law applicable to the matter which is the subject of the hearing, but the legal officer shall not otherwise participate in the deliberations of the administrative body. At the close of deliberations of the administrative body, the legal officer shall prepare the necessary findings of fact upon which the administrative body shall base its final decision in the matter before it.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.150 Final decision – Reconsideration – Judicial review.
The administrative body’s written final decision shall include:
A. The nature and background of the proceeding.
B. Findings of fact addressing contested issues of fact, based exclusively on the record.
C. Conclusions referencing permit criteria and other specific provisions of the law, together with reasons and precedents relied upon.
D. The administrative body’s determination of the appropriate rule, order, or relief, based upon a consideration of the whole record and supported by reliable, probative and substantial evidence.
E. The time frames for reconsideration and appeal.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

2.18.160 Reconsideration.
Motions for reconsideration must be filed within ten (10) working days of the date of the administrative body’s final decision. The motion for reconsideration shall set forth alleged errors of fact, law, or procedure, or issues omitted from the decision. Any request for reconsideration shall stay further issuance of city permits and shall stay the time frame for appeal of the administrative body’s decision. The time for appealing a final decision of the administrative body shall begin to run upon the issuance of a decision on a motion for reconsideration that was filed in a timely manner. If a motion for reconsideration is filed, the administrative body shall either:
A. Correct or amend the decision without an additional public hearing; or
B. Set the matter for additional public hearing, in which case notice shall be published anew, including to all parties of record; or
C. Confirm the original decision.
(Ord. 6588 § 1, Added, 12/09/2015)

Chapter 2.20 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:
2.20.010     Time of meetings.
2.20.020     Council correspondence—In general.
2.20.030     Council correspondence requiring legislative action.
2.20.040     Standard rules adopted.
2.20.050     Recording of minutes.

2.20.010 Time of meetings.
The city council shall hold its regular meetings in the Third Floor Council Chambers at City Hall located at 200 East Market Street on the second, fourth, and fifth Wednesday evening of each month, commencing as in "Committee of the Whole" at the hour of 7:15 p.m. and reconvening in regular session as soon there after as the city council may determine. If the Wednesday shall fall on December 24 or December 31, the council shall hold its regular meetings on the Tuesday immediately preceding such Wednesday. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as restricting the city council's authority to cancel regular meetings or call special meetings.
(Ord. 6494, Amended, 01/13/2010; Ord. 6346, Amended, 11/12/2003; Ord. 6161, Amended, 08/20/1997)

2.20.020 Council correspondence—In general.
The city clerk is authorized to open and examine all mail or other written communications addressed to the city council, unless the same is addressed to the personal attention of any one member of the council, and to give it immediate attention to the end that all administrative business referred to in said communication, and which does not require legislative action, may be acted upon by the department or departments having jurisdiction thereover. Copies of such correspondence shall simultaneously be referred to the mayor's office who shall be responsible for taking action on any valid request or petition by and through the respective departments of the city. Such referrals and action by the mayor and the city clerk shall be brought to the attention, whenever applicable, of the city council, together with the proposed action or resolution thereon; provided, that all matters requiring legislative action shall be timely placed on the agenda, as set forth in Section 2.20.030.
(Prior code § 1.14.015)

2.20.030 Council correspondence requiring legislative action.
All correspondence addressed to the city council and received by the city clerk or any other officer or employee of the city shall not become public record until such time as it has been received and filed with the city council at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of said body. Correspondence received in the city clerk's office after 12:00 noon on the Tuesday preceding the regular council meeting shall not be placed on the agenda but shall be held over until the next regular council meeting. Correspondence need not be read aloud or in its entirety at a city council meeting, unless requested by a majority vote of the council, but the city clerk shall indicate, in summary form, the nature of the correspondence and the name and address of the sender, and shall make copies of the correspondence available to council members.
(Prior code § 1.14.016)

2.20.040 Standard rules adopted.
The following standing rules shall become and the same are established for the conduct of the proceedings of the city council.
1. The city council may be convened in special meeting at any time in the manner prescribed by law, but no special meeting shall be held at any place other than that prescribed for holding of the regular meetings.
2. The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting of the council, and having called the members to order, shall preserve order and decorum, and in case of disturbance or disorderly conduct in the chamber, may direct the same to be cleared of spectators.
3. The clerk, in calling the roll of the council, shall call the names of the members in their alphabetical order.
4. In all elections to office the roll shall be called; the vote of the members shall be given "vive voce" and shall be entered on the journal.
5. All questions of order shall be decided by the mayor, subject to an appeal to the council.
6. If any member shall transgress any rule of the council, the mayor or any member may call him to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately take his seat and be silent, unless permitted by the council to make an explanation; and the council, if appealed to, shall decide the question of order.
7. An appeal from the decision of the mayor upon any question shall be allowed and put only upon the demand of at least two members.
8. Upon an appeal the question shall be: "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?" The roll shall be called, the ayes and noes be taken and recorded in the journal.
9. Every member present when a question is put shall vote unless the council for special reasons shall excuse him. In determining the number of votes necessary to carry a question only the ayes and noes shall be counted.
10. Every motion or proposition shall be reduced to writing, if the mayor or any member shall so request.
11. The order of proceedings may be suspended or changed at any meeting, for the time only, by a vote of the majority of the members present.
12. The call for the previous question shall be entertained only upon the demand of two members, and while pending shall preclude all amendments and debate upon the main question; and shall be decided by a vote upon the following proposition: "Shall the main question be now put?"
13. Any question containing two or more propositions shall be divided upon the demand of any member.
14. Upon the call of any member, the ayes and noes upon any question shall be recorded upon the journal, but such call shall not preclude amendments before the main question is put.
15. The mayor or any member shall have the liberty to protest against any ordinance or resolution which he may deem injurious to the public or any individual, and have the reasons of his protest entered upon the journal, but such protest and reasons therefor must be reduced to writing, signed by the protestant, and filed with the clerk within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the adjournment of the meeting at which such ordinance or resolution shall have been passed.
16. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order unless the council is engaged in voting.
17. A motion to adjourn or to lay on the table shall be decided without debate.
18. Any ordinance or resolution, after commitment and report thereon, may be recommitted at any time prior to the final passage thereof.
19. In the filling of blanks in any resolution, order or ordinance presented to the council, the first names moved, the longest time stated and the largest sum presented shall be the first put.
20. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be entertained except a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone indefinitely, to postpone to a certain date, to commit or amend; which several motions shall have precedence in the order here given.
21. All ordinances should be read by title three times. The title of all ordinances shall include a comprehensive summary and if possible a statement of legislative intent.
    a. The first reading shall be by title only.
    b. The second reading shall include a reading of the title and shall be subject to such hearings as are required by the city council or provided by the city Charter and the laws of the state of Washington.
    c. The third reading shall be by title only.
    d. No ordinance shall be revised or amended by its title only, but any ordinance revised or any ordinance amended shall be inserted at length in the ordinance reviving or amending the same. Upon the passage thereof, the vote thereon shall be taken by ayes and noes, entered upon the journal.
    e. Copies of an ordinance shall be available to the council and to the public on or before the time of the first meeting.
    f. The council may change or suspend any of the above rules by a majority vote of those present. The vote of the majority for suspension or change shall be for that one time only.
23. No member shall leave a meeting of the council without permission of a majority of the members present.
24. No member of the city council, or officer of the city, shall be accepted or approved by the council as surety on any official bond required by law or any ordinance of the city, for any officer of the city.
25. Charges against any officer of the city shall be in writing, verified by affidavits, and having been read shall be laid on the table or referred to a committee for investigation without debate.
26. When a member is about to speak, he shall arise and address the mayor by his official title; and when more than one member claims the floor at the same time, the mayor shall pronounce the name of the member entitled to speak. No member shall speak more than twice on the same question, except by unanimous consent of the council.
27. All business brought before this council by motion, resolution or any other way and laid upon the table, shall be considered as finally disposed of, unless taken from the table by order of the council, before adjournment of the third regular meeting subsequent to the meeting at which it was tabled.
28. Whenever at the time appointed for the meeting of the council there shall not be a quorum present, it shall be lawful for the members present to order the chief of police to arrest the members absent, or any of them, and cause them to appear forthwith at the place of meeting, and there remain until the meeting adjourns or leave of absence be granted them.
29. It shall also be lawful for any member or members, in numbers less than a quorum, who may have assembled at the time and place appointed for a meeting of the council, to adjourn to a subsequent time, and cause the chief of police to give notice to the absent members of the council of the time to which such adjournment shall have been made, requiring their attendance at such adjourned meeting under the penalty of two dollars ($2.00) to each member; and if such absent member, after having been so notified, shall fail to attend such adjourned meeting, he shall forfeit two dollars ($2.00) to the use of the city, unless he be excused for his absence upon sufficient reason by him presented to the council.
30. The rules of parliamentary practice set forth in "Robert's Rules of Order" shall govern this council in all matters to which they are applicable when not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the state of Washington, these rules, or any ordinance of the city or order of the council.
31. When any meeting of the council is about to be dissolved, every member shall retain his seat until the mayor shall have announced adjournment.
32. If the regular meeting date of the council shall fall on a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held on the following day.
(Prior code § 1.14.020)

2.20.050 Recording of minutes.
All city council meetings of the city council of Aberdeen held at the hour of 8:00 p.m. in the City Hall of the city of Aberdeen shall be recorded by the city comptroller of Aberdeen. All such recordings of the city of Aberdeen shall be held for a period of six months after the date of the meeting. After the recordings have been held for a period of six months, the city comptroller of Aberdeen may erase the recordings. If any member of the general public requests a verbatim transcript of a city council meeting, that individual shall pay the labor costs expended by the city of Aberdeen to produce the transcript plus twenty-five percent of the overhead cost expended in producing the transcript.
(Prior code § 1.14.030)

Chapter 2.24 CODE OF ETHICS

Sections:
2.24.010     Purpose.
2.24.020     Application.
2.24.030     Requirements.
2.24.040     Remedies – Penalties for violations.
2.24.050     Limitations on gifts.
2.24.060     Definitions.

2.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this "Code of Conduct" is to promote public trust and accountability by providing clear standards for officers and employees of the city of Aberdeen, consistent with standards for state officers and employees, limiting the receipt or furnishing of any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity form a source except the city, for a matter connected with or related to the officer or employee's services as such an officer or employee, in addition to state laws regarding conflict of interest in contracts [Chapter 42.23 RCW], and to ensure the efficient, fair, and professional administration of federal grant funds in compliance with federal and state standards, regulations, and laws.
(Prior code § 1.18.010)

2.24.020 Application.
This "Code of Conduct" applies to all officers and employees of the city of Aberdeen. Sections 2.24.030 and 2.24.040 apply only to those officers, employees, or agents of the city of Aberdeen engaged in the award or administration of contracts supported by federal grant funds.
(Prior code § 1.18.020)

2.24.030 Requirements.
No officer, employee, or agent of the city of Aberdeen shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by federal grant funds, if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Such a conflict would arise when any of the following persons or entities has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award:
A. The employee, officer, or agent; or
B. Any immediate family member; or
C. Any partner; or
D. An organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of the above.
The city of Aberdeen's officers, employees, or agents shall neither solicit nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors, potential contractors or subcontractors.
(Prior code § 1.18.030)

2.24.040 Remedies – Penalties for violations.
To the extent permitted by federal and state laws or regulations, violation of Sections 2.24.030 or 2.24.040 may cause penalties, sanctions, or other disciplinary actions to be taken against the city's officers, employees, or agents, or the contractors, potential contractors, subcontractors, or their agents. In addition, the responsible city officers and employees shall be subject to disciplinary action under provisions of the city Charter and personnel policies, as appropriate, for violations of Sections 2.24.030 or 2.24.050.
(Prior code § 1.18.040)

2.24.050 Limitations on gifts.
A. No officer or employee of the city of Aberdeen may accept gifts, other than those specified in subsections (B) and (E) of this section, with an aggregate value in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00) from a single source in a calendar year or a single gift from multiple sources with a value in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00). For purposes of this section, "single source" means any person, whether acting directly or through any agent or other intermediary, and "single gift" includes any event, item, or group of items used in conjunction with each other or any trip including transportation, lodging, and attendant costs, not excluded from the definition of gift under Section 2.24.060. The value of gifts given to an officer's or employee's family member shall be attributed to the official or employee for the purpose of determining whether the limit has been exceeded, unless an independent business, family, or social relationship exists between the donor and the family member.
B. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, the following items are presumed not to influence or confer special privileges, and may be accepted without regard to the limit established by subsection (A) of this section:
    1. Unsolicited flowers, plants and floral arrangements;
    2. Unsolicited advertising or promotional items of nominal value, such as pens and note pads;
    3. Unsolicited tokens or awards of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento, or similar item;
    4. Unsolicited items received by an officer or employee for the purpose of evaluation or review, if the officer or employee has no personal beneficial interest in the eventual use or acquisition of the item by the officer's or employee's department;
    5. Informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the recipient's performance of official duties;
    6. Food and beverages consumed at hosted receptions where attendance is related to the officer's or employee's official duties;
    7. Admission to, and the cost of food and beverages consumed at, events sponsored by or in conjunction with a civic, charitable, governmental or community organization; and
    8. Unsolicited gifts from dignitaries from another state or foreign country that are intended to be personal in nature.
C. The presumption in subsection (B) of this section is rebuttable and may be overcome based on the circumstances surrounding the giving and acceptance of the item.
D. Notwithstanding subsections (B) and (E) of this section, an officer or employee of a regulatory department or of a department that seeks to acquire goods or services who participates in those regulatory or contractual matters may receive, accept, take, or seek, directly or indirectly, only the following items from a person regulated by the department or from a person who seeks to provide goods or services to the department:
    1. Unsolicited advertising or promotional items of nominal value, such as pens and note pads;
    2. Unsolicited tokens or awards of appreciation in the form of a plaque, trophy, desk item, wall memento, or similar item;
    3. Unsolicited items received by an officer or employee for the purpose of evaluation or review, if the officer or employee has no personal beneficial interest in the eventual use or acquisition of the item by the officer's or employee's department;
    4. Informational material, publications, or subscriptions related to the recipient's performance of official duties;
    5. Food and beverages consumed at hosted receptions where attendance is related to the officer's or employee's official duties;
    6. Admission to, and the cost of food and beverages consumed at, events sponsored by or in conjunction with a civic, charitable, governmental or community organization; and
    7. Those items excluded form the definition of gift in Section 2.24.060 except:
        a. Payments by a governmental or nongovernmental entity of reasonable expenses incurred in connection with a speech, presentation, appearance, or trade mission made in an official capacity;
        b. Payments for seminars and educational programs sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit professional, educational, or trade association, or charitable institution; and
        c. Flowers, plants, and floral arrangements.
E. An officer or employee may accept gifts in the form of food and beverage on infrequent occasions in the ordinary course of meals where attendance by the officer or employee is related to the performance of official duties. Gifts in the form of food and beverage that exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) on a single occasion shall be reported as provided in RCW Chapter 42.17.
(Prior code § 1.18.050)

2.24.060 Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.
"Gift" means anything of economic value for which no consideration is given. "Gift" does not include:
    1. Items from family members or friends where it is clear beyond a reasonable doubt that the gift was not made as part of any design to gain or maintain influence in the agency of which the recipient is an officer or employee;
    2. Items related to the outside business of the recipient that are customary and not related to the recipient's performance of official duties;
    3. Items exchanged among officials and employees or a social event hosted or sponsored by a state officer or state employee for coworkers;
    4. Payments by a governmental or nongovernmental entity of reasonable expenses incurred in connection with a speech, presentation, appearance, or trade mission made in an official capacity. As used in this subsection, "reasonable expenses" are limited to travel, lodging, and subsistence expenses incurred the day before through the day after the event;
    5. Items a state officer or state employee is authorized by law to accept;
    6. Payment of enrollment and course fees and reasonable travel expenses attributable to attending seminars and educational programs sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit professional, educational, or trade association, or charitable institution. As used in this subsection, "reasonable expenses" are limited to travel, lodging, and subsistence expenses incurred the day before through the day after the event;
    7. Items returned by the recipient to the donor within thirty days of receipt or donated to a charitable organization within thirty days of receipt;
    8. Campaign contributions reported under RCW Chapter 42.17; and
    9. Discounts available to an individual as a member of an employee group, occupation, or similar broad-based group.
"Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, firm, institution, or other entity, whether or not operated for profit.
(Prior code § 1.18.060)

Chapter 2.28 WORKING OF PRISONERS

Sections:
2.28.010     Hours.
2.28.020     Compensation and credit for labor.
2.28.030     Discharge of prisoner by completion of sufficient labor to complete sentence or to pay fines and costs.

2.28.010 Hours.
Any person committed to the city jail by judgment of the municipal court or in default of the payment of fines and costs of prosecution, may be compelled on each day of the week except Sunday, to perform eight hours labor upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, public buildings or grounds, or public works of the city of Aberdeen, while serving the sentence imposed by said judgment.
(Prior code § 1.22.010)

2.28.020 Compensation and credit for labor.
The municipal court, in imposing sentence upon any person committed to the city jail, shall as a part of said sentence provide whether or not said prisoner shall be compelled to perform labor as herein provided.
A. Any person committed to the city jail shall be given two days credit upon said sentence for each eight hour day of labor so performed.
B. Any person committed to the city jail in default of payment of fines and costs shall be given credit of five dollars ($5.00) for each day served in jail without labor, and if labor is performed by such prisoner, he shall be given credit for the sum of twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50) for each eight hour day of labor so performed.
(Prior code § 1.22.020)

2.28.030 Discharge of prisoner by completion of sufficient labor to complete sentence or to pay fines and costs.
The chief of police shall certify to the municipal court the number of days' labor performed by the persons imprisoned and when sufficient labor has been performed to complete the sentence or to pay the fines and costs at the rates herein provided, the municipal court shall issue an order discharging the prisoner.
(Prior code § 1.22.030)

Chapter 2.30 LAND USE HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:
2.30.010     Purpose.
2.30.020     Hearing examiner – Creation.
2.30.030     Appointment – Confirmation – Removal – Contract.
2.30.040     Qualifications.
2.30.050     Term.
2.30.060     Conflict of interest – Ex parte contact.
2.30.070     Hearing examiner – Authority and duties.
2.30.080     Applications.
2.30.090     Report by city staff.
2.30.100     Public hearing.
2.30.110     Hearing examiner’s decision and recommendation.
2.30.120     Reconsideration.
2.30.130     Appeal of hearing examiner’s decision.
2.30.140     Hearing examiner’s report.

2.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an administrative land use regulatory system which will separate the city’s land use regulatory function from its land use planning function; ensure and expand the principles of fairness and due process in public hearings; and provide an efficient and effective land use regulatory system which integrates the public hearing and decision-making processes for land use matters.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.020 Hearing examiner – Creation.
The office of the hearing examiner is created by the city council. The hearing examiner shall interpret, review and implement land use regulations, hear appeals from orders, recommendations, permits, decisions or determinations made by a city official as set forth in this chapter, and review and hear other matters as provided for in this code and other ordinances. The term “hearing examiner” shall likewise include the hearing examiner pro tem.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.030 Appointment – Confirmation – Removal – Contract.
The hearing examiner shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. An examiner may be removed from office at will and without cause by the mayor; however, such removal shall not affect the ability of the examiner to complete any cases for which he or she has already undertaken the hearing. The examiner may be retained under a professional services contract for a specified term on conditions determined by the mayor and approved by the city council. The contract may also provide for examiners pro tem to serve in the absence of the examiner.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.040 Qualifications.
Hearing examiners and hearing examiners pro tem shall be appointed solely with regard to their qualifications for the duties of their office and will have such training and experience as will qualify them to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge the other functions conferred upon them. Hearing examiners shall hold no other elective or appointive office or position with the city.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.050 Term.
The term of appointment for the hearing examiner shall be for a period not to exceed four (4) years, subject to termination as provided in Section 2.30.030, and shall be coterminous with the term of the mayor. Hearing examiners pro tem may be appointed for such terms and functions as the mayor deems appropriate.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.060 Conflict of interest – Ex parte contact.
A. No hearing examiner shall conduct or participate in any hearing, decision or recommendation in which the hearing examiner has a direct or indirect substantial financial or familial interest, or concerning which the hearing examiner has had substantial prehearing contacts with proponents or opponents. A hearing examiner shall abide by the applicable provisions of state law, including, without limitation, the appearance of fairness doctrine and this code.
B. No person, including city officials, elective or appointive, shall attempt to influence a hearing examiner in any matter pending before him/her, except at a public hearing duly called for such purposes, or to interfere with a hearing examiner in the performance of his/her duties in any other way; provided, that this section shall not prohibit the city attorney from rendering legal services to the hearing examiner upon request, or prohibit other persons or officials from responding in writing to requests for information from the hearing examiner; and further provided, that city officials or employees may, in the performance of their official duties, provide information for the hearing examiner or process a city case before the hearing examiner, when such actions take place or are disclosed in the hearing examiner’s hearing or meeting.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.070 Hearing examiner – Authority and duties.
A. The hearing examiner shall hear and decide the following land use quasi-judicial applications:
    1. Rezones which are not of general applicability (site-specific rezones).
    2. Conditional use permits.
    3. Preliminary subdivisions and planned developments.
    4. Shoreline substantial development permits subject to quasi-judicial review, shoreline variances, and shoreline conditional use permits.
B. The hearing examiner shall hear and decide appeals alleging an error in administrative decisions or determinations made under the zoning code or any other development regulations under Title 14, Environmental Regulations; Title 16, Subdivisions; and Title 17, Zoning.
C. The hearing examiner shall conduct public hearings and proceedings required by Titles 14, 16, and 17, the city of Aberdeen shoreline master program, and the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW) and conduct such other hearings or meetings as the city council may from time to time deem appropriate; provided, that the substantive SEPA decision and decisions on the associated actions shall be made by the officials designated in this code.
(Ord. 6610 § 1, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.080 Applications.
Applications for all matters to be heard by the hearing examiner shall be presented to the city staff, to be processed according to the applicable provisions of this code and the city of Aberdeen shoreline master program. The city staff shall be responsible for assigning a date for the public hearing for each application as required. The hearing examiner may consider two (2) or more applications relating to a single project concurrently, and the findings of fact, conclusions and decision on each application may be covered in one (1) written decision.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.090 Report by city staff.
City staff shall coordinate and assemble the comments and recommendations of other applicable city officials and governmental agencies having an interest in the application, and shall prepare a report summarizing the factors involved, including recommendations and suggested findings and conclusions. At least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing, the report shall be filed with the hearing examiner and copies thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and shall be made available to any interested party at the cost of reproduction.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.100 Public hearing.
A. Before rendering a decision on any application, the hearing examiner shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon, as applicable. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in the applicable city code governing the application.
B. The hearing examiner shall have the authority granted to administrative bodies and presiding officers under Chapter 2.18 for the conduct of quasi-judicial hearings and may prescribe additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with Chapter 2.18.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.110 Hearing examiner’s decision and recommendation.
A. The hearing examiner’s decision or recommendation shall contain the required elements of quasi-judicial final decisions in Section 2.18.150.
B. At the conclusion of oral testimony at a public hearing, the hearing examiner may establish the date and time at which the public record will close. The public record may be extended beyond the public hearing for the purpose of allowing written testimony to be submitted. The extension shall not exceed ten (10) working days after the conclusion of oral testimony. All decisions of the hearing examiner shall be rendered within ten (10) working days after the date the public record closes.
C. The hearing examiner’s decision shall be based upon the policies of the comprehensive planning documents of the city, shoreline master program, the standards set forth in the various development regulations of the city or any other applicable program adopted by the city council. When acting upon any of the above applications or appeals, the hearing examiner may grant or deny the application, or may attach reasonable conditions, modifications and restrictions found necessary to make the project compatible with its location and to carry out the goals and policies of the applicable comprehensive plan, shoreline master program, or other applicable plans or programs adopted by the city council.
D. The decision of the hearing examiner on all matters is final and conclusive, unless appealed to Grays Harbor County superior court as provided for in this code or the city of Aberdeen shoreline master program.
E. Upon issuance of the hearing examiner’s decision, the city staff shall transmit a copy of the decision by first class mail to the last address provided to the city by the applicant and send a notice of the decision by first class mail to other interested parties requesting the same.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.120 Reconsideration.
The procedures and requirements for a reconsideration of a decision of the hearing examiner shall be as established in Section 2.18.160.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.130 Appeal of hearing examiner’s decision.
A. Appeals of actions of the hearing examiner are appealable to Grays Harbor County superior court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW, except for shoreline permit actions, which are appealable to the State Shoreline Hearings Board pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW.
B. Notice of the appeal and any other pleadings required to be filed with the court or the Shoreline Hearings Board shall be filed and served as required by the applicable statute.
C. The cost of transcribing and preparing all records ordered certified by the court or the Shoreline Hearings Board or desired by the appellant for such appeal shall be borne by the appellant. The appellant will be provided copies of hearing tapes by the city and will be responsible for their transcription.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

2.30.140 Hearing examiner’s report.
A. The hearing examiner shall prepare an annual written report for the city council summarizing activities, actions and observations.
B. The hearing examiner shall meet with the city council as requested, for the purpose of reviewing reported observations, including a review of the policies contained in the comprehensive plan, shoreline master program, development regulations and the administration of these policies.
(Ord. 6592 § 1, Added, 05/25/2016)

Chapter 2.32 BUILDING CODE COMMISSION

Sections:
2.32.010     Building code commission created.
2.32.020     Membership—Term of office.
2.32.030     Officers.
2.32.040     Meetings—Voting.
2.32.050     Powers and duties.
2.32.060     Policy.
2.32.070     Procedures.
2.32.080     Appeals.
2.32.090     Decisions on appeals—Finality—Further appeal.

2.32.010 Building code commission created.
There is hereby created a building code commission whose membership and duties shall be as prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.27.010)

2.32.020 Membership—Term of office.
The building code commission shall consist of eight members, all of whom shall serve without compensation. The membership of the commission shall be as follows: two members shall be appointed from the membership of the Aberdeen city council; one member shall be a licensed architect; two members shall be general building contractors; one member shall be a specialty contractor; one member shall be a retailer of building materials and supplies; and one member shall be a registered engineer. The building official and the fire chief shall be ex-officio members of the building code commission. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. At least five members shall be residents of the city of Aberdeen. Up to three members may be nonresidents of the city of Aberdeen but shall have a current business license to do business in the city of Aberdeen. The members from the Aberdeen city council shall be appointed for terms of one year. The other six members shall be appointed for terms of two years, which terms shall be staggered so that three appointments expire one year and three the following year. Terms of office shall expire on December 31st of the appropriate year. The members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, for such cause as the mayor and city council shall deem sufficient.
(Prior code § 1.27.020)

2.32.030 Officers.
The commission shall elect a chairman to preside at its meetings and a vice chairman to preside in the absence of the chairman. The building official shall be the secretary of the commission and be responsible for giving notice of meetings and keeping all records and minutes except when the commission is considering appeals from the uniform fire code in which case the fire chief shall serve as secretary. The terms of offices shall be for one year, or until their successors are elected. The officers shall be elected at the first regular meeting of each calendar year.
(Prior code § 1.27.030)

2.32.040 Meetings—Voting.
The commission shall fix a date, time and location for its regular meeting by by-law, or motion passed and recorded in its minutes; providing, that regular meetings of the commission shall be held at least once every three months. Special meetings may be called from time to time as provided by law. The commission may adopt such by-laws for the conduct of its business as it finds necessary. Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A majority vote of those present at a meeting is required for any action of the commission. The chairman shall vote only when required to break a tie.
(Prior code § 1.27.040)

2.32.050 Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the commission are as follows:
A. Review enacted and proposed building, plumbing, electrical, housing, mechanical, fire and dilapidated structures codes and proposed amendments or changes in said codes, and to solicit public input thereon and make recommendations to the city council;
B. To research, recommend and promote uniform regulations, legislation, and enforcement pertaining to all phases of building construction and related codes;
C. To advise and assist the various departments of city government when requested in the administration and enforcement of laws and ordinances pertaining to building, construction, and related work;
D. To act as the board of appeals for the Uniform Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical, and Fire Codes and for the "Dilapidated Structures Ordinance" of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 1.27.050)

2.32.060 Policy.
The commission shall seek uniformity in all codes and, wherever possible, shall insist on performance standards rather than specification standards when studying codes for revision or adoption.
(Prior code § 1.27.060)

2.32.070 Procedures.
A. It is desirable that all requests for code or ordinance changes pertaining to buildings, construction or related matters, be reviewed by the commission. To realize this goal, proposed changes should be submitted to the secretary for the commission with all supporting evidence and facts as to why the change should be made and how any amendments should read. The secretary shall provide copies of requested changes and supporting evidence and facts and other information the secretary feels is pertinent to the proposal to each commission member, if possible, not less than ten days prior to the next regular commission meeting whenever possible. The commission shall act promptly on requests for changes and shall report in writing to the appropriate department or the city council.
B. The chairman of the building commission shall have the power to appoint subcommittees to study codes, ordinances or proposals for recommendation back to the commission. The chairman may appoint research committees of nonmembers who are specialists in their respective fields. The chairman shall appoint a member of the commission to serve as the chairman of each committee. The research committee shall make their recommendations through their chairman back to the building commission.
(Prior code § 1.27.070)

2.32.080 Appeals.
A. Whenever an appeal is filed, pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Electrical Code, or Uniform Fire Code questioning an interpretation of any of such codes by the administration or questioning an administrative decision concerning the suitability of alternate materials or types of construction, the building official, or fire chief in the case of appeals from the Uniform Fire Code, will immediately contact by phone the authors of the respective codes for their interpretation and discuss these with the appellant. If the building department and the appellant fail to agree on the solution, a copy of the appeal and a report of the author's interpretation along with written reports from both the appellant and the building department shall be delivered to the chairman of the commission and the chairman of the commission shall appoint an ad hoc appeal board and shall schedule an appeal within two working days. Such board shall be appointed from commission members and shall consist of five members whom the chairman deems qualified to consider the technical questions presented by the appeal. The ad hoc appeal board shall give written notice to the appellant, and the department making the decision from which the appeal is made, of a time and place for the hearing of such appeal which shall be held in five working days of the appointment of the ad hoc appeals board. The board shall make a written decision within five working days of the appointment of the ad hoc appeals board; this time, however, may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. The affirmative vote of three members of the ad hoc appeals board is necessary to reverse the determination of the department.
B. All appeals must be in writing and shall specify the decision appealed from and the resolution suggested by the appellant, along with the grounds for such decision. All appeals to the board shall be served upon the chairman or the building official of the city of Aberdeen, or the fire chief in the case of appeals arising out of the Uniform Fire Code, and must be filed within thirty (30) days of the decision which is being appealed.
C. The appeals board shall make a record of the appeal. It shall hear evidence from the appellant and from the administration and may consider the interpretations of the authors of the respective codes as reported by the appellant or the city department.
D. The appeals board shall give written notice of its decision to the secretary with a duplicate copy to the appellant.
(Prior code § 1.27.080)

2.32.090 Decisions on appeals—Finality—Further appeal.
Any order of the commission sitting as a board of appeals shall be final and conclusive unless, within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the order, a petition for review is filed in superior court.
(Ord. 6367, Amended, 09/22/2004)

Chapter 2.40 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
2.40.010     Planning Commission Created - definitions.
2.40.020     Terms of office.
2.40.030     Vacancies—Removal of member.
2.40.040     Organization—Meetings—Records.
2.40.050     Powers – Duties.
2.40.060     Referrals from council—Reports.
2.40.080     Secretary.
2.40.090     Quorum.

2.40.010 Planning Commission Created - definitions.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 44, Laws of 1935, as amended (RCW 35.63, as amended) and Article XI, Section 11 of the Constitution of the state of Washington, there is created a city planning commission, consisting of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The word "commission" when used herein shall mean the Planning Commission. The word "director" when used herein shall mean the Community Development Director.
(Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

2.40.020 Terms of office.
The term of office of the members shall be three years, but of the first six appointed, the term of the first two shall end on the second Monday in January, 1972 and January, 1973 and the last two shall end on the second Monday in January, 1974. The terms of the first six members appointed shall be fixed and designated by the mayor at the time of such appointment. The term of the seventh member shall begin on the second Monday of January, 1981.
(Prior code § 1.29.020)

2.40.030 Vacancies—Removal of member.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Members may be removed after public hearing, by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. Notice of the charge and pendency of the hearing with respect to the removal of a member of the planning commission shall be given by mail addressed to the residence of the accused member at least five days before the date of said hearing. The members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and they shall serve without compensation; provided, however, they may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in performing their official duties.
(Prior code § 1.29.030)

2.40.040 Organization—Meetings—Records.
A. Organization and Meetings. The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members who shall hold office for one year. The commission shall hold a regular meeting the third Thursday of each month at a fixed time and place selected by the commission and shall hold such special meetings as are deemed necessary by its chairman, by a majority of its members, or by the city council. If a regularly scheduled meeting falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next prior business day.
B. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the transaction of business. The commission shall adopt minutes of its meetings and such minutes shall constitute the public record of the commission. An audio recording shall be made of each commission meeting and the audio recording shall be held by the secretary of the commission for a period of one year. At the end of a one year period from the date of the meeting, if no request has been made for a copy and if no appeal or other action related to the recording is pending, the secretary shall erase the audio recording and the written minutes, as approved by the commission, shall constitute the official record of the commission. Any individual requesting a transcript of the tapes shall pay an amount as set forth in Section 2.20.050.
(Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009. Prior code § 1.29.040)

2.40.050 Powers – Duties.
The commission shall have all of the powers and perform each and all of the duties specified by Chapter 35.63 RCW including the preparation of a comprehensive plan zoning ordinance and critical areas ordinance to be recommended to the city council.
(Ord. 6592 § 4, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

2.40.060 Referrals from council—Reports.
The city council may refer to the planning commission, for its recommendations and report, any ordinance, resolution or other proposal relating to any of the matters and subjects referred to in RCW 35.63, as amended, and the commission shall promptly report to the council thereon, making such recommendations and giving such counsel as it may deem proper in the premises.
(Prior code § 1.29.060)

2.40.080 Secretary.
The mayor shall designate a member of the paid staff of the city to serve as secretary, who shall serve without additional compensation.
(Prior code § 1.29.080)

2.40.090 Quorum.
A majority of the membership of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any action taken by a majority of those present when those present constitute a quorum, at any regular or special meeting of the planning commission, shall be deemed and taken as the action of the commission.
(Prior code § 1.29.090)

Chapter 2.44 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION

Sections:
2.44.010     Bureau of fire prevention created.
2.44.020     Duties.
2.44.030     Chief of fire department—Duties.
2.44.040     Inspection of buildings.
2.44.050     Supplemental regulations—Issuing of permits—Certificates of approval—Fees.
2.44.060     Inspection—Frequency.
2.44.070     Orders of inspectors—Review of.
2.44.080     Inspection initiated by private complaints.
2.44.090     Records.
2.44.100     Annual report.
2.44.110     Violations—Penalties.

2.44.010 Bureau of fire prevention created.
A. A bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city of Aberdeen is established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department who shall be responsible for the duties and activities of this bureau and for the enforcement of the ordinances pertaining to fire prevention.
B. The chief of the fire department shall designate an officer (or member) of the fire department as chief inspector of the bureau of fire prevention, who shall hold this office at the pleasure of the chief of the fire department.
C. The chief of the fire department may also designate such number of assistant inspectors as shall from time to time be deemed necessary. He may, in addition, designate such number of assistant inspectors from the uniformed force of the fire department as shall from time to time be deemed necessary.
(Prior code § 1.34.010)

2.44.020 Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all laws and ordinances of the state, county and city, covering the following:
    1. The prevention of fires;
    2. The storage and use of explosives and flammables;
    3. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment;
    4. The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
    5. The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live, or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose;
    6. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires;
    7. The investigation of building especially susceptible to fire;
    8. The investigation of hazardous occupancies.
B. They shall have other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. Furthermore, they shall have power to act and do whatever may be deemed necessary for the safety and protection of the citizens from fire hazards. The chief of the fire department may delegate any of his powers or duties under this chapter to the head of the bureau of fire prevention.
(Prior code § 1.34.020)

2.44.030 Chief of fire department—Duties.
The chief of the fire department shall prepare instructions for the chief inspector and his assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by the applicable sections.
(Prior code § 1.34.030)

2.44.040 Inspection of buildings.
The chief of the fire department (or his authorized representatives) may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premise within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which under the provisions of this chapter, he or they may deem necessary to be made.
(Prior code § 1.34.040)

2.44.050 Supplemental regulations—Issuing of permits—Certificates of approval—Fees.
A. The requirements of this chapter are presented as a minimum requirement for safety. In their enforcement they shall be supplemented, especially as to detail, by the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
B. Only devices and materials which have been tested and/or approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories shall be installed or used, and such installation or use shall comply with the latest published regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, a complete set of which shall be kept on file in the office of the fire chief and/or city clerk.
C. The chief of the fire department is authorized and empowered to issue permits for the storage, transportation, use and/or sale of explosives and flammable materials of any description, for the approval of the use of machinery, equipment or apparatus pertinent to such flammable materials. Such permits may be for any definite period at the discretion of the authority enforcing the chapter.
D. Certificates of approval authorizing the installation and maintenance of acetylene equipment, anaesthetical apparatus, blower and exhaust systems, calcium carbide storage, city gas, compressed gas systems, dip tanks, dry cleaning and dyeing plants, inflammable liquid storage, fuel systems (pulverized), gasoline systems (lighting and heat), incinerators, nitro-cellulose X-ray and motion picture films, oil burning equipment, paint spraying and spray booths, pyroxlylin plastic (storage, sale and handling), refrigerating systems, tanks, gravity and pressure, shall be issued and authority to make such installations or maintain such apparatus or equipment must be obtained from the chief of the fire department before such installation is made and certificate of approval issued before such apparatus or equipment is placed in use, tested, filled or otherwise made to perform the function for which it is designed or intended.
E. The chief of the fire department or his assistants may at their discretion charge a fee of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than five dollars ($5.00) for a permit to install, with the subsequent inspection thereof, any one or more units or pieces of equipment made at one time. A complete schedule of such charges shall be approved by the council and be kept on file with the city clerk and/or fire chief.
(Prior code § 1.34.050)

2.44.060 Inspection—Frequency.
A. The fire prevention bureau shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, all buildings and premises, including such other hazards or appliances as the chief may designate, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions which would reasonably tend to cause fire or contribute to its spread, or any violation of the purpose or provisions of this code and of any other law or standard affecting fire safety.
B. This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer or employee, responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or by reason of a failure to inspect, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment or process authorized herein, or for any action in connection with the control or extinguishment of any fire or in connection with any other official duties.
(Prior code § 1.34.060)

2.44.070 Orders of inspectors—Review of.
A. Whenever any inspector, as given in Sections 2.44.050 and 2.44.060, except when properly provided for by permit, shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of waste paper, boxes, accumulations of moss or sawdust on roofs, or any highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, or shall find violations of the ordinance of the bureau of fire prevention, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied. This order shall be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings within the time specified by the inspector, subject to review by the chief of the fire department upon request by the owner or occupant within this time limit. The chief shall review this order and such order shall remain in force and be complied with unless revoked or modified by the chief within twenty-four (24) hours from time of requesting the review. Provided, however, that any such owner or occupants may, within three days after the making or affirming of any such order by the chief of the fire department, file his petition with the municipal court, praying a review of such order, and it shall be the duty of such court to hear the same within not less than five days nor more than ten days from the time the petition is filed, and to make such decision in the premises as right and justice may require. This decision shall be final. Such parties so appealing to the municipal court shall file with said court within two days a bond in an amount to be fixed by the court, conditioned to pay all the costs of such appeal in case such appellant fails to sustain his appeal.
B. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of said order, shall be liable to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
C. The orders of the bureau of fire prevention may be served upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or by registered mail. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, the order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the said person a copy of the order, or it may be sent by registered mail to the owner's last known post office address.
(Prior code § 1.34.070)

2.44.080 Inspection initiated by private complaints.
A. The bureau of fire prevention, upon the complaint of any person or whenever it shall be deemed necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within their jurisdiction. Inspections shall be made for the purpose of reporting and correcting the following special fire hazards pertaining to buildings and their occupancy:
    1. Lack of repairs;
    2. Age and dilapidated condition;
    3. Faulty or unapproved construction;
    4. Lack of sufficient fire escapes;
    5. Lack of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus;
    6. Lack of fire extinguishing equipment;
    7. Materials and buildings specially susceptible to fire;
    8. Conditions endangering other property or occupants.
B. Reports on such inspections shall be extensive and thorough and shall give full recommendations of the bureau of fire prevention setting forth the measures necessary to correct such special hazards by alterations, additions or demolition, or by any other method.
(Prior code § 1.34.080)

2.44.090 Records.
The chief of the fire department shall keep, in the office of the bureau of fire prevention, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Records shall be made daily from the reports made by the inspectors under the provisions of this chapter. Likewise, records of all inspections, order and reports shall be kept by the bureau of fire prevention. All such records shall be public.
(Prior code § 1.34.090)

2.44.100 Annual report.
A. The annual report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made on or before the 15th day of January and transmitted to the chief of the fire department so as to be included in his annual report to the mayor or city council. It shall contain all proceedings under this chapter, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include.
B. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to investigate and to recommend to the city council such additional ordinances, or amendments to existing ordinances, as he may deem necessary for safeguarding life and property against fire, and to include such in the annual report.
(Prior code § 1.34.100)

2.44.110 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, or persons, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this fire prevention code, or neglecting to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall forfeit, and pay a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and in addition thereto a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day that said violation is permitted to exist beyond a reasonable period after notice has been served as provided in said section, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned in the city jail not to exceed thirty (30) days for each offense.
(Prior code § 1.34.110)

Chapter 2.46 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT COMMAND AGENCY

Sections:
2.46.010     Fire Department Designated.
2.46.020     Authority to request assistance.
2.46.030     Emergency assistance agreements.
2.46.040     Oral emergency assistance agreements.
2.46.050     Liability - recovery of costs.

2.46.010 Fire Department Designated.
The governing body of the city hereby designates the Aberdeen Fire Department as the hazardous materials incident command agency for all hazardous materials incidents within the corporate limits of the city. The Aberdeen Fire Chief may delegate hazardous incident command responsibility to state or municipal agencies as necessary in the interests of departmental operations.
(Ord. 6516, Added, 09/14/2011)

2.46.020 Authority to request assistance.
The fire chief is authorized to enter into agreements with persons, agencies, and/or corporations who may provide assistance with respect to a hazardous materials incident. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.24 RCW such persons, agencies, and/or corporations are not liable for civil damages resulting from any act or omission in the rendering of such care, assistance, or advice, other than acts or omissions constituting gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct, provided:
1. The fire department and the person whose assistance is requested have entered into a written hazardous materials assistance agreement prior to the incident which incorporates the terms of AMC 2.46.030, except as specified in AMC 2.46.040;
2. The request for assistance comes from the fire department.
(Ord. 6516, Added, 09/14/2011)

2.46.030 Emergency assistance agreements.
A. Hazardous materials emergency assistance agreements which are executed prior to a hazardous materials incident shall include the following terms and conditions:
    1. The person requested to assist shall not be obligated to assist;
    2. The person requested to assist may act only under direction of the incident commander or his representative;
    3. The person requested to assist may withdraw his assistance if he deems the actions or directions of the incident commander to be contrary to accepted hazardous materials response practices;
    4. The person requested to assist shall not profit from rendering the assistance;
    5. The person requested to assist shall not be a public employee acting in his official capacity within the boundaries of his political subdivision;
    6. Any person responsible for causing the hazardous materials incident shall not be covered by the liability standard defined in AMC 2.46.020.
B. It is the responsibility of both parties to ensure that mutually agreeable procedures are established when assistance is requested, for recording the name of the person whose assistance is requested, and the time and date of the request, which records shall be retained for three years by the fire department. A copy of the official incident command agency designation shall be a part of the assistance agreement specified in this section.
(Ord. 6516, Added, 09/14/2011)

2.46.040 Oral emergency assistance agreements.
A. The chief of the fire department or his representative may enter into oral hazardous materials emergency assistance agreements at the scene of an incident where execution of a written agreement prior to the incident is not possible. A notification of the terms of this section shall be presented at the scene by the incident commander or his representative to the person whose assistance is requested. The incident commander and the person whose assistance is requested shall both sign the notification which appears in subsection (2) of this section, indicating the date and time of signature. If a requesting agency deliberately misrepresents individual or agency status, that agency shall assume full liability for any damages resulting from the actions of the person whose assistance is requested, other than those damages resulting from gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.
B. The notification required by subsection (1) of this section shall be as follows:NOTIFICATION OF “GOOD SAMARITAN” LAW
You have been requested to provide emergency assistance by a representative of a designated hazardous materials incident command agency. To encourage your assistance, the Washington State Legislature has passed “Good Samaritan” Legislation (Chapter 4.24 RCW) to protect you from potential liability.
The law reads, in part: “Any person who, in good faith, renders emergency care, assistance, or advice with respect to a hazardous materials incident is not liable for civil damages resulting from any act or omission in the rendering of such care, assistance, or advice, other than acts or omissions constituting gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.”
The law requires that you be advised of certain conditions to ensure your protection:
1. You are not obligated to assist and you may withdraw your assistance at any time.
2. You cannot profit from assisting.
3. You must agree to act under the direction of the incident commander.
4. You are not covered by this law if you caused the initial accident or if you are a public employee doing your official duty.
I have read and understand the above:
Name _________________________
Date _________________ Time _________
I am a representative of a designated hazardous materials incident command agency and I am authorized to make this request for assistance:
Name _________________________
Date _________________ Time _________
(Ord. 6516, Added, 09/14/2011)

2.46.050 Liability - recovery of costs.
A. The Aberdeen Fire Department or its authorized contractor is authorized, but not required, to mitigate the effects of any hazardous material unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the city of Aberdeen.
B. Any person or persons, responsible for causing a hazardous materials incident, as defined in RCW 70.136.020, is liable to the Aberdeen Fire Department for extraordinary costs incurred by the Aberdeen Fire Department, in the course of protecting the public from actual or threatened harm resulting from the hazardous materials incident, until the incident oversight is assumed by the state of Washington Department of Ecology or another public agency with jurisdiction over the incident.
C. “Extraordinary costs” as used in this section means those reasonable and necessary costs incurred by the Aberdeen Fire Department in the course of protecting life and property that exceed the normal and usual expenses anticipated for police and fire protection, emergency services, and public works. These shall include, but not be limited to, overtime for public employees, unusual fuel consumption requirements, any loss or damage to publicly owned equipment, and the purchase or lease of any special equipment or services required to protect the public during the hazardous materials incident.
(Ord. 6516, Added, 09/14/2011)

Chapter 2.48 CIVIL SERVICE

Sections:
2.48.010     Civil service commission created.
2.48.020     Removal of commissioners—Vacancies.
2.48.030     Classification of employees.
2.48.040     Examinations—Subject matter.
2.48.050     Veteran's preference in examinations.
2.48.060     Clerk of commission—Register of persons examined.
2.48.070     Appointments in classified service—Notice of vacancies—Probation.
2.48.080     Officers and employees in civil service.
2.48.090     Removals, suspensions and demotions.
2.48.100     Reports to commission.
2.48.110     Annual reports.
2.48.120     Frauds prohibited.
2.48.130     Appointments.
2.48.140     Violations—Penalty.
2.48.150     Rules and regulations of police department and fire department.
2.48.160     Temporary appointments—Police department.
2.48.170     Temporary appointments—Fire department.
2.48.180     Filing application—Notice of examinations.
2.48.190     Prerequisites.
2.48.200     False statements.
2.48.210     Medical and physical examination.
2.48.220     Examinations.
2.48.230     Examiners.
2.48.240     Eligible lists.
2.48.250     Expiration of eligibility.
2.48.260     Lines of promotion.
2.48.270     Promotion examinations.
2.48.280     Eligibility for promotion.
2.48.290     Minimum requirement for promotion.
2.48.300     Seniority in promotion in the fire department.
2.48.310     Vacancies.
2.48.320     Retirement mandatory.
2.48.330     Causes for removal or separation.
2.48.340     Discharge of probationer.
2.48.350     Probationary period of promotion.
2.48.360     Leave of absence.
2.48.370     Retention of civil service position.
2.48.380     Lay-off and reduction in rank.
2.48.390     Reinstatements.
2.48.400     Reports for eligibles.
2.48.410     Adoption of necessary rules and regulations.

2.48.010 Civil service commission created.
A. Civil service is established in the city of Aberdeen for the Police and Fire Departments of the City, to be administered by a civil service commission. The commission shall consist of five commissioners.
B. One commissioner shall be a member of the city council, and the remaining four commissioners shall be appointed from the resident citizens of the city not holding any official position with the City, all terms commencing on the first day of January. The commissioner appointed from the membership of the Aberdeen city council shall serve a term of one year. The commissioners other than the councilmember shall serve terms of four years and the terms shall be set so that the term of two commissioners expire on January 1st of each even numbered year. All appointments shall be made by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Any member of the commission may be removed for incompetency, incompatibility or dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good cause; provided, however, that no member shall be removed until charges have been preferred in writing and due notice and a full hearing held before the city council, except as provided in Section 2.48.020.
C. The civil service commission may retain a legal advisor who may conduct and preside over hearings conducted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the civil service commission. The legal advisor shall not be entitled to vote in the proceedings. The legal advisor's primary function will be to provide legal advice to the commission and, upon request, to conduct the hearing pursuant to the rules and regulations of the civil service commission.
D. In the event a vacancy occurs, there shall be appointed a commissioner, not later than January 15th, following a vacancy or expired term. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term. Three commissioners shall constitute a quorum to transact any business herein. All commissioners shall serve without compensation, except that a commissioner who is also serving as clerk and secretary for the commission shall be entitled to compensation.
(Prior code § 1.38.010)

2.48.020 Removal of commissioners—Vacancies.
As an alternative to removal under Section 2.48.010, the mayor may, in his or her discretion, remove any commissioner, but the vacancy thereby created shall be filled by the city council. The mayor shall, within five days, report in writing any such removal to the council with his or her reasons therefor, but the commissioner so removed shall have no right to a trial, hearing or appeal. Vacancies in the office of commissioner occurring in any other way than by removal by the mayor, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the consent and approval of the council.
(Prior code § 1.38.020)

2.48.030 Classification of employees.
The city council shall classify and describe civil service job classifications for the police and fire departments. The city council shall adopt such classification by resolution, and may amend adopted classifications by motion. Changes in the job classifications will be subject to the procedure as specified in the Aberdeen personnel ordinance or policies. The salary ranges will be as established by the city council.
(Prior code § 1.38.030)

2.48.040 Examinations—Subject matter.
All applicants for offices or places classified under civil service in the departments herein provided for shall be subject to examination which shall be public, competitive and open to all citizens of the United States who are qualified to take such examination. Such examinations shall be practical in their character and will fairly test the relative capacity of the persons examined to discharge the duties of the position to which they seek to be appointed, and shall include therein appropriate tests of physical qualifications, health and skill. No questions in any examination shall relate to political or religious opinions or affiliations. All examinations shall be made under the control of the commission, from time to time as necessity requires, and shall be held at a time and place designated by the commission for such purpose. Every applicant for entry level examination shall pay the city finance department an examination fee to be set by the civil service commission and shall not be examined until he or she exhibits the receipt therefor. The examination fee shall not exceed the cost of administering the examination.
(Prior code § 1.38.040)

2.48.050 Veteran's preference in examinations.
In all competitive examinations, unless otherwise provided for herein or in state law, to determine the qualifications of applicants for civil service positions, a preference shall be given to all veterans as defined in RCW 41.04.005 by adding to the passing mark, grade or rating only, based upon a possible rating of one hundred (100) points as perfect a percentage in accordance with the following:
1. Ten percent to a veteran who is not receiving any veterans retirement payments and said percentage shall be utilized in said veteran's competitive examinations and not in any promotional examination until one of such examinations results in said veteran's first appointment: provided, that said percentage shall not be utilized in any promotional examination;
2. Five percent to a veteran who is receiving any veterans retirement payments and said percentage shall be utilized in said veteran's competitive examination only and not in any promotional examination until one of such examinations results in said veteran's first appointment: provided, that said percentage shall not be utilized in any promotional examination;
3. Five percent to a veteran who, after having previously received employment with the state or any of its political subdivisions or municipal corporations, shall be called, or recalled, to active military service for a period of one year, or more, during any period of war, for his first promotional examination only, upon compliance with RCW 73.16.035 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended;
4. There shall be no examination preferences other than those which have been specifically provided for above and all preferences above specified in subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this section must be claimed by a veteran within eight years of the date of his release from active service.
(Prior code § 1.38.050)

2.48.060 Clerk of commission—Register of persons examined.
The mayor, with the consent of the commission, shall appoint a clerk who shall also act as secretary for the commission and who shall keep the records for the commission, prepare all reports made to it and keep a record of all examinations held under its discretion and perform such other duties as the commission may prescribe. From the returns or reports of examinations made by the commission, the clerk shall prepare a register for each grade or class of position in the classified service of the city, of the persons whose general average standing upon examinations for such grade or class is not less than the minimum fixed by the rules hereinafter provided therefor, and who are otherwise eligible; and such person shall take rank upon the register of candidates in order of their relative excellence, as determined by examination without reference to priority of time of examination.
(Prior code § 1.38.060)

2.48.070 Appointments in classified service—Notice of vacancies—Probation.
A. The department head shall notify the commission of any vacancy in a classified civil service position. Separate notice shall be given of each position to be filled, except that one notification shall be sufficient where more than one position of the same grade is to be filled.
B. Upon such notice for an entry level position, the commission shall certify to the department head the names and addresses, together with a notation of veterans preference if any, of the first five candidates on the list or register of eligible or the top twenty-five (25) percent, whichever is greater, for the position to be filled. If there are less than five eligible candidates on the register, the lesser number shall be certified. In the event more than one position of the same grade is to be filled, the commission may certify a lesser number than five names for each position and may certify a single list from which the appointments shall be made. The commission may limit the number of times the same person shall be certified.
C. Upon such notice for a position above the entry level, the commission shall certify to the department head the names and addresses, together with a notation of veterans preference if any, of the first three candidates on the list or register of eligible for the position to be filled. If there are less than three eligible candidates on the register, the lesser number shall be certified. In the event more than one position of the same grade is to be filled, the commission may certify a lesser number than three names for each position and may certify a single list from which the appointments shall be made. The commission may limit the number of times the same person shall be certified.
D. The department head shall be the appointing official and shall make the appointment from the name or names certified to him or her by the commission. The department head may require each candidate to appear before him for interview and may inspect the candidate's examination papers. Appointments may be made without regard to the order of sequence of certification, subject to any preferences established by ordinance.
E. All appointees shall be on probation for a period of one year from the date of appointment and may be discharged at any time during such probation as provided in Section 2.48.340. If any appointee has not been discharged, his or her appointment shall automatically become permanent at the expiration of the probationary period.
(Prior code § 1.38.070)

2.48.080 Officers and employees in civil service.
A. All full paid employees of the fire and police departments shall be in the classified civil service upon appointment and qualification for office.
B. Depending upon the needs of the department, the civil service may restrict applicants for entry level firefighter positions to persons who are certified as paramedics. The paramedics, however, are not a separate rank within the fire department; rather, they shall be dealt with as appointed positions under subsection (C) of this section.
C. Additional positions within the police and fire department to which classified civil service employees may be assigned may be created by the city council. Appointment to or removal from such positions shall not be under civil service and shall be made by the department head; however, appointees to such positions shall retain their most recent civil service classification.
(Ord. 6486, Amended, 09/23/2009)

2.48.090 Removals, suspensions and demotions.
A. No person in the classified civil service who has been permanently appointed under provisions of this chapter shall be removed, suspended or demoted except for cause, and only upon the written accusation of the appointing power; a written statement of which accusation shall be served upon the accused, and a duplicate filed with the commission. Any person so removed, suspended or demoted may, within ten days from the time of his or her removal, suspension or demotion, file with the secretary of the commission a written demand for a hearing, whereupon the commission shall conduct such hearing.
B. Such hearing shall be public, after no less than five days written notice to the accused of the time and place thereof, and the accused shall be afforded the right to appear by counsel, and to present his or her defense. A full and complete record of the proceedings, and all testimony, shall be made. Hearings shall be informal and the rules of evidence prevailing in judicial proceedings shall not be binding. Any oral or documentary evidence and other data deemed relevant by the commission may be received in evidence. The commission shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas and require the attendance of witnesses and the production by them of books, papers, and documents as may be deemed by the commission material to a just determination of the appeal. Such process or subpoena shall issue under the order of the commission and shall be signed by the chairperson and secretary thereof and be directed to the chief of police for service, and may be served and returned by any regular or special police officer.
C. The hearing shall be confined to the determination of the question of whether the removal, suspension or demotion was made in good faith and for cause. After such hearing, the commission may affirm the action of the appointing power, or if it finds that the removal, suspension or demotion was not made in good faith and for cause, shall order the immediate reinstatement or reemployment of such person, which reinstatement shall, if the commission so provides, be retroactive, and entitle such person to pay or compensation for the time of removal, suspension or demotion. The commission may also, in lieu of affirming a removal, modify the order by directing a suspension without pay, for a given period, and subsequent restoration to duty, or demotion in classification, grade or pay. The findings of the commission shall be certified in writing to the appointing power, and the employee affected and shall be forthwith enforced by such power. In rendering a decision following a hearing, the commission shall make and enter findings of fact in support of its decision.
D. If the order of removal, suspension or demotion is concurred in or modified by the commission or a majority thereof, the accused may appeal therefrom to the superior court of Grays Harbor County. Such appeal shall be taken by serving the secretary of the commission, within thirty (30) days after the entry of the order, a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof and demanding that a certified transcript of the testimony taken at the hearing, the record of the hearing, and all papers on file with the commission relating to the order, be filed by the commission with the superior court. Also within thirty (30) days after the entry of the order, the appellant shall deposit with the civil service commission a sum of money reasonably calculated to cover all costs of preparing a transcript. Upon completion of the transcript, the appellant shall forthwith pay any additional sums owing for the transcript preparation or the commission shall return any excess funds paid. The commission shall, within ten days after the filing of the notice, and after payment of the costs of preparing the transcript, certify and file the transcript and record with the court to the determination of whether the order of the commission was or was not made in good faith and for cause, and no appeal shall be taken except upon such ground or grounds. By stipulation of all parties to the review proceedings, the record may be shortened; however, any party unreasonably refusing to stipulate to limit the record may subsequently be taxed for the additional costs. Nothing in this section shall limit the power of the department head to suspend without pay any subordinate for a period not exceeding eighty (80) working hours in any calendar year without a hearing.
(Prior code § 1.38.090)

2.48.100 Reports to commission.
For the purpose of certification to the city officers for the payment of salaries and in order that the commission may keep a proper record of changes in the classified civil service, each appointing officer shall immediately report in writing to the commission prior to the next regular meeting.
A. Every probational or temporary appointment made;
B. Every refusal or neglect to accept an appointment under the department head by a person who has been duly certified;
C. Every suspension or other disciplinary action made by the department head of any officer or employee with the reasons thereof;
D. Every separation from service under the department head and whether the separation was caused by death, dismissal or resignation; any such resignation to be in writing and filed with the commission;
E. Every office created or abolished in the department, which comes under the classified civil service;
F. Every leave of absence granted to a member of the department.
(Prior code § 1.38.100)

2.48.110 Annual reports.
The commission shall on or before the first day of December of each year make a report to the mayor and city council showing its own actions, the practical effects thereof, and any suggestion it may have for the benefit of the service.
(Prior code § 1.38.110)

2.48.120 Frauds prohibited.
No person holding any position in the classified civil service is under obligation to contribute to any political fund or to render any political service to any person or party whatsoever, and no person shall be removed, reduced in salary or grade or otherwise prejudicated for refusing to do so. No public officer, whether elected or appointed shall discharge, promote, demote or in any manner change the official rank, employment or compensation of any person under civil service, or promise or threaten to do so, for giving or withholding, or neglecting to make any contribution of money, or any other valuable thing, for any political purpose.
(Prior code § 1.38.120)

2.48.130 Appointments.
The commission shall certify to the clerk all removals from or appointments to places and offices in the classified civil service, and all vacancies occurring therein, whether by death, retirement, resignation or dismissal. The finance director shall not draw or pay any warrant, or be in any manner concerned in paying any salary or wages to any person for services as any officer or employee of the city under civil service unless and until the certificate aforesaid is on file.
(Prior code § 1.38.130)

2.48.140 Violations—Penalty.
Any person in the service of the city under civil service rules who willfully or through culpable negligence violates any of the provisions of this chapter, and who is convicted thereof after trial before the civil service commission, shall be dismissed from the service of the city and not be subject to reappointment.
(Prior code § 1.38.150)

2.48.150 Rules and regulations of police department and fire department.
The chief of police and fire chief, may, from time to time, provide proper rules and regulations governing their departments, which rules and regulations shall be signed by the chief of the department and shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the department and shall be in effect from and after the posting, which rules and regulations may be changed from time to time by the chief of police or fire chief.
(Prior code § 1.38.170)

2.48.160 Temporary appointments—Police department.
The police chief of the city of Aberdeen may appoint, for a temporary period of time, police officers for the City of Aberdeen. Such appointments shall only be during a period of emergency declared by the mayor of the city of Aberdeen. The temporary appointments shall be for no longer than a period of sixty (60) days.
(Prior code § 1.38.180)

2.48.170 Temporary appointments—Fire department.
The fire chief of the city of Aberdeen may appoint, for a temporary period of time, fire-fighters for the city of Aberdeen. Such appointments shall only be during a period of emergency declared by the mayor of the city of Aberdeen. The temporary appointments shall be for no longer than a period of sixty (60) days.
(Prior code § 1.38.190)

2.48.180 Filing application—Notice of examinations.
Whenever there is need, the secretary shall make public notice inviting qualified persons to apply for employment in the civil service and for admission to the examination scheduled to establish an eligibility list. Persons desiring to compete for such positions shall file applications with the secretary on forms supplied by the city of Aberdeen. Notice of the time and place and general scope of every examination will be given by the commission by publication in the city's official newspaper, at least two weeks preceding such examination and such notice shall likewise be posted for two weeks at the City Hall, and such additional places as may be directed by the city.
(Prior code § 1.38.210)

2.48.190 Prerequisites.
No person shall be eligible or permitted to take an original or entrance examination for classified civil service unless he is a high school graduate or holds a general equivalent diploma of a high school education.
(Prior code § 1.38.225)

2.48.200 False statements.
Fraudulent conduct or false statements by an applicant, or by others with the applicant's connivance in any application or examination, is cause for the exclusion of the applicant from any examination or for removal of the applicant's name from the eligible register, or for discharge from the service after appointment; provided, that no person who has completed the probationary period shall be removed from the service after being accepted for such vacancy, without having an opportunity to be heard in the person's own behalf before the commission.
(Prior code § 1.38.230)

2.48.210 Medical and physical examination.
Before any applicant is appointed to any department under civil service, the applicant shall be required to take and pass a physical examination to the satisfaction of the commission. The cost of such medical examination for a person considered for appointment to the classified civil service shall be borne by the department.
(Prior code § 1.38.240)

2.48.220 Examinations.
The examination may consist of one or more of the following:
A. Written examination;
B. Oral examination;
C. Physical agility examination;
D. Medical-physical examination.
These examinations, including the scoring and minimum passing levels, shall be approved by the commission prior to testing.
(Prior code § 1.38.260)

2.48.230 Examiners.
All examinations shall be conducted by the commission, or by an examiner or examiners it names for the purpose of assisting in the examinations. The commission shall determine or approve the general questions to be propounded and the scope of the examination.
(Prior code § 1.38.270)

2.48.240 Eligible lists.
The commission shall keep a list of eligible, together with their grades of standing, date of examination and registration, for the inspection of the appointing officer in the various departments. Prior to making an appointment from eligibility list, the appointing official may require candidates to pass such other examinations, reasonably related to determining fitness for the position, including psychological evaluations and background checks, as may be required by the appointing official and consented to by the commission. Upon the request of the appointing official, the commission may remove the names of persons failing to successfully pass such additional examinations from the eligibility list.
(Prior code § 1.38.280)

2.48.250 Expiration of eligibility.
Eligibility lists shall expire in one year; provided, however, that the commission shall have the authority to shorten or extend the duration of any eligibility list.
(Prior code § 1.38.290)

2.48.260 Lines of promotion.
The commission shall establish lines of promotion from lower to higher grades of service in all cases where the duties of the lower position tend to qualify for service in the higher position.
(Prior code § 1.38.300)

2.48.270 Promotion examinations.
The rules governing promotion examinations shall, except as herein provided, be the same as for original examinations.
(Prior code § 1.38.310)

2.48.280 Eligibility for promotion.
No person shall be admitted to an examination for promotion for the various job classifications in the police and fire departments until such person has met the minimum qualifications of education and experience as specified in the job descriptions and served under regular appointment in the city of Aberdeen including probationary period; provided, however, that in the event the position to be filled is one requiring specialized or technical training or skill, of which fact the civil service commission shall be the judge, the commission may permit all members of the department, regardless of time and service, or persons nonmembers of the department, to take such examination. An exception to the examination restriction shall be granted to regularly appointed members who will meet all the minimum requirements of education and experience for promotion as specified in the job descriptions prior to the expiration of the eligibility list that results from that examination; provided, however, that no such member shall be promoted until all stated requirements are met.
(Prior code § 1.38.320)

2.48.290 Minimum requirement for promotion.
Minimum passing levels for promotional examinations shall be set by the civil service commission prior to testing on any promotional examination.
(Prior code § 1.38.330)

2.48.300 Seniority in promotion in the fire department.
Each candidate for promotion in the fire department who first has received a passing grade in a promotional examination, shall be entitled to a seniority credit to be added to officer's examination grade. The seniority credit shall be applied by adding one point for each year of active service the officer has had with the department to the total numerical score of correct answers in the examination; provided, that the seniority credit shall in no case exceed ten percent of the examination grade achieved by the officer.
(Prior code § 1.38.340)

2.48.310 Vacancies.
Whenever any vacancy to be filled by promotion exists, and there is no current eligibility list for that position, the head of the department shall notify the commission of such vacancy and the commission shall immediately call for an examination to fill such vacancy. The three persons receiving the highest passing grade, including credits for seniority as herein provided, shall be certified by the commission to the head of the department who shall appoint one of those certified to fill such vacancy.
(Prior code § 1.38.350)

2.48.320 Retirement mandatory.
Each and every civil service employee of the city of Aberdeen, shall upon attaining the age of seventy (70) years, be mandatorily retired from further active service with the city. Such retirement shall be effective upon the first calendar day of the month next succeeding the date such member attained the age of seventy (70) years. The commission may establish minimum medical and fitness standards which must be met by employees as a condition of continued employment. Such standards need not be the same as the standards for original employment, but the standards should be job related.
(Prior code § 1.38.360)

2.48.330 Causes for removal or separation.
The tenure of classified members of the civil service shall be only during good behavior, and any such person may be removed or discharged, suspended without pay, demoted or reduced in rank, or otherwise disciplined for any of the following reasons:
A. Incompetency, inefficiency or inattention to or dereliction of duty;
B. Violation of law, of official rules, regulations, policies or orders, or failure to obey any lawful or reasonable direction when such failure or violation amounts to insubordination or serious breach of discipline;
C. Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the employee holds;
D. Acceptance for personal use of a fee, gift, or other valuable thing in the course of work when given in the hope or expectation of receiving a favor or better treatment than that accorded the public generally.
E. Drunkenness or use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or any other habit forming drug, liquid or preparation to such extent that the use thereof interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical fitness of the employee, or which precludes the employee from properly performing the function and duties of any position under civil services;
F. Conviction of a felony, or a misdemeanor;
G. Willful or repeated negligence in performing duties;
H. Misuse of public funds;
I. Falsifying reports or records;
J. Any act or omission sufficient to show the employee to be unsuitable and unfit for public service.
(Prior code § 1.38.370)

2.48.340 Discharge of probationer.
During the first one year of regular service (the probationary period), an appointing officer may dismiss a probationer by filing with the commission a statement in writing of such dismissal, together with such reasons therefor as to such appointing officer may be deemed convincing and such dismissal shall become effective at once unless disapproved by the commission.
(Prior code § 1.38.380)

2.48.350 Probationary period of promotion.
Following a promotion, an employee shall serve a one year probationary period in the new position which is considered part of the selection process. During the probationary period, the appointing officer may return a probationer to the probationer's previous rank by filing with the commission a statement in writing of such action, together with the reasons therefor as to such appointing officer may deem convincing and such return to previous rank shall become effective at once unless disapproved by the commission.
(Prior code § 1.38.385)

2.48.360 Leave of absence.
The head of a department may, in his or her discretion, grant any civil service employee in his or her department a leave of absence without pay for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days. Absence for a longer period of time not to exceed one year may be granted by permission on written request of the employee, giving the reasons therefor, approved by the head of the department and the mayor. Unless the commission provides otherwise for any particular case, a leave of absence for more than three months shall not entitle the employee when returning to duty to resume his former position, but such employee shall be entitled only to standing on the preferred eligible list for said position; this limitation shall not apply to absence on account of disability caused by sickness or injury, or to leave of absence during which the employee performs temporary service in a different position in the same department, or temporary service in any position in any other department of the city government.
(Prior code § 1.38.410)

2.48.370 Retention of civil service position.
A member of the classified civil service who is appointed to a position within the department which is not within the civil service, as provided in Section 2.48.080(D) shall retain his or her former civil service classification. Such employee shall have the right to recourse to a civil service hearing for discharge and disciplinary matters, but shall have no right to a hearing on the return to the underlying civil service classification. If an employee appointed to a position as provided in Section 2.48.080(D) is not removed for cause, affecting the underlying Civil Service position, the employee shall, upon removal from the appointed position, resume his or her former position in the classified service, and the last appointee to the position from which he or she was appointed and the last appointees in positions subordinate thereto and in line of promotion shall resume their former positions respectively. The name of the person in the lowest position affected and who necessarily retired from the service because of the retirement of the officer shall be placed on the appropriate register for certification.
(Prior code § 1.38.420)

2.48.380 Lay-off and reduction in rank.
Whenever it becomes necessary in either department through lack of work, insufficient funding, or any other cause to reduce the force, lay-offs and reductions shall be made by department and by class of position as determined by the city. The civil service commission shall adopt rules governing lay-off procedures. Those rules shall use the following criteria and shall recognize the city's policy that a most recently hired civil service employee shall be the first to be laid off and the most recently promoted civil service employee to a classification subject to reduction shall be the first to be demoted:
A. Temporary or emergency employees occupying the civil service position but who have not been certified by the civil service commission for that position shall be laid off first.
B. Probationary employees in positions subject to reduction shall be laid-off next in inverse order of their seniority in the classification in the department.
C. Regular civil service appointees shall be the last laid off in each position and lay-offs shall be in inverse order to their seniority in the position.
D. Civil service employees occupying positions subject to lay-off may elect to be reduced in rank to their last held civil service rank, in which case the lay-off rules shall be applied to that rank or class of position.
E. The chief of each department and employees with civil service classifications who are holding non-civil service positions under Section 2.48.080 shall retain the seniority of their most recent civil service classification, if any, for applying rules for lay-off or reduction in rank.
F. In the best interests of the city, the commission may provide exceptions in its rules to the order of lay-off to retain employees who have special skills.
(Prior code § 1.38.430)

2.48.390 Reinstatements.
The commission shall adopt rules for the reinstatement of laid-off employees which shall give such employees priority in hiring over persons on the eligibility list for up to two years from the date of the lay-off.
(Prior code § 1.38.440)

2.48.400 Reports for eligibles.
Each eligible shall promptly report to the commission any change of address, giving street and number and telephone; any failure or refusal to accept appointment or promotion with the reasons therefor; and any desire that his name be withheld from certification or that it be dropped from an eligible list.
(Prior code § 1.38.450)

2.48.410 Adoption of necessary rules and regulations.
The commission shall elect one of its own members as chairperson and shall adopt its own rules of procedure. The commission may adopt any further rules to facilitate the administration of appointment and regulation under the civil service as it may deem necessary and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.38.470)

Chapter 2.52 PERSONNEL PLAN

Sections:
2.52.010     General provisions.
2.52.020     Personnel policies.
2.52.030     Types of employment.
2.52.040     Classification of employees.
2.52.050     Personnel committee.
2.52.060     Personnel committee meeting—Time and place.
2.52.070     Legal holidays.
2.52.080     Vacations.
2.52.090     Sick leave.
2.52.100     Sick leave for LEOFF I employees.

2.52.010 General provisions.
A. Nondiscrimination Policy. It is the policy of the city that employment shall be based upon merit and fitness, free from discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, national origin, political affiliation or handicap.
B. Exclusion. This chapter shall not apply to the following offices: mayor, council member, elected officials and members of commissions and boards, unless particular provisions clearly include incumbents of such offices.
C. Conflicts. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with or invalidate state law relating to the subject matter of this chapter, nor to take precedence over civil service regulations as to those employees covered by civil service.
(Prior code § 1.40.010)

2.52.020 Personnel policies.
The city council shall adopt personnel policies to provide a uniform system of personnel administration throughout the city's service, to protect and clarify the rights and responsibilities of all city employees, and to insure that recruitment, selection, placement, promotion, retention and separation of city employees are based upon the employee's qualifications and fitness and are in compliance with state and federal laws.
(Prior code § 1.40.020)

2.52.030 Types of employment.
Employment with the city of Aberdeen shall generally fall within one of the following categories, or a combination thereof:
A. Regular Full-time. An employee who has been retained in an appointed position following the completion of the initial one year probationary period and who works a minimum workweek of forty (40) hours. Regular full-time employees receive the vacation, sick leave, retirement and other benefits for the position classification.
B. Part-time. An employee who works less than forty (40) hours per week who normally follows a predetermined pattern of working hours. Part-time employees are entitled to vacation, sick leave and other benefits on a prorated schedule on the basis of hours usually worked; provided, however, that temporary part-time employees shall receive no benefits.
C. Provisional. A provisional employee is one whose position is created because of a specific project or grant. A provisional employee is entitled to the same benefits received by regular full-time or part-time employees, as the case may be, however provisional employees have no layoff rights or right to grieve the termination of their positions.
D. Temporary. An employee who has been appointed for a limited period of time, not to exceed six months or one thousand forty (1,040) hours of employment in a given calendar year. Temporary employees are not entitled to sick leave, paid holidays, vacation, or any other benefits except those mandated by law. If a temporary employee is subsequently retained in a permanent position, the date for computing seniority, sick leave and vacation leave accrual shall be the date uninterrupted, temporary employment began.
(Prior code § 1.40.030)

2.52.040 Classification of employees.
Employees of the city of Aberdeen will be classified as to the particular work function required by the job that he or she is performing. Procedures for changes in classification, promotions, demotions, and other personnel action shall be set forth in the personnel policies. It is the responsibility of the particular department head and the personnel officer to insure compliance with the policies adopted by the city council.
(Prior code § 1.40.040)

2.52.050 Personnel committee.
A personnel committee is created consisting of the mayor, the president of city council, and the chair of the finance committee. The personnel committee shall be responsible for studying, developing, and recommending policies affecting the city’s personnel system and is advisory to both the mayor and the city council. As the mayor may request, the personnel committee shall advise the mayor on the selection, appointment, discipline and removal of department heads. The personnel committee shall also serve to advise the city council on requests for exemptions to the personnel policies or compensation plan of the city.
(Ord. 6643 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019. Prior code § 1.40.050)

2.52.060 Personnel committee meeting—Time and place.
The personnel committee of the city of Aberdeen will meet on the third Thursday of every month commencing at the hour of 4:00 p.m., or as soon thereafter as a quorum may be available. The meeting shall be held at the Aberdeen City Hall.
(Ord. 6240, Amended, 01/19/2000; Ord. 6178, Amended, 02/25/1998. Prior code § 1.40.060)

2.52.070 Legal holidays.
The following days shall be considered legal holidays:
1. January 1st (New Year's Day);
2. The third Monday of January (Martin Luther King's Birthday);
3. The third Monday of February (Presidents' Day);
4. The last Monday of May (Memorial Day);
5. July 4th (Independence Day);
6. The first Monday in September (Labor Day);
7. November 11th (Veterans Day);
8. The fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day);
9. The day immediately following Thanksgiving Day;
10. December 25th (Christmas Day).
Whenever any legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered a legal holiday. Whenever a legal holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered a legal holiday.
(Prior code § 1.40.070)

2.52.080 Vacations.
A. Employees shall accrue vacation time as provided for by the applicable collective bargain agreement or ordinance. If a person's employment is terminated before the person has worked for the city for twelve (12) months, all accumulated vacation time is forfeited.
B. The time of taking vacations shall be determined by the department head. Accrual of vacation time shall be governed by the appropriate collective bargaining agreement or ordinance. The city is obligated to compensate an employee who has worked for the city for more than one year for any unused vacation time accumulated prior to retirement or termination, or to provide a means for the employee to use such accumulated vacation time.
(Ord. 6559, Amended, 06/25/2014. Prior code § 1.40.080)

2.52.090 Sick leave.
Regular full-time employees shall accrue one day of sick leave for each month of employment, unless a specific ordinance or collective bargaining agreement provides otherwise, and excepting those employees whose retirement system provides benefits similar to sick leave. Sick leave can be accumulated up to sixty (60) days unless a different period is provided by ordinance or the appropriate collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 6559, Amended, 06/25/2014. Prior code § 1.40.090)

2.52.100 Sick leave for LEOFF I employees.
A LEOFF I employee is a member of the Law Enforcement Officers and Firefighters Retirement System as it existed prior to October, 1977. In the case of sickness which renders such an employee unable to perform the duty of employment, a regular full-time employee who is covered by the LEOFF I system is entitled to nonaccumulative sick leave with pay as follows:
A. Employees working eight hour days shall be entitled to seven days nonaccumulative sick leave for each calendar year, providing, however, that such employees may take only three consecutive working days of sick leave with pay.
B. Employees working ten hour days shall be entitled to six days nonaccumulative sick leave for each calendar year, providing, however, that such employees may take only three consecutive working days of sick leave with pay.
C. Employees working twenty-four (24) hour shifts shall be entitled to three nonconsecutive working shifts as nonaccumulative sick leave in each calendar period.
D. It is the intent of this section to provide sick leave allowance only for short-term illnesses. In case of long-term illnesses or disability, application should be made for disability to the LEOFF Board. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall have the effect of extending beyond six months the disability leave required under RCW 41.26 or its predecessor statutes.
(Prior code § 1.40.100)

Chapter 2.58 ABERDEEN LIBRARY BOARD

Sections:
2.58.010     Aberdeen library board established – Membership.
2.58.020     Terms of office – Removal.
2.58.030     Filling positions.
2.58.040     Rules of procedure.
2.58.050     Duties.
2.58.060     Public library expenditures – Prior review by board.
2.58.070     Budget and expenditures.

2.58.010 Aberdeen library board established – Membership.
There is created an advisory board to the city council that shall be known as the Aberdeen library board. The board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members shall serve without compensation. Members selected for appointment shall have a demonstrated interest in the Aberdeen library. No more than two (2) members at a given time may reside outside the Aberdeen city limits.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.020 Terms of office – Removal.
The first appointments of the five (5) board members shall be for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4), and five (5) calendar years, respectively, and thereafter each board member shall be appointed annually to serve for five (5) calendar years. No person shall be appointed to the board for more than two (2) consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms as soon as possible in the manner in which members are regularly chosen. Any member of the board may be removed by a majority vote of the city council.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.030 Filling positions.
Individuals interested in serving on the board may apply to the mayor for consideration at any time. Prior to submitting the name of any appointee to the city council for confirmation at least two (2) weeks’ advance notice shall be posted in a prominent place on the city’s official website stating that a vacancy exists and interested individuals may apply to the mayor for consideration.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.040 Rules of procedure.
The board shall adopt bylaws governing the transaction of business. The bylaws shall include provisions for the date, time and place of regular meetings. Provisions shall be made for maintaining minutes of the meetings and records of all reports, conclusions, and recommendations. The bylaws shall provide for the annual election of officers for one (1) year terms which shall include a chairperson and a vice chairperson.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.050 Duties.
The Aberdeen library board is created to provide advisory guidance to the mayor and city council in the establishment of goals and activities related to public library services in the city of Aberdeen and to assist the mayor, city council, and library patrons in evaluating the Timberland Regional Library District’s operation of the Aberdeen Timberland Library and use of the city’s library facilities. The board may solicit and accept monies dedicated to library activities and operations on behalf of the city and may provide assistance to private foundations and other trustees of funds dedicated to Aberdeen library services by reviewing proposals and recommending appropriate uses of the funds. The board is encouraged to establish a close working relationship with the Timberland Regional Library District and the Friends of the Aberdeen Timberland Library.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.060 Public library expenditures – Prior review by board.
Actions by the city council or a city department that propose a major expenditure of public funds related to the Aberdeen library or the acceptance of a substantial donation to the library shall be submitted to the library board for prior review and comment. The board shall submit a report on the proposal within sixty (60) days of the submission. The report shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal is consistent with the goals and activities of the Aberdeen library. The city council may amend a proposal after receiving the library board report without submitting the amended proposal to the board.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

2.58.070 Budget and expenditures.
The Aberdeen library board shall not incur any indebtedness on behalf of the city without express approval of the mayor and the city council.
(Ord. 6609 § 3, Added, 07/26/2017)

Chapter 2.60 PARK BOARD

Sections:
2.60.010     Created.
2.60.020     Organization—Meetings—Duties—Powers.
2.60.030     Park fund created.
2.60.040     City of Aberdeen Park Code.
2.60.050     Recreational sports fund.
2.60.060     Recreational sports revolving fund.
2.60.070     Morrison Riverfront Park Fund.

2.60.010 Created.
There is created a board of park commissioners of Aberdeen. The board shall consist of five persons of Aberdeen of recognized fitness for the position, and shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, and shall serve without compensation. Four of the commissioners appointed under this section shall serve terms of three years. The commissioner position next becoming vacant following the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section shall, thereafter, be a term of one year.
(Prior code § 1.50.010)

2.60.020 Organization—Meetings—Duties—Powers.
The board of park commissioners shall organize by electing one of its members president, and one of its members secretary of the board. It shall hold regular and special meetings as its members themselves determine. Two of its members present at any regular or special meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board of park commissioners shall have control and supervision of all parks belonging to the city and shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the government and management thereof, which rules and regulations shall be enforced by the police department.
(Prior code § 1.50.020)

2.60.030 Park fund created.
There is created a fund to be known as the "park fund," of which fund the city treasurer shall be the custodian. There shall be paid into the fund such moneys as the city council may from time to time order, as well as any and all moneys which may be donated to the city for park purposes. The moneys in the park fund shall be expended only for the acquisition and improvement of the free public parks belonging to the city.
(Prior code § 1.50.030)

2.60.040 City of Aberdeen Park Code.
Under the authority granted by Section 25 of the Aberdeen City Charter, the following rules and regulations for the government and management of the Aberdeen Parks are adopted by the park board and shall constitute the park code of the city of Aberdeen and may be cited as such.
A. Conduct in all public parks shall be subject to all the general police regulations of the city of Aberdeen and not exclusively to the provisions of this code.
B. This code is declared to be an exercise of the police power of the State of Washington and the city of Aberdeen, for the public peace, health, safety and welfare, and its provisions shall be liberally construed.
C. Definitions. The terms herein used, unless clearly contrary to or inconsistent with the context in which used, shall be construed as follows:
"Board" shall mean the park board of the city of Aberdeen.
"Caretaker" shall mean the person primarily responsible for overseeing and administering the particular park to which he is assigned.
"Director" shall mean the director of parks and recreation of the city of Aberdeen.
"Motor vehicle" shall mean any self-propelled device capable of being moved upon a road and in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motorscooters, jeeps or similar type four-wheel drive vehicles and snow-mobiles whether or not they can be legally operated upon the public highways.
"Park" shall mean and include all parks, squares, drives, parkways, boulevards, medians, boat launching ramps, beaches, playgrounds and recreation area and facilities comprising the parks and recreation system of the city of Aberdeen and under the management and control of the park board of the city of Aberdeen.
"Person" shall mean all natural persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, teams, clubs and all associations or combinations of persons whenever acting for themselves or by an agent, servant or employee.
"Police" shall mean and include the chief of police and his officers.
D. Permits Required for Certain Activities. It is unlawful in any park without first securing a permit from the director, for any person to:
    1. Use a public address system or other sound amplifying device;
    2. Use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising in any park or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or card to any tree, shrub, railing, post or structure, or erect a structure of any kind;
    3. Sell refreshments or merchandise or engage in any business or occupation;
    4. Keep any boat for hire upon any waters in any park. Launching of waterborne craft from any shoreline is prohibited except from specifically designated areas or with specific permit. The launching of waterborne craft as provided in this section shall be unlawful if the required fee as determined by the board has not been paid;
    5. Take up collections or to act as or apply the vocation of a solicitor, agent, peddler, beggar, strolling musician, organ grinder, exhorter, barker or showman within a park;
    6. Use the Rotary Log Pavilion for any public or private activity without first executing a rental application and use agreement with terms approved by the director.
E. Permit Administration. 
    1. Any person claiming to have a permit from the director must produce and exhibit such permit upon the request of any authorized person who may desire to inspect the same.
    2. The director reserves the right to cancel a permittee's activity on any day that the director wishes to make use of the facility and when there is a need of the facility which transcends the need of the permittee. Such notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. A permittee's activity may be canceled immediately for violation of park rules or for violation of permit restrictions or the terms and conditions of a "Rotary Log Pavilion" rental application and use agreement.
    3. All permittees must leave the facility in a condition considered satisfactory to the caretaker or his designee who will supervise cleanup activities. No group shall conduct activities causing extra custodial work unless previous agreement has been made to pay for such work.
    4. At all assemblies of minors under eighteen (18) years of age, responsible adults must be present throughout the entire function.
F. Prohibited Activities. It is unlawful for any person to:
    1. Cut, remove, destroy, mutilate, or deface any turf, tree, plant, shrub, flower, structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, lighting system, sprinkling system or other property in any park;
    2. Leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes, wastepaper, cans or other rubbish in a park except in a garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purposes;
    3. Deposit any household or commercial garbage, refuse, waste or rubbish which is brought as such from any private property in any garbage can or other receptacle designated for such purpose located within a park;
    4. Drain or dump refuse or waste from any trailer, camper or automobile or other vehicle except in designated disposal areas or receptacles;
    5. Pollute or in any way contaminate by dumping or otherwise depositing therein any waste or refuse of any nature, kind or description including human waste or bodily waste in any stream, river, lake or other body of water running in, through or adjacent to any park;
    6. Clean fish or other food or wash any clothing or other articles for personal or household use or any dog or other animal except at designated areas in the park;
    7. Clean or wash any automobile or any other vehicle in any park except in areas specifically designated for that use;
    8. Possess, discharge, set off or cause to be discharged in or into any park, any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, firework, explosive or other substance harmful to the life or safety of persons or property;
    9. Discharge across, in or into any park a firearm, bow and arrow or air or gas weapon, or any device capable of injuring or killing any person or animal or damaging or destroying any public or private property;
    10. Annoy, bother, molest, insult or offer an affront to any other person within a park;
    11. Play games and conduct general horseplay on crowded swimming beaches. At times large, uncrowded beach area can safely permit some games. Such games will be permitted only with the consent of a caretaker, custodian, lifeguard or other park employee;
    12. Practice or play golf, baseball, cricket, lacrosse, polo, archery, hockey, tennis or other games of like character or to hurl or propel any missile except at places set apart for such purposes by the director;
    13. Open or consume alcoholic beverages in a park except by permit within the "Rotary Log Pavilion;"
    14. Operate any powered or motorized boats, skis or crafts on Lake Aberdeen other than those powered by electric motors having a maximum size of twelve (12) volts.
G. Animal Control. 
    1. All dogs or other pets or domestic animals must be kept on leash no greater than eight feet in length and under control at all times while in a park.
    2. Dogs, pets or domestic animals are not permitted on any designated swimming beach in any park nor in any public building unless so posted; provided, that this section shall not apply to seeing eye dogs.
    3. No person shall allow his dog or other pet or domestic animal, or any animal under his control, to bite or in any way molest or annoy other park visitors, nor shall any person permit such animal to bark continuously or otherwise disturb the peace or tranquility of the park.
    4. No horses shall be permitted in any park except where designated and posted to specifically permit such activity. Horses shall not be permitted on any designated swimming area, campground or picnic area.
    5. No person shall ride any horse or other animal in such a manner that might endanger life or limb or any person or animal, and no person shall allow a horse or other animal to stand unattended or insecurely tied.
    6. No person shall in any manner tease, annoy, disturb, molest, catch, injure or kill, or throw any stone or missile of any kind at or strike with any stick or weapon any animal, bird or fowl; or catch any fish or feed any fowl or animal except at places and times designated for such purposes by the director and so posted by signs. No person shall give, offer or attempt to give to any animal or bird within the park any tobacco, drink or other article known to be noxious to animals or birds.
    7. Owners of dogs or other animals damaging or destroying park property will be held liable for the full value of the property damaged or destroyed in addition to impounding fees and penalty imposed for violation of these provisions.
    8. Owners or custodians of dogs or other animals which defecate on park property shall be responsible for removal of all wastes.
    9. All laws, rules and regulations of the State Game Commission relating to season limits and methods of finishing are applicable to fishing or game fish in all City of Aberdeen parks. No person may fish for or possess any fish taken from any dam, dike, bridge, dock, boat landing or beach which is posted with a sign prohibiting fishing.
H. Regulation of Campgrounds and Picnic Areas. 
    1. Picnicking is permitted only in designated and marked picnicking areas or in such other places within a park as may from time to time be designated by a caretaker.
    2. No person shall camp in any park except in areas specifically designated and/or marked for that purpose.
    3. In order to afford the general public the greatest possible use of the parks on a fair and equal basis, continuous occupancy of camping facilities shall be limited. Limitation of occupancy may be established and posted by the director or caretaker at any individual facility or area.
    4. The number of vehicles occupying camping facilities shall be limited to one car or one camper or one vehicle with trailer per camp or trailer site. A greater number may be authorized in specific areas when constructed facilities so warrant.
    5. Fees for the use of camp or trailer sites are due and payable daily. The daily fee covers use of facilities until the vacating time of 3:00 p.m. of the following day.
    6. Occupants shall vacate camping facilities by removing their personal property therefrom prior to 3:00 p.m. if the applicable use fee has not been paid of if time limit for occupancy of the campsite has expired. The occupants may, however, remain in other areas of the park for purposes other than camping until normal closing time of the park. Remaining overtime shall subject the occupant to the payment of additional use fees.
    7. A trailer site, picnic area or campsite is considered occupied when it is being used for appropriate purposes by a person or persons who have paid the daily use fee when applicable. No person shall take or attempt to take possession of a campsite, trailer site, picnic area or other park facility when it is being occupied by another party or when informed by a caretaker that such campsite, picnic area, trailer site or other facility is occupied.
    8. It is unlawful to build fires in any park except in areas designated by the director.
I. Regulation of Motor Vehicles, Bicycles, Boats and Aircraft. 
    1. No operator of any automobile, trailer, camper, boat trailer or other vehicle shall park such vehicle in any park except where the operator is using the area for a designated recreational purpose and the vehicle is parked either in a designated parking area or in another area with the permission of a caretaker. No person shall park, leave standing or abandon a vehicle in any park after closing time except when camping in a designated area or with permission from the caretaker. Any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be towed away at the owner's or operator's expense.
    2. No person shall operate any motor vehicle on a trail in any park unless such trail has been specifically designated and posted for such use. Subject to the provisions of this code, no person shall operate a motor vehicle within the boundaries of a park except on roads, streets, highways, parking lots or parking areas; provided, that traveling upon such roads, streets, highways, parking lots or parking areas has not been prohibited by proper posting.
    3. No person shall drive a motor vehicle within any park at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the traffic and the surface and width of the road and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons, property or wildlife; provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour. The board, however, upon finding that the safety of persons and the condition of the road and the traffic thereon so warrant, may establish lower speed limits and shall post the same in the area where so established.
    4. It is unlawful to enter or leave a park by other than established entrances and exits. The parking of vehicles in any park is prohibited except in established parking areas. It is unlawful to park along roadways if the normal flow of traffic is impeded or if parking causes conditions that are hazardous to public safety. The servicing of vehicles within a park is prohibited, including oil changes and other than emergency repairs. It is unlawful to engage in, conduct or hold any trials or competitions for speed, endurances or hill climbing involving any motor vehicle.
    5. Riding of bicycles shall be permitted in any park on roadways and other areas where designated or posted to specifically permit such activity.
    6. All persons using city-owned sail boats must complete and pass the certified sailing class offered by the Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Department and must adhere to the specific rules posted on the boathouse at Lake Aberdeen.
    7. No aircraft shall land or take off from any body of water or land area in a park not specifically designated for landing aircraft.
    8. Except where specifically amended by this code, all motor vehicle regulations contained in the city of Aberdeen Code shall apply to all roads, highways, parking lots, or parking areas within city of Aberdeen parks.
J. Park Hours. In parks which are controlled by gates or other devices normal park hours are as posted except in the case of prearranged, special group activities or regularly established concessions.
K. Enforcement. The police, director or caretaker or other park employees are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. Any police, director or caretaker having reasonable cause to believe that any person has violated one of the provisions of this code may, in addition to invoking other sanctions, direct said persons to leave the park. Any person failing to leave the park when so directed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
L. Violations. 
    1. Violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this code shall subject the offender to a fine in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or to imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding ninety (90) days or to both such fine and imprisonment.
    2. Anyone concerned in the violation of this code whether directly committing the act or omitting to do the thing constituting the offense or who aids or abets the same, whether present or absent, and anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such an offense is and shall be a principal under the terms of this code and shall be proceeded against and prosecuted as such.
M. If any provision or section of this code is held to be void or unconstitutional all other parts not expressly so held shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 6532, Amended, 10/24/2012; Ord. 6499, Amended, 06/09/2010. Prior code § 1.50.050)

2.60.050 Recreational sports fund.
There is created a fund to be known as the recreational sports fund of which the finance director shall be the custodian. There shall be paid into the fund such moneys as the city council may from time to time order, as well as all other moneys received from and for the operation of parks and recreation department programs. The moneys in the recreational sports fund shall be expended only for the operation of recreational programs sponsored or conducted by the parks and recreation department.
(Prior code § 1.50.060)

2.60.060 Recreational sports revolving fund.
There is created a revolving fund in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be used solely for the purpose of paying expenses related to recreational programs of the parks and recreation department. The revolving fund will be maintained in a bank as a checking account and payments shall be made by check from that account. No check shall exceed the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The fund will be replenished by a warrant drawn on the recreational sports fund. This fund shall be maintained by the finance director.
(Prior code § 1.50.065)

2.60.070 Morrison Riverfront Park Fund.
There is created a fund to be known as the "Morrison Riverfront Park Fund" of which the finance director shall be the custodian. This fund shall be administered under the direction of the park board. This fund shall be used for the receipt of donations for the Morrison Riverfront Park and for income rents from property which has been designated for the park. Disbursements from this fund shall be made only for property acquisition, development, operation, and maintenance of Morrison Riverfront Park.
(Prior code § 1.50.070)

Chapter 2.62 COMMUNITY SERVICE CENTER BOARD

Sections:
2.62.010     Creation—Membership—Term.
2.62.020     Officers—Meetings—Quorum.
2.62.030     Secretary.
2.62.040     Duties and Powers.
2.62.050     Fund Created—Source of Moneys.

2.62.010 Creation—Membership—Term.
There is hereby created a Community Service Center Board consisting of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Four of the members hall be city councilmembers whose terms shall run concurrently with the term of office for which she/he was elected. The fifth member shall serve a term of two years which shall expire January 1st of odd numbered years. Members shall serve without compensation, provided, however, that they may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Prior code § 1.46.010)

2.62.020 Officers—Meetings—Quorum.
The members shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman who shall hold office for one year. Regular meetings shall be held no less than nine times per year at such times and places as established by the Board. A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
(Prior code § 1.46.020)

2.62.030 Secretary.
The mayor shall designate a member of the paid staff of the city to serve as secretary, who shall serve without additional compensation.
(Prior code § 1.46.030)

2.62.040 Duties and Powers.
The Community Service Center Board is charged with the responsibility of maintaining and operating the Aberdeen Community Service Center. The Board shall establish rents and user fees and administer the same. The Board has the power to enter into lease and use agreements of less than 30 days duration and shall recommend action to the city council on leases or use agreements of more than 30 days duration. The Board may expend only such moneys as may be appropriated by the city council and only upon the authorization of the city council.
(Prior code § 1.46.040)

2.62.050 Fund Created—Source of Moneys.
There is hereby created a fund, to be known as the Community Service Center Fund, of which the city treasurer shall be custodian. There shall be paid into the fund such moneys as the city council may from time to time order, any and all moneys that may be donated to the city for the repair, renovation, or operation of the Community Service Center and all income generated by rents or user fees for the Community Service Center. the moneys in the fund shall be expended only for the maintenance, operation, repair, renovation, and expansion of the Community Service Center and other related purposes.
(Prior code § 1.46.050)

Chapter 2.64 BOARD OF MUSEUM AND HISTORY

Sections:
2.64.010     Creation—Membership—Term.
2.64.020     Officers—Meetings—Quorum.
2.64.030     Secretary.
2.64.040     Duties and powers.
2.64.050     Fund created—Source of moneys—Expenditure of funds.
2.64.060     Transfer and disposition of property.

2.64.010 Creation—Membership—Term.
There is created an Aberdeen Board of Museum and History, consisting of eight members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. One of the board members shall be an Aberdeen City Councilman. The term of the council member shall be for one year ending on the second Monday in January. The term of office of the other members of the board shall be three years, terminating on the second Monday in January of the appropriate year for the position. Members shall serve without compensation; provided, however, that they may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Prior code § 1.51.010)

2.64.020 Officers—Meetings—Quorum.
The members shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its members who shall hold office for one year. The board shall hold a regular meeting on the first Tuesday of each month at the hour of 7:30 p.m. at the Community Service Center. If the regularly scheduled meeting falls on a holiday the meeting shall be held on the next following business day. A majority of the membership of the board shall constitute a quorum.
(Prior code § 1.51.020)

2.64.030 Secretary.
The mayor shall designate a member of the paid staff of the city to serve as secretary, who shall serve without additional compensation.
(Prior code § 1.51.030)

2.64.040 Duties and powers.
The Aberdeen Board of Museum and History is charged with the responsibility of developing plans and programs for the preservation and recognition of the historical heritage of the city and the surrounding area , including the maintenance and display of city property transferred to the care and custody of the board. It shall develop and coordinate historical projects for the city. It shall have the power to apply for and accept gifts, donations, bequests and grants in the name of the city for the collection and display of books, maps, charts, papers, photographs, films, relics and other materials illustrative of the heritage of the area. the board may expend only such moneys as may be appropriated by the city council and only upon the authorization of the city council.
(Ord. 6286, Amended, 05/02/2001. Prior code § 1.51.040)

2.64.050 Fund created—Source of moneys—Expenditure of funds.
There is created a fund, to be known as the "museum and history fund," of which the city treasurer shall be the custodian. There shall be paid into the fund such moneys as the city council may from time to time order, as well as any and all moneys that may be donated to the city for historical or museum purposes. The moneys in the fund shall be expended only for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.51.050)

2.64.060 Transfer and disposition of property.
The city council may, by resolution, transfer property acquired by other city departments or donated to the city for museum purposes to the care and custody of the board of museum and history. Property so transferred may be maintained, displayed, or housed by other city departments with the consent of the board. City property which has been transferred to the care and custody of the board may be removed from such care and custody or otherwise disposed of resolution of the city council. The board may dispose of property transferred to its care and custody by transfer or exchange with other museums or by sale for fair market value, provided, that property which was transferred from another city department shall be returned and, provided further, that property which was donated to the city for museum purposes shall be disposed of in accordance with the terms and conditions, if any, of the donation.
(Ord. 6286, Amended, 05/02/2001. Prior code § 1.51.060)

Chapter 2.66 ART COMMISSION

Sections:
2.66.010     Commission established - membership.
2.66.020     Terms of office.
2.66.030     Filling positions.
2.66.040     Rules of procedure.
2.66.050     Powers.
2.66.060     Public are expenditures - prior review by commission.
2.66.070     Budget and expenditures.

2.66.010 Commission established - membership.
There is created an arts commission that shall be known as the Aberdeen Arts Commission. The arts commission shall consist of six members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. One of the commission members shall be an Aberdeen City Councilmember. Members shall serve without compensation. Members selected for appointment shall have a demonstrated interest in public art. At least one member shall be an owner or manager of a business within the city and at least one member shall be active in local arts programs or cultural services activities. No more than two members at a given time may reside outside the Aberdeen city limits.
(Ord. 6484, Amended, 07/08/2009; Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.020 Terms of office.
The term of the councilmember shall be for one year ending on the second Monday in January. The term of office of the other members shall be five years terninating on the second Monday in January of the appropriate year for the position; provided that the first appointments shall be for staggered terms with the first term ending in January 2009, the second in January 2010, the third in January 20911, the fourth in January 2012 and the fifth in January 2013 and thereafter members shall be appointed annually to serve for five years. No person shall be appointed to for more than two consecutive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms as soon as possible in the manner in which members are regularly chosen. Any member of the arts commission may be removed by the mayor and majority vote of the city council, in their sole discretion, for such cause as is deemed appropriate to ensure orderly operation of the arts commission or to ensure its ability to efficiently perform the duties and functions for which it was established.
(Ord. 6484, Amended, 07/08/2009; Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.030 Filling positions.
Individuals interested in serving on the arts commission may apply to the Mayor for consideration at any time. Prior to submitting the name of any appointee to the city council for confirmation, including initial members, at least two weeks advance notice shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation stating that a vacancy exists and interested individuals may apply to the mayor for consideration.
(Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.040 Rules of procedure.
The arts commission shall adopt procedural rules governing the transaction of business. The Rules shall include provisions for the date, time and place of regular meetings. Provisions shall be made for maintaining minutes of the meetings and records of all reports, conclusions, and recommendations. The Rules shall provide for the annual election of officers for one year terms which shall include a chairperson and a vice chairperson. The mayor shall designate a city employee to serve as secretary to assist the arts commission in maintaining its records and providing notice of meetings.
(Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.050 Powers.
The arts commission is authorized to establish goals and policies for the selection, funding, procurement, and maintenance of public art to provide guidance to the city council and all city departments. The arts commission may solicit and accept monies dedicated to public art on behalf of the city. Within funds appropriated by the city council for the specific purpose, the arts commission may, alone or in cooperation with any other private or public entity, initiate, sponsor or conduct programs calculated to further public awareness of and interest in the visual arts.
(Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.060 Public are expenditures - prior review by commission.
Any action by the city council or a city department that proposes an expenditure of public funds for public art or the acceptance of a donation of public art shall be submitted to the arts commission for prior review and comment. The commission shall submit a report on the proposal within ninety (90) days of the submission unless it determines that additional time is required to consider the proposal as part of a larger planning process or public art project being developed or reviewed by the commission. The report shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal is consistent with the goals and policies adopted by the arts commission. The city council may amend a proposal after receiving the arts commission report without submitting the amended proposal to the committee.
(Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

2.66.070 Budget and expenditures.
The arts commission shall not incur any indebtedness on behalf of the city without express approval of the mayor and the city council.
(Ord. 6438, Added, 06/27/2007)

Chapter 2.68 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.68.010     Chief of police—Power to increase or decrease force.

2.68.010 Chief of police—Power to increase or decrease force.
The chief of police shall have the authority, at his discretion, by and with the consent and concurrence of the mayor and a majority of the police committee of the council, to increase or diminish the number of patrolmen on the police force of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 1.52.030)

Chapter 2.72 POLICE RESERVE

Sections:
2.72.010     Established.
2.72.020     Membership.
2.72.030     Identification card—Badge.
2.72.040     Termination of membership.
2.72.050     Duties.
2.72.060     Rules and regulations—Supervision.
2.72.070     Powers and authority.
2.72.080     Firearms.
2.72.090     Employment status and compensation.
2.72.100     Civil defense registration.

2.72.010 Established.
There is created and established a police reserve force with a membership of not to exceed fifteen (15) members. The police reserve force shall function as a unit of the city of Aberdeen civil defense and under the supervision of the chief of police of the city of Aberdeen and the director of civil defense.
(Prior code § 1.53.010)

2.72.020 Membership.
A. All members of the police reserve force shall be appointed by the chief of police, subject to the approval of each appointment by the mayor. To be eligible for appointment each applicant must file a written application with the chief of police, be willing to serve an average number of sixteen (16) hours per month in his duties or training, and meet the following minimum qualifications and requirements:
    1. United States citizenship;
    2. Residency within the county of Grays Harbor;
    3. Good moral character;
    4. An applicant must not have been convicted of a felony or of any offense involving moral turpitude.
B. Applicants must further complete any training program or programs prescribed by the chief of police both before and after their appointment and, at the time of appointment, subscribe to the oath of office substantially the same as that required by members of the police department.
(Prior code § 1.53.020)

2.72.030 Identification card—Badge.
The chief of police is authorized to furnish each member of the police reserve force with a membership identification card and police badge. The identification card is to be carried by the members at all times. The police badge shall be worn only when the police reserve member is authorized to wear the prescribed uniform.
(Prior code § 1.53.030)

2.72.040 Termination of membership.
The membership of any person in the reserve police force may be terminated with or without cause at any time by the chief of police. Any member may resign by giving written notice of his resignation to the chief of police. Upon termination of membership all equipment of the member shall be returned to the chief of police within five days.
(Prior code § 1.53.040)

2.72.050 Duties.
The duties of the police reserve force are to supplement the regular police force in the event of a major disaster affecting the citizens of the city of Aberdeen, to aid in the control of traffic and maintenance of order at parades, and general policing of large assemblies of people, and to assist the regular police force in the protection of life, property, and the preservation of peace and order as authorized by the chief of police.
(Prior code § 1.53.050)

2.72.060 Rules and regulations—Supervision.
The chief of police shall be the commanding officer of the police reserve force. He shall have the authority to establish a training program, promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of the police reserve force and its members, prescribe the proper uniform and supervise the performance of the duties of the police reserve force. The chief of police shall further have the authority to delegate supervisory authority over the police reserve to officers of the regular city police department, and to designate supervisory officers within the reserve, and to designate the members who shall act as supervisory officers. All rules and regulations governing the police reserve force must be approved by the director of civil defense.
(Prior code § 1.53.060)

2.72.070 Powers and authority.
Members of the police reserve shall have such power and authority as may be vested in them by the chief of police; in no event to exceed the powers of regular members of the city police department. Members of the reserve shall have no powers or authority as police officers except while in the performance of duties ordered by the chief of police or his authorized representative.
(Prior code § 1.53.070)

2.72.080 Firearms.
No member of the police reserve force shall carry a firearm until he has received from the chief of police a certificate authorizing him to do so and unless he is engaged in duties which, by authorization of the chief of police, shall require the possession of a firearm.
(Prior code § 1.53.080)

2.72.090 Employment status and compensation.
Except for the limited purposes stated herein, no member of the police reserve force shall be deemed to be a city employee, nor within the scope or effect of civil service ordinances or regulations of the city, nor entitled to any benefits under police pension laws or any other benefits or retirement plans for city employees. Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation; provided, that the city council in its discretion may provide all or part of the costs of uniforms, equipment and/or insurance.
(Prior code § 1.53.090)

2.72.100 Civil defense registration.
All members of the police reserve force shall be registered as civil defense workers so as to be eligible for any benefits or compensation which may now or hereafter be provided by the state of Washington through its department of civil defense.
(Prior code § 1.53.100)

Chapter 2.76 SINKING FUND BOARD

Sections:
2.76.010     Sinking fund board created—Membership.
2.76.020     No additional compensation.
2.76.030     Duties of the board.
2.76.040     Certification for redemption of city debt.
2.76.050     Journal of board proceedings.
2.76.060     Vacancy in board.
2.76.070     Cancellation of bonds purchased by the board.

2.76.010 Sinking fund board created—Membership.
The mayor, city treasurer, and finance committee of the city council of the city of Aberdeen, shall constitute and be denominated as a sinking fund board.
(Prior code § 1.54.010)

2.76.020 No additional compensation.
Any three of the officers named, of whom the city treasurer shall be one, shall be and are authorized and required to discharge the duties and trust hereby vested in them, but shall not receive any additional compensation or salary for such services.
(Prior code § 1.54.020)

2.76.030 Duties of the board.
A. The board shall negotiate the sale of all bonds of the city, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance under which such bonds may issue, and shall, from time to time, invest the moneys which shall constitute the sinking fund for the redemption of the city debt or any surplus of interest to the credit of the interest fund, in the purchase of bonds issued by the city at the market price, not exceeding par value thereof. If at any time such investments cannot be made, then the board may invest such bonds in interest-bearing securities of the Aberdeen School District now known as District No. 5, the county of Grays Harbor, the state of Washington, of the United States.
B. Provided, the board may purchase bonds of the city at a premium whenever the interest accruing on said bonds, from time of purchase to maturity, will be greater than the premium on said bonds and interest on the amount to be used to make the proposed purchase.
C. The interest shall be computed at the average rate of interest earned by money in the sinking fund for the previous year, excepting the money that may be invested in bonds of the city and for the time that will elapse between the date of proposed purchase and maturity of the bonds.
D. No money belonging to the sinking fund or interest fund shall be loaned to any person or corporation.
(Prior code § 1.54.030)

2.76.040 Certification for redemption of city debt.
Whenever any of the money constituting the sinking fund for the redemption of the city debt shall be required for investment as above mentioned, or for the redemption of any city bonds at their maturity, the sinking fund board shall report the amount of money so required to the treasurer, who shall certify the same to the city council, and thereupon the city council shall authorize an order to be drawn on the treasurer, payable from the sinking fund board for such purpose.
(Prior code § 1.54.040)

2.76.050 Journal of board proceedings.
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to keep a correct journal of the proceedings of the board, to be verified by any three of them, himself being one, and once in each year, or oftener if required, to render to the council a full and detailed report of the proceedings of the board. All acts of said board shall be based on resolution duly entered in the journal.
(Prior code § 1.54.050)

2.76.060 Vacancy in board.
In case of a vacancy in office, or inability of any of said board to attend to the duties imposed, it shall be the duty of the council to designate by resolution one or more of their number to supply the place of such member or members of the board for the time being.
(Prior code § 1.54.060)

2.76.070 Cancellation of bonds purchased by the board.
All bonds and securities purchased by said board shall be held for safekeeping by the city treasurer of the city of Aberdeen. Whenever city bonds are paid, a record thereof shall be made in the journal of the board, and the bonds shall be canceled and burned in the office of the city treasurer, under the direction and supervision of the board.
(Prior code § 1.54.070)

Chapter 2.80 STANDING COMMITTEES

Sections:
2.80.010     Establishment and designation of standing committees.
2.80.020     Public safety committee.
2.80.030     Finance committee.
2.80.040     Public works committee.
2.80.050     Committee on committees.
2.80.055     Selection of committee membership.
2.80.060     Referral of bills.
2.80.070     Special committees—Appointment.
2.80.080     Committee meeting time and place—Committee of the whole.

2.80.010 Establishment and designation of standing committees.
The regular standing committees of the city council shall be three in number and each committee shall consist of four members. Appointments to committee memberships should be made by the calendar year from the membership of the City Council. The regular standing committees of the City Council should be as follows:
A. Public safety committee;
B. Finance committee;
C. Public works committee.
The standing committees may assist in the development of the budget for the general areas of their responsibilities.
(Prior code § 1.56.010)

2.80.020 Public safety committee.
The public safety committee shall generally supervise the functions of the city council in connection with matters affecting: the fire and police departments; the ambulance service; the fire code; the issuance of licenses and permits relating to law enforcement matters; the maintenance of law and order and the prevention of fire hazard; health, and pollution, and shall make reports to the city council for its consideration.
(Prior code § 1.56.020)

2.80.030 Finance committee.
The finance committee shall generally supervise the functions of the city council in connection with legislative, judicial, general fund financial matters of the city government and the issuance of licenses and permits affecting financial matters. Without limiting the functions of the committee, it shall examine and audit reports of city officers, examine and audit all bills presented to the city for payment, have general supervision over the special assessment rolls of the city, and supervise the insurance and risk management programs. It shall also function as a liaison with other legislative bodies, with the Association of Washington Cities, and other organizations connected with governmental activities. The committee shall have supervision of maintaining the city code and shall make recommendations to the city council as to additions, amendments, or revisions of the city Charter or the city code.
(Prior code § 1.56.030)

2.80.040 Public works committee.
The public works committee shall generally supervise the functions of the city council in connection with matters affecting: engineering, including construction, planning and codes in connection therewith; streets, alleys, traffic wharves and bridges; all aspects of the water, sewer, garbage, and other public utilities of the city; the obtaining and supplying of water to the city and others; the ecology, environment and beautification of the city and shall make reports to the city council for its consideration.
(Prior code § 1.56.040)

2.80.050 Committee on committees.
A. The members of the standing committees shall be selected by a committee on committees in accordance with AMC 2.80.055. The committee on committees shall consist of three member from the city council, no two of which shall be from the same ward. The committee on committees shall be composed of the following:
    1. The president of the city council;
    2. The councilmember who is the most recent past president from a different ward than the president, provided that if no past president is available to serve, the city council shall elect a member to serve in the place of the past president;
    3. One member elected by the city council. The elected member shall chair the committee on committees.
B. The committee on committees shall make its recommendations and report to the city council at the second regular meeting of the city council in January of each year. The recommendations and report shall be subject to confirmation by the city council. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of each committee.
(Ord. 6146, Amended, 12/18/1996. Prior code § 1.56.140)

2.80.055 Selection of committee membership.
Councilmembers shall submit their requests for standing committee appointments to the committee on committees no later than the first regular meeting of the city council in January. Requests may include alternate committees, but no councilmember will be appointed to more than one standing committee.
If a councilmember requests membership on a standing committee which has no vacancy, the most senior member of the committee who has served at least four consecutive years on the committee shall be appointed to a different standing committee in the same manner as a councilmember requesting a new committee appointment, provided that no more than two senior members of each standing commmittee shall be involuntarily appointed to another standing committee in any one year.
If there are more requests for membership on a standing committee than vacancies, including vacancies resulting from the involuntary re-assignment of up to two senior members, a coin toss shall be used to determine which of the requesting councilmembers will be appointed to each vacancy on the committee.
(Ord. 6146, Added, 12/18/1996)

2.80.060 Referral of bills.
All bills, communications and requests shall be referred to the appropriate committee.
(Prior code § 1.56.150)

2.80.070 Special committees—Appointment.
The mayor or the city council or the committee on committees shall have the right to appoint any special committee.
(Prior code § 1.56.160)

2.80.080 Committee meeting time and place—Committee of the whole.
The standing committees of the Aberdeen City Council will meet and hold their sessions on Wednesday evening of each week at City Hall, 200 East Market, Aberdeen, commencing at the hour of 6:30 p.m., except the finance committee, which shall commence at the hour of 6:00 p.m., or as soon thereafter as a quorum may be present for the conducting of business; provided, however, that no regular meeting of a standing committee shall continue after the hour of 7:15 p.m., at which time the city council shall meet as in committee of the whole; provided, further, that the public safety committee may hold such additional regular meetings as it deems necessary in the Aberdeen Police Station and/or the Aberdeen Fire Department on Mondays, commencing at the hour of 4:30 p.m. or as soon thereafter as a quorum may be present for the conducting of business; and providing further, that the public works committee may hold such additional regular meetings as it deems necessary on Tuesdays, at Aberdeen City Hall, commencing at the hour of 4:30 p.m., or as soon thereafter as a quorum may be present for the conducting of business; and provided further, that the finance committee may hold such additional regular meetings as it deems necessary on Mondays, at Aberdeen City Hall, commencing at the hour of 4:30 p.m., or as soon thereafter as a quorum may be present for the conducting of business.
(Prior code § 1.56.170)

Chapter 2.84 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION

Sections:
2.84.010     Established.
2.84.020     Membership.
2.84.030     Duties.

2.84.010 Established.
There is established for the city of Aberdeen a commission to be known as the traffic safety commission.
(Prior code § 1.57.010)

2.84.020 Membership.
The commission shall consist of nine members; the mayor of the city of Aberdeen, who shall be the chairman, the chief of police, city attorney, the chief of the fire department, the street superintendent, a representative of the school district, a representative of the regional comprehensive health planning, the development coordinator, and the traffic engineer.
(Prior code § 1.57.020)

2.84.030 Duties.
It shall be the duty of the commission to advise the mayor and the city council of the city of Aberdeen on problems related to traffic safety. The commission would coordinate programs between local, state, and federal governments.
(Prior code § 1.57.030)

Chapter 2.86 CIVIL EMERGENCIES

Sections:
2.86.010     Proclamation of civil emergency.
2.86.020     Orders during emergency.
2.86.030     Authority of mayor to enter into contracts and incur obligations.
2.86.040     Use of services and equipment of municipalities and citizens.
2.86.050     Registration of employees and volunteers.
2.86.060     Ratification, confirmation of orders.
2.86.070     Publication of proclamation.
2.86.080     Noncompliance deemed misdemeanor.

2.86.010 Proclamation of civil emergency.
The mayor, or if he is unavailable, the president of the city council shall proclaim in writing the existence of a civil emergency resulting from a disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, storm, earthquake, or other natural cause, when it appears that the imminent threat of death or injury of persons, or the destruction of property requires, in his judgment, extraordinary measures to protect the public peace, safety and welfare.

2.86.020 Orders during emergency.
Upon the proclamation of a civil emergency, the mayor, or if he is unavailable, the president of the city council, during the existence of such civil emergency, may make and proclaim any or all of the following orders:
A. An order imposing a general curfew applicable to the city as a whole, or to such geographical area or areas of the city and during such hours, as he deems necessary, which effective hours and affected area or areas may be modified from time to time;
B. An order requiring any or all business establishments to close and remain closed until further order;
C. An order requiring the closure of any or all bars, taverns, liquor stores, and other business establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or otherwise dispensed; provided that with respect to those business establishments which are not primarily devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages and in which such alcoholic beverages may be removed or made secure from possible seizure by the public, the portions thereof utilized for the sale of items other than alcoholic beverages may, in the discretion of the mayor, be allowed to remain open;
D. An order requiring the discontinuance of the sale, distribution or giving away of alcoholic beverages in any or all parts of the city.
E. An order requiring the discontinuance of the sale, distribution or giving away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
F. An order closing to the public any or all public places including streets, alleys, public ways, schools, parks, beaches, amusement areas, and public buildings;
G. An order requesting federal and/or state assistance in combating such civil emergency;
H. An order assisting in providing essential supplies to disaster victims; advising appropriate authorities concerning rationing, price control, wage and rent controls and allocation of food and other essential commodities;
I. An order directing the use of all public and private health, medical, and convalescent facilities and equipment to provide emergency health and medical care for injured persons;
J. An order authorizing, in cooperation with utility management and appropriate state and federal agencies, the shutting off, restoration, and operation of utility services in accordance with priorities established for combating such civil emergency;
K. An order providing for the evacuation and reception of the population of the city or any part thereof; and
L. Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property.
(Ord. 6534, Amended, 11/28/2012)

2.86.030 Authority of mayor to enter into contracts and incur obligations.
Upon the proclamation by the mayor of a civil emergency resulting from a disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or by fire, flood, storm, earthquake, or other natural cause, and during the existence of such civil emergency, the mayor, in carrying out the provisions of RCW Chapter 38.52, shall have the power by order to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster, protect the health and safety of persons and property, and provide emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. Such powers shall be exercised in the light of the exigencies of the situation without regard to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by ordinance (excepting mandatory constitutional requirements), including, but not limited to, budget law limitations and requirements of competitive bidding and publication of notices pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, the levying of taxes, and the appropriation and expenditures of public funds.

2.86.040 Use of services and equipment of municipalities and citizens.
In addition to or in connection with the exercise of the powers specified in sections 2.86.020 and 2.86.030, the mayor shall in accordance with RCW Chapter 38.52 and in carrying out the provisions thereof:
A. Utilize to the maximum extent practicable the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices, and agencies of the city, state and other municipal corporations organized under the laws of the state; and
B. In the event of a disaster and upon the proclamation by the governor of the existence of such disaster, command the service and equipment of as many citizens as the mayor considers necessary in the light of the disaster proclaimed; provided, that citizens so commandeered shall be entitled during the period of such service to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by RCW Chapter 38.52 and federal and state civil defense regulations for registered civil defense or emergency services workers.

2.86.050 Registration of employees and volunteers.
Each city department shall be responsible for the registration of city employees and volunteers commandeered by the department as civil defense or emergency services workers pursuant to RCW Chapter 38.52 and shall formulate and recommend a plan and program for compensation and reimbursement of persons so registered.

2.86.060 Ratification, confirmation of orders.
A. The mayor shall, wherever practicable, advise and consult with the city council with respect to disaster response activities. Any orders issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, at the earliest practicable time, be presented to the city council for review and appropriate legislation including:
    1. Findings by resolution with respect to actions taken;
    2. Authorization of payment for services, supplies, equipment loans and commandeered property used during disaster response activities;
    3. Approval of gifts, grants or loans accepted by the mayor during the emergency;
    4. Levy of taxes to meet costs of disaster response and recovery operations;
    The city council may ratify and confirm, modify, or reject any such order, and if rejected any such order shall be void. Ratification and confirmation shall be by majority of the council then present and voting. If the orders are not so ratified and confirmed, the orders shall, after the vote, be void. The orders shall be considered in full force and effect until the city council shall act.
B. The city finance director shall be authorized to draw and to pay the necessary warrants for expenditures made pursuant to order and authorized by the city council.

2.86.070 Publication of proclamation.
The mayor, or president of the city council, shall cause any proclamation issued by him pursuant to the authority of this chapter to be delivered to all news media within the city, and shall utilize such other available means, including public address systems, as shall be necessary, in his judgment, to give notice of such proclamations to the public.

2.86.080 Noncompliance deemed misdemeanor.
It is unlawful for anyone to fail or to refuse to obey any order proclaimed pursuant to this legislation. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6195, Added, 09/16/1998)

Chapter 2.92 EMPLOYEE INDEMNIFICATION

Sections:
2.92.010     Indemnification.

2.92.010 Indemnification.
The city of Aberdeen agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless its employees, officers, elected officials, and members of its boards and commissions from any civil liability for acts or omissions arising from the performance in good faith and without malice of the individual's duties as an employee, officer, elected official or board or commission member of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 1.70.030)

Chapter 2.96 MUNICIPAL OFFICE HOURS

Sections:
2.96.010     Office hours of municipal offices.

2.96.010 Office hours of municipal offices.
The Finance Department shall be open for the transaction of business from 8:00 a.m., until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. All other Departments shall maintain regular office hours as aproved by the Mayor. Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted as prohibiting routine closures between the hours of noon and 1:00 p.m. and temporary closures authorized by the Mayor due to emergencies, staff shortages, or other unanticipated circumstances
(Ord. 6433, Amended, 02/28/2007)

Chapter 2.104 DEVELOPMENT COORDINATOR

Sections:
2.104.010    Office created.
2.104.020    Appointment—Removal.
2.104.030    Duties.
2.104.040    Salary.

2.104.010 Office created.
The office of development coordinator is created.
(Prior code § 1.82.010)

2.104.020 Appointment—Removal.
The development coordinator shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and may be removed by the mayor with the approval of the city council.
(Prior code § 1.82.020)

2.104.030 Duties.
The duties of the development coordinator shall be as follows:
A. To investigate, pursue, and be informed of all governmental programs involving federal and state aid to cities;
B. To inform the mayor, city council, and department heads of such project that will be of interest to the city;
C. After the selection of such programs or projects, to coordinate with and assist the various city departments and others in obtaining the necessary project data to apply for financial aid and to personally initiate and follow through to its acceptance of any such application;
D. To make recommendations to the mayor, city council, and/or the various department heads as may be required to adjust their methods, planning, or record keeping to correspond to the requirements of the aid providing agency;
E. To assist the mayor in his administrative duties by the handling of routine matters as well as any special assignments requiring considerable research and preparation;
F. To attend all city council meetings as well as other meetings representing or assisting the mayor such as planning committee meetings and others;
G. To make every effort to promote commercial, industrial and residential growth as well as upgrading the city's existing environment by recommending and coordinating new innovations through to the action stage;
H. To assist the mayor in budget work relating to federal and state funds as well as any studies connected therewith;
I. To perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the mayor and city council.
(Prior code § 1.82.030)

2.104.040 Salary.
The salary of the development coordinator shall be fixed by the city council by ordinance.
(Prior code § 1.82.040)

Chapter 2.108 TRAFFIC ENGINEER

Sections:
2.108.010    Created.
2.108.020    Duties.

2.108.010 Created.
The position of traffic engineer is created. The position of traffic engineer is made a part of the engineering department under the jurisdiction of that department. The appointment of the traffic engineer and his assistants is made by the city engineer.
(Prior code § 1.86.010)

2.108.020 Duties.
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to:
A. Plan, design and initiate all traffic-related improvements dealing with signalizing, signing, markings and other services;
B. Investigate, report and recommend on City Council referred traffic problems;
C. Assist the chief of police, city electrician, street superintendent in all matters relating to the installation, operation and updating of traffic controls.
(Prior code § 1.86.020)

Chapter 2.112 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:
2.112.010    Public records available.
2.112.020    Hours for records inspection and copying.
2.112.030    Requests for public records.
2.112.040    Costs of providing copies of public records.
2.112.050    Response to requests.
2.112.060    Review of denials of public records requests.
2.112.070    Records index.
2.112.080    Protection of public records.

2.112.010 Public records available.
All public records of the city of Aberdeen, as defined by Chapter 42.56 RCW, are deemed to be available for public inspection and copying pursuant to this chapter, except as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010)

2.112.020 Hours for records inspection and copying.
Public records shall be available for inspection during the city's customary business hours. For the purposes of this chapter, the customary business hours of the city shall be from 8:00 a.m. to noon and from 1:30 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays.
(Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010)

2.112.030 Requests for public records.
In accordance with the requirements of Chapter 42.56* RCW that local agencies prevent unreasonable invasions of privacy, protect public records from damage or disorganization, and prevent excessive interference with essential functions of the city, public records may be inspected or copied or copies of such records may be obtained, by members of the public, upon compliance with the following procedures:
A. A request shall be made in writing upon a form prepared by the corporation counsel which shall be available in the city clerk's office. This request shall be directed to the department head of the department having custody of the requested record. If the appropriate department is unknown, the request may be made to the city clerk. This request may be submitted to the department head or the department head's designee during customary business hours.
B. The request shall include the following information:
    1. The name and address of the person requesting the record;
    2. The time of day and date on which the request was made;
    3. The nature of the request;
    4. An appropriate description of the record requested.
    Nothing in this section shall relieve a department from honoring requests received by mail for copies of identifiable public records.
* Scrivener’s Error: This reference appeared as Chapter 52.56 RCW in Ord. 6502. It has been editorially corrected at the city’s request.
(Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010)

2.112.040 Costs of providing copies of public records.
A. Costs for Paper Copies. There is no fee for inspecting public records, and a requestor may obtain standard black and white photocopies of up to twenty (20) pages at no charge. Fifteen cents ($0.15) per page will be charged if the request exceeds twenty (20) pages. For example, a request for twenty-one (21) pages will cost three dollars and fifteen cents ($3.15). If, at the city’s discretion, materials need to be copied by an outside source, either due to volume, current workload of city staff, or any other reason, the requestor will be charged the actual amount invoiced to the city by the copying vendor. The city council, by resolution, may set a higher fee for copying when warranted by actual costs to the city. The resolution shall include a statement of the actual per page costs or other costs, if any, in accordance with RCW 42.56.120.
B. Costs for Supplies. Envelopes and/or packaging, and/or the cost of any digital storage media or device (e.g., CD or thumb drive) are charged at the actual costs of those supplied.
C. Costs for Postage. Postage is charged at the actual postage costs of such postage.
D. Costs for Electronic Copies. 
    1. For public records not already in electronic format, and exceeding twenty (20) pages, the requestor will be charged ten cents ($0.10) per page for scanning; and
    2. For public records delivered via electronic means (e.g., email, cloud-based storage, etc.), the requestor will be charged ten cents ($0.10) per gigabyte or portion thereof; and
    3. For public records delivered via electronic means (e.g., email, cloud-based storage, etc.), the requestor will be charged five cents ($0.05) for each four (4) electronic attachments or files.
E. Customized Service Charge. In addition to the charges described in the previous subsections, with advance notice to the requestor the city may include a customized service charge for the use of information technology expertise to prepare data compilations, or provide customized electronic service access services when such compilations and customized access services are not used by the city for other city purposes.
F. Combining Costs. Charges in the above subsections may be combined to the extent that more than one (1) type of charge applies to copies produced in response to a particular request. The city will take reasonable steps to provide the records in the most efficient manner available in its normal operations.
G. Deposits and Installments. In the event a request is estimated to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), the city may require the requestor to deposit an amount not to exceed ten percent of the estimated cost prior to the duplication of record(s). If a department makes a request available on a partial or installment basis, the department may charge for each part of the request as it is provided. If an installment of a records request is not claimed or reviewed, the department is not obligated to fulfill the balance of the request.
H. Payment. Payment may be made by cash, check, or money order payable to the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6629 § 1, Amended, 07/25/2018; Ord. 6596 §1, Amended, 08/10/2016; Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010; Ord. 6131, Amended, 08/07/1996)

2.112.050 Response to requests.
Responses to requests for public records shall be made promptly. Within five business days of receiving a public records request the department head or the department head's designee shall respond by either (1) providing the record; (2) acknowledging that the city has received the request and providing a reasonable estimate of the time the city will require to respond to the request; or (3) denying the public record request on the grounds that the records requested are exempt from public inspection under Chapter 42.56 RCW or other applicable law. Additional time required to respond to a request may be based upon the need to clarify the intent of the request, to locate and assemble the information requested, to notify third persons or agencies affected by the request, or to determine whether any of the information requested is exempt and that a denial should be made as to all or part of the request. In acknowledging receipt of a public record request that is unclear, the department responding may ask the requestor to clarify what information the requestor is seeking. If the requestor fails to clarify the request, the department need not respond to it. All denials shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for the denial, including a statement of the specific exemption authorizing the withholding of the record and a brief explanation of how the exemption applies to the record withheld. In addition the department head may delete identifying details when it makes available or publishes any public record when there is reason to believe that disclosure of such details would be an invasion of personal privacy protected by Chapter 42.56 RCW. Any such deletion shall be accompanied by a written justification.
(Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010)

2.112.060 Review of denials of public records requests.
Any person who objects to the denial of a request for a public record may petition for a prompt review of such decision by tendering a written request for review. The written request shall specifically refer to the written statement accompanying the denial and shall state the reasons the person believes the exemptions do not apply. The department head or his designee shall immediately review the denial and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the denial by a final decision within two business days following the original denial. Administrative remedies shall not be considered to be exhausted until the request has been returned with a final decision or until the close of the second business day following denial of inspection, whichever occurs first.
(Prior code § 1.94.060)

2.112.070 Records index.
The mayor and the city council find that it would be unduly burdensome and would interfere with the city's operations to maintain an index of records as specified in RCW 42.56.070 because of the complexity and diversity of its business and the resulting volume of correspondence, reports, surveys, staff studies and other materials. The city and each of its departments shall make available for public inspection and copying all indexes maintained for city or departmental use except where such inspection or copying would necessarily result in the disclosure of exempt information or information protected by law.
(Ord. 6502, Amended, 08/25/2010. Prior code § 1.94.070)

2.112.080 Protection of public records.
A department head may require that a representative of the city be present at any inspection of public records. Inspection shall be denied and records shall be withdrawn if the individual inspecting the records does so in a manner which will damage or substantially disorganize them or which interferes excessively with other functions of the department or the city.
(Prior code § 1.94.080)

Chapter 2.114 CORRECTIONS DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.114.010    Definitions.
2.114.020    Programs - Policies and procedures.
2.114.030    Corrections department programs as privilege - No right to participate - Participation may be required.
2.114.040    Costs of programs.
2.114.050    Good time credit - Work day to jail day ratio.
2.114.060    Electronic home detention.
2.114.070    Work release.
2.114.080    Work time credit.
2.114.090    Day reporting.
2.114.100    Work crew in general - Types of work performed - Limitations.

2.114.010 Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings:
A. Confinement shall mean confinement within the corrections facility, or participation in a corrections department program.
B. Corrections department shall mean the division of the Aberdeen Police Department assigned the duties of operating city corrections facilities and programs.
C. Corrections facility shall mean the city of Aberdeen jail and city facilities used by the Corrections Department for its programs.
D. Corrections staff shall mean employees of the Aberdeen Police Department assigned to the corrections department.
E. Day of work shall mean a work day pursuant to a work crew or work time credit program, as such term is defined by corrections department policy, but in no case shall be less than six (6) hours of work, and shall be measured from the time the person is required to arrive at the corrections facility and shall end when such person is permitted to leave.
F. Inmate shall mean any defendant sentenced by the Aberdeen municipal court or another court to serve a period of confinement in the corrections facility.
G. The terms jail, imprisonment, or commitment, as those terms are used in a sentencing order of the court, shall mean confinement.
H. Program shall mean electronic home detention or monitoring, work crew, work release, work time credit, day reporting, or other corrections department programs as authorized by city ordinance or corrections department policy.
I. Qualifying inmate shall mean an inmate who meets the conditions of participation in a corrections department program as such conditions are set forth in the corrections department policies and procedures applicable to such program.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.020 Programs - Policies and procedures.
The corrections department shall establish policies and procedures for implementation of the programs authorized in this chapter. The policies and procedures may establish fees for participation based on the cost of administering the program and may provide for consequences, including but not limited to loss of good time credit, for an inmate who does not comply with behavioral requirements and rules of a program.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.030 Corrections department programs as privilege - No right to participate - Participation may be required.
A. Participation in programs is discretionary and the inmate shall have no right to participate in such programs rather than serving the entire jail sentence imposed by the court. There shall be no guarantee to any inmate that he or she will be permitted to participate in any program even after a date for participation is established. In the event an inmate is accepted in, or ordered to participate in, a program, and thereafter the program is not available, the inmate may be permitted to participate in another program for which he or she is eligible, subject to availability and at the sole discretion of corrections staff.
B. Participation shall be conditioned upon the inmate meeting the qualifications of such program, and complying with applicable policies and procedures for such program.
C. The corrections department may, at its discretion, require an inmate to participate in a corrections department program against his or her will.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.040 Costs of programs.
The city may, pursuant to resolution or through a budget ordinance, set various fees which may be required as a condition of participating in a program; provided, the corrections department may waive the fees in order to manage the correction facility’s population, or in order to make such programs available to the indigent.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.050 Good time credit - Work day to jail day ratio.
A. An inmate may receive good time credit for good behavior in an amount not to exceed one-third (1/3) of the confinement ordered by the court; provided, such good time credit may be taken away from the inmate pursuant to corrections department policies and procedures.
B. Any inmate who performs work on a corrections facility work crew, or pursuant to a work time credit program, shall receive credit for one (1) day of confinement ordered by the court for every one (1) day of work performed. Partial credit for periods of less than one (1) day may be given where the inability to complete the full day of work is not the fault of the inmate, and the inmate has otherwise complied with the program policies.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.060 Electronic home detention.
A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement in a private residence or another qualifying residence, subject to an acceptable system of electronic surveillance.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.070 Work release.
A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a work release program. Inmates participating in the work release program may, pursuant to applicable policies or procedures, spend a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour period unsupervised and away from the corrections facility while performing work for the inmate’s employer or an agency or party for which the inmate is performing community service. The inmate shall spend the nonworking hours at the corrections facility.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.080 Work time credit.
A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a work time credit program. Inmates participating in the work time credit program may, pursuant to applicable policies or procedures, spend a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour period away from the corrections facility and under limited supervision while performing work on a voluntary basis for the city or a qualifying community service agency. The inmate shall spend the nonworking hours at the corrections facility. Inmates performing community service pursuant to the work time credit program shall receive community service credit towards the payment of their financial obligations to the court.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.090 Day reporting.
A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a day reporting program. Inmates participating in the day reporting program shall, pursuant to applicable policies or procedures, spend the day under supervision at the corrections facility, or at some other location as set forth in corrections facility policy, and spend the remainder of the twenty-four (24) hour period unsupervised at an approved private residence, subject to conditions as set forth in the corrections facility’s policies and procedures.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

2.114.100 Work crew in general - Types of work performed - Limitations.
A. In general. A qualifying inmate sentenced to a period of confinement at the corrections facility may, at the discretion of corrections staff and subject to applicable policies and procedures, serve all or a portion of his or her ordered confinement on a work crew program. Inmates participating in the work crew program may, pursuant to applicable policies or procedures, spend a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour period performing work under the supervision of the corrections facility at on-site or off-site locations. The inmate shall spend the nonworking hours at the corrections facility or under limited or no supervision at another location as permitted by corrections facility policy.
B. Types of work. A work crew program may be utilized to perform the following types of work:
    1. Garbage, litter, debris, and junk removal from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, open space, wetlands, shorelines, waterways, steep slopes, parks, and public facilities.
    2. Removal and maintenance of invasive and undesirable vegetation and leaves from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, open space, wetlands, shorelines, waterways, steep slopes, parks, and public facilities.
    3. Removal of snow, sand, dirt, and debris from municipal, state, and federal property, including but not limited to roadways, roadway easements, sidewalks, trails, and public facilities.
    4. Graffiti removal and repair on state, federal, and municipal property.
    5. General maintenance and repair of municipal, state, and federal property.
C. Performance of work for other public agencies. The work crew may perform work at the request of other public agencies. The corrections facility may, at its discretion, require the public agency to pay a fee for the utilization of the work crew.
D. Performance of work for private parties or nonprofit agencies. The work crew may perform work that more than incidentally benefits private parties or nonprofit agencies on the condition that the private party or nonprofit agency reimburses the city of Aberdeen for the costs of providing the work crew and the private party or nonprofit agency assumes all responsibility for supervision of the work crew and all risk and liability exposure of having the work crew perform the work. Reimbursement may be waived at the discretion of the corrections staff when the work performed primarily benefits the poor and infirm.
E. Performance of bargaining unit work. The city of Aberdeen will not utilize a work crew to perform work that is customarily performed by members of a bargaining unit represented by a city of Aberdeen employee union, without the prior agreement of the union.
(Ord. 6511, Added, 12/08/2010)

Chapter 2.120 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE

Sections:
2.120.010    Bonds, procedure—State law adopted.
2.120.020    Procedure—Initiation by petition or resolution.
2.120.030    Local improvement contracts—Bids—Generally.
2.120.040    Bids—Bond required.
2.120.050    Completion of improvement—Acceptance by city council.
2.120.060    Definition—Immediate payment plan or bond installment plan.
2.120.070    Assessment roll—Compilation—Hearing—Notice.
2.120.080    Assessment roll—Hearing—Generally—Appeal.
2.120.090    Immediate payment plan.
2.120.100    Payment by bonds.
2.120.110    Delinquent assessments—Generally.
2.120.120    Items of cost.
2.120.130    Call and payment of warrants.
2.120.140    Issuance of bonds—Coupons.
2.120.150    Bonds—Terms—Interest.
2.120.160    Sale of bonds.
2.120.170    Call and payment of bonds.
2.120.180    Bonds—Form.
2.120.190    Applicability of chapter and state law.

2.120.010 Bonds, procedure—State law adopted.
Whenever the city council of the city of Aberdeen, shall provide for making local improvements and for paying the whole or any portion of the cost and expense thereof, by levying and collecting special assessments on property especially benefitted, the proceedings therefor shall be in accordance with the provisions of an act of the legislation of the state of Washington, entitled "An Act relating to local improvements in cities and towns and repealing certain Acts and parts of Acts," approved March 17th, 1911, and the provisions of this chapter and ordinances amendatory thereof.
(Prior code § 8.04.010)

2.120.020 Procedure—Initiation by petition or resolution.
A. Any such improvement may be initiated either upon petition or by resolution therefor, but such improvement may be ordered only by ordinance.
B. In case the improvement is initiated by petition, such petition shall be presented to and filed with the city clerk or such other officer as may be designated by the city council. The city engineer shall thereupon examine such petition and ascertain if the facts therein stated are true and shall cause an estimate of the costs and expense of such improvement to be made and shall transmit the same to the city council, together with all papers and information in his possession regarding the same, together with his recommendations thereon and a description of the boundaries of the district and a statement of the proportionate amount of the cost and expense of such improvement which shall be borne by property within the proposed assessment district, and a statement of the aggregate assessed valuation of the real estate, exclusive of the improvements in such districts according to the valuation last placed upon it for purpose of general taxation, together with all other outstanding and unpaid local improvement assessments against the property included in the district excluding penalties and interest; and in case the said petition is sufficient, shall also submit a diagram showing thereon the lots, tracts or parcels of land and other property which will be especially benefitted thereby and the estimated amount of the cost and expense of such improvement to be borne by each lot, tract or parcel of property.
C. The city council or other legislative body, may initiate such improvement directly by resolution, declaring its intention to order such improvement and setting forth the nature and territorial extent thereof and notify all persons who may desire to object thereto to appear and present such objections, at a meeting of the city council, or other legislative body, at the time specified in such resolution. Such resolution shall be published in at least two consecutive issues of the official newspaper of the city and the date of hearing thereon shall be at least fifteen (15) days after the date of the first publication of the same. The city engineer shall submit to the city council, at or prior to the date fixed for such hearing, the same date and information required to be submitted in the case of a petition.
D. The city council may, by ordinance, authorize the making of any such improvement and such ordinance may be passed on or at any time after the date of the hearing specified in the resolution.
(Prior code § 8.04.020)

2.120.030 Local improvement contracts—Bids—Generally.
A. All local improvements, funds for the making of which are derived in whole or in part from assessments upon property specially benefitted, shall be made either by the city itself, or by contract upon competitive bids. The city council shall determine whether such local improvement shall be done by contract or the city itself. The city council shall have power, without any liability whatsoever to any bidder, to reject any and all bids. The city may provide that all the work to be done in any local improvement district shall be let in one contract or at its option, it may provide that the work in any local improvement district be subdivided and separate and distinct contracts be let for each subdivision thereof. Before awarding any such contract, or contracts, the City Clerk shall cause to be published in two issues of the official newspaper of the city a notice, for at least ten days before the letting of such contract or contracts, inviting sealed proposals to be filed with the city clerk on or before the date and hour named therein. The plans and specifications for such work must, at the time of the publication of such notice, be on file in the office of the City Engineer of the city of Aberdeen, subject to public inspection.
B. All bids shall be accompanied by a certified check payable to the order of the city clerk of the city of Aberdeen, for a sum not less than five percent of the amount of the bid, and no bid shall be considered unless accompanied by such check at the time and place named; such bids shall be publicly opened and read. No bid shall be rejected for informality, but shall be received if it can be understood what is meant thereby. The city council shall proceed to determine the lowest responsible bidder and may let such contract to such bidder or, if in its opinion, all bids are too high it may reject all of them and readvertise or may proceed to do the work under its own supervision by day work and in such case all checks shall be returned to the bidders by the city clerk. If the contract be let, then, and in such case, all checks shall be returned to the bidders, except that of the successful bidder, which shall be retained until a contract in such form and substance as shall be required by the city council be entered into for making such improvement between the bidder and the city and the duly approved and accepted bond therefor be filed in the office of the city clerk. If the said bidder fails to enter into such contract in accordance with his bid, when required so to do, by the city council, said certified check shall be deemed forfeited to the city and the city clerk shall deliver said check, properly endorsed, to the city treasurer to be deposited to the credit of the particular local improvement fund and the city council shall order the city clerk to readvertise for proposals for such work.
(Prior code § 8.04.030)

2.120.040 Bids—Bond required.
Every contractor for the making of any such improvement shall be required to enter into a good and sufficient bond for the performance of his contract and containing such other conditions as may be proposed. Such bonds shall run to the city of Aberdeen and shall be payable to said city and may be consolidated with the bond required by statute to be given for public improvements running to the state of Washington for the protection of laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and material men, and in case it is so consolidated, shall run to the city of Aberdeen and be filed with the city clerk of said city. The penalty of such bond shall be in such sum as shall be specified in the contract, not less than fifty (50) percent of the contract price, and unless the surety on such bond is a licensed surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the state of Washington, such bond must be signed by not less than two individuals qualified to become surety upon bail and the sufficiency of such surety must be approved by the city council.
(Prior code § 8.04.040)

2.120.050 Completion of improvement—Acceptance by city council.
Whenever the city engineer shall file in the office of the city clerk a written report or certificate showing that any contract for making any improvement contemplated by this chapter has been completed and that the work has been carried out according to contract and the contract completed, the city clerk shall cause notice to be given by a publication in the official newspaper that at a time specified in said notice, not less than ten days from the date of the first publication of said notice, the city council will act upon the matter of accepting or rejecting the improvement as made and that the city council will hear, consider and pass upon all objections or protests that may be interposed by interested parties. Such notice shall be published in at least one issue of the official newspaper. All objections and protests of any and all persons interested which may be presented in response to said notice shall be acted upon and determined by the city council and the said city council shall have power to accept or reject said improvement.
(Prior code § 8.04.050)

2.120.060 Definition—Immediate payment plan or bond installment plan.
Any local improvement contemplated under this chapter may be made either upon the "immediate payment plan" or "bond installment plan" as the city council may provide.
A. By the "immediate payment plan" is meant that the entire assessment against any and all parcels of land assessed shall mature to be paid at or before delinquency in a single payment for the entire assessment for each parcel assessed.
B. By the "bond installment plan" is meant a division of the entire assessment against any parcel of land into equal annual installments, not to exceed ten annual installments, one such installment with interest to mature and become payable each year and the issuance by the city of improvement district installment bonds to be paid exclusively from funds derived from the assessments levied in the local improvement districts covered by such bonds.
C. The failure of the city council or other legislative body to designate in the resolution of its intention to improve, or in the ordinance creating an improvement district, the mode of payment of the assessment, shall be construed to mean that the assessment in such improvement district shall be payable upon the "immediate payment plan." The city council shall have the power at any time prior to the equalization of the assessment roll in any improvement district and prior to the issuance of any improvement district fund warrants, to change the mode of payment in such district from the "immediate payment plan" to the "bond installment plan."
(Prior code § 8.04.060)

2.120.070 Assessment roll—Compilation—Hearing—Notice.
A. Not more than thirty (30) days after the final acceptance of the work under any contract for any local improvement by the city council the city engineer shall prepare, either before or after the acceptance of the work, as to him shall be deemed advisable, and file with the city clerk an assessment roll which shall describe the property included in the district in the smallest subdivisions thereof and give the name of the owner or owners of each tract so far as known and when the name of the owner shall be unknown, that fact shall be stated and said assessment roll shall show the amount assessed against each such tract or parcel of land and when the assessment is to be made upon the "bond installment plan," the amount of each installment shall be stated. In no case shall a mistake in, or omission of, the name of the owner be fatal when the description of the property is correct.
B. Upon the filing of the assessment roll with the city clerk, the city council shall fix a date for hearing upon such roll before the council and direct the city clerk to give notice of such hearing and the time and place thereof. Such notice shall specify such time and place of hearing of such roll and shall notify all persons who may desire to object thereto to make such objections in writing and to file the same with such clerk at or prior to the date fixed for such hearing, and that at the time and place fixed, and that at such other times as the hearing may be continued to, the city council will sit as a board of equalization for the purpose of considering such objections made thereto or any part thereof, and will correct, revise, raise, lower, change or modify said roll or any part thereof or set aside such roll, and order that such assessment be made de novo as to such body shall seem just and equitable, and then proceed to confirm the same by ordinance. Such notice shall be published in at least two issues of the official weekly newspaper and in at least five issues if the official newspaper is a daily newspaper, and the date of hearing provided in said notice must be at least fifteen (15) days after the date of the last publication of said notice.
(Prior code § 8.04.070)

2.120.080 Assessment roll—Hearing—Generally—Appeal.
A. At the time fixed by the council as is designated in said notice for hearing objections to the confirmation of said roll, or at such times as such hearing may be adjourned to, the city council, or other legislative body, shall sit as a board of equalization and hear, consider and determine all objections, protests and complaints, if any have been filed, and consider the same; and shall have power to modify, correct, revise, raise, lower or change such roll, or any part thereof, or to set aside such roll and order that such assessment be made de novo as to such body shall appear equitable and just. In case a new assessment roll is ordered, the same shall be prepared by the city engineer and in case the same includes property omitted from the first or if any assessments have been raised from the amount appearing in the first roll, a new notice of hearing shall be given as herein provided. But in case no new property appears on said roll or if no assessments have been raised, no objections to the same will be considered unless such objections were filed prior to the original date of hearing. The city council shall then confirm the assessment roll by ordinance, which ordinance shall specify the entire amount of the assessments as shown upon such roll and shall direct that the assessment roll be deposited with the city treasurer for collection and shall specify the manner and terms of payment of such assessment. No objection to the assessment shall be considered by the city council unless the grounds are stated clearly and unless such objection is made in writing and filed within the time prescribed.
B. In case an appeal shall be taken to review the action of the city council as prescribed by law, upon receipt of a certified copy of the decision of the court, the city clerk or other officer who shall at that time have custody of the assessment roll shall modify and correct such assessment roll in accordance with such decision, provided no further appeal has been taken, in which case such action shall be deferred until such officers shall have received a certified copy of the decision of the highest appellate court to which such case is taken for review.
(Prior code § 8.04.080)

2.120.090 Immediate payment plan.
Whenever the cost and expense of any improvement shall be payable by the mode of "immediate payment," the city treasurer shall, upon the receipt of such roll, publish a notice in the official paper of the city for ten consecutive daily or two consecutive weekly issues that the said roll is in his hands for collection and that any assessment thereon or any portion of any such assessment may be paid at any time within thirty (30) days from the date of the first publication of said notice, without penalty, interest or costs, and that unless payment be made within such time, such assessment or unpaid portion thereof will become delinquent. All such delinquent assessments shall be subject to a charge for interest at the rate of eight percent and to an additional charge of five percent penalty levied upon both principal and interest due until the same shall be certified to the county treasurer as hereinafter provided.
(Prior code § 8.04.090)

2.120.100 Payment by bonds.
The city treasurer shall, as soon as any assessment roll payable on the "bond installment plan" has been placed in his hands for collection, publish a notice in the official newspaper of the city for ten consecutive daily or two consecutive weekly issues, that such roll is in his hands for collection and that any assessment thereon or any portion of any such assessment may be paid at any time within thirty (30) days from the date of the first publication of said notice without penalty, interest or costs. Whenever the cost and expense of any improvement shall be payable by the mode of "payment by bonds" the whole or any portion of any assessment levied on account of such improvement may be paid without penalty or interest during the first thirty (30) days following the date of the first publication of a notice by the city treasurer that such assessment and assessment roll is in his hands for collection, and the unpaid balance, if any, may be paid in equal annual installments, the number of which shall equal the number of years which the bonds to pay for the improvement may run; or, the lien of any such assessment may be discharged at any time after the said thirty (30) days by paying the entire unpaid portion thereof with all penalty and costs attaching, together with all interest thereof to date of delinquency of the installment thereof next falling due. The first installment shall become due and payable during the thirty-day period succeeding a date one year after the date of first publication of such notice, and annually thereafter each succeeding installment shall become due and payable in like manner. If the whole or any portion of any assessment remain unpaid after the first thirty-day period herein provided for, interest upon the whole unpaid sum shall be charged at the rate fixed in the ordinance providing for such improvement, and each year thereafter one of said installments, together with interest due upon the whole of the unpaid balance shall be collected. Any installment not paid prior to the expiration of the thirty-day period during which such installment is due and payable, shall thereupon become delinquent. All delinquent installments shall be subject to a charge for interest at the bond rate and to an additional charge of five percent penalty levied upon both principal and interest due on such installment or installments, until certified to the county treasurer as hereinafter provided.
(Prior code § 8.04.100)

2.120.110 Delinquent assessments—Generally.
A. Whenever any local improvement assessment, as contemplated in this chapter, or any installment or interest on unpaid installments, if the said improvement is on the "bond installment plan," shall remain delinquent and unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days after the date of delinquency, the city treasurer shall certify and transmit to the county treasurer of Grays Harbor County, Washington, a list of all such delinquent local assessments, installments, interest and penalties with a description of the parcel or parcels of land to which the same are chargeable, and the amount of interest chargeable to each parcel, together with the number of the improvement district and such other information as may be directed by the city council by ordinance. Upon receiving such list, it shall be the duty of the county treasurer to enter said delinquent local assessments against the respective parcels of land upon the current tax rolls of the county for the general county and state taxes under a separate column on said rolls, to be provided and known as the "local improvement column." All such delinquent local assessments, including interest and penalty, shall bear interest from the time of filing such list with the county treasurer at the rate of fifteen (15) percent per annum until paid. All certificates of delinquency issued by the county treasurer shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such assessment, or assessments, were levied and shall bear interest at the rate of fifteen (15) per cent per annum. In case any certificate or delinquency is demanded and issued by such county treasurer for any general county or state taxes, there shall be included therein the local improvement assessment or installment so certified, and the county treasurer may likewise issue certificates of delinquency on said property for said local assessment or installment thereof whether or not there is any delinquent general county or state taxes upon said property and such certificate of delinquency shall be issued as nearly as practicable in the same manner and form as certificates of delinquency for general state and county taxes, and said certificates of delinquency may be foreclosed in the same manner that certificates of delinquency for state and county taxes are foreclosed, and the date when such certificate of delinquency shall be subject to foreclosure shall be specified therein, and all provisions of law relating to the issuance and foreclosure of certificates of delinquency for state and county taxes and the issuance of tax deeds thereon shall be applicable to the foreclosure of delinquent certificates containing such assessment or installment as the whole or part thereof.
B. In case no certificate of delinquency shall be demanded and issued against any property for any assessment or installment so certified to the county treasurer, all of such assessments then standing unpaid upon the rolls and the property upon which the same are levied, shall be included in the next suit brought by the county to foreclose outstanding taxes and assessments and such assessments shall be foreclosed and such property sold in the same proceedings and in the same manner that general taxes are foreclosed and such property sold and in case any property is sold to the county for any such assessment or installment or any part thereof, and a tax deed issued to the county, the county shall be deemed to hold the title thereof in trust for the county and for the city, and whenever such land shall be subsequently sold to the county, the county shall deduct from the proceeds of such sale, first, the full amount of the general tax charged against such property with the accumulated interest, and second, the balance of said sale price or so much thereof as may be necessary to pay the amount of such local assessment or assessments or installment and accumulated interest and penalty, shall be remitted by the county treasurer to the city treasurer of the city of Aberdeen, and the county shall retain the excess, if any there be.
C. There shall be no redemption from such sale after the issuance of the deed as in the case of general county and state taxes. In the event that two or more assessments or installments shall be certified on the same piece of property, the sale of said property on any one installment or assessment shall not discharge said property from the lien of any other assessment or installment, but title shall be taken subject to such assessments or installments remaining unpaid. Any certificate of delinquency issued by the county treasurer as herein directed, shall contain all assessments and all installments appearing upon the tax rolls against said property at the time of the issuance thereof.
D. All collections made by the county treasurer whether from the owner of the property or from purchasers of certificates of delinquency or from the sale of property deeded by the county through foreclosure proceedings, shall be remitted to the city treasurer on or prior to the tenth day of the month following such collection and shall be thereupon credited to such property by the city treasurer in all respects and in the same manner as nearly as practicable that said fund would have been credited and deposited if paid directly to the city treasurer by the owner of said property.
(Prior code § 8.04.110)

2.120.120 Items of cost.
A portion of the cost and expense of any improvement made under the provisions of this chapter including the engineering expenses and including the making of the estimate of the cost and expense of the improvement, also the cost of supervision and inspection of the work and the ascertaining of the ownership of the property included in the assessment district and the cost of advertising and publishing of all notices shall be shown upon the said assessment roll and the amount of such cost and expense as so shown shall be paid into the current expense fund of the city by the city treasurer out of the first collections made upon the said local improvement district. In making up the assessment roll, the city engineer shall show the amount of such cost and expense.
(Prior code § 8.04.120)

2.120.130 Call and payment of warrants.
If such improvement is on the "immediate payment plan" the city clerk shall issue local improvement fund warrants in payment of the cost and expense of the work and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer of the city of Aberdeen to call in and pay said warrants in their numerical order, whenever it shall have sufficient funds on hand to the credit of such particular fund and shall likewise call bonds issued by the officers of the city of Aberdeen when the improvement is being made on the "bond installment plan."
(Prior code § 8.04.130)

2.120.140 Issuance of bonds—Coupons.
A. In case said improvement is made on the bond installment plan, the city treasurer shall, at the expiration of thirty (30) days after the first publication of the notice to pay assessment, report to the city council the amount collected by him upon the said roll and shall specify in said report the amount remaining unpaid upon said roll, and the city council may then, or at a subsequent meeting, by ordinance, direct the mayor and city clerk to issue the bonds on the local improvement district established by the ordinance ordering the improvement in an amount equal to the amount remaining unpaid on said assessment, which ordinance shall specify the denominations of the bonds which may be in denominations of five hundred dollars ($500.00), two hundred dollars ($200.00), and one hundred dollars ($100.00) as in such ordinance provided.
B. That there shall be attached to each bond such a number of coupons, not exceeding twelve (12), as shall be required to represent the annual interest thereon.
(Prior code § 8.04.140)

2.120.150 Bonds—Terms—Interest.
Such bonds by their terms shall be made payable on or before a date not to exceed ten years from and after the date of the issuance of such bonds, which latter date may be fixed by the ordinance directing their issuance or by resolution and shall bear such interest as may be provided in the ordinance ordering the improvement, not exceeding eight per cent per annum, which interest shall be payable annually or semi-annually as may be provided by the ordinance ordering the improvement, and each bond shall have attached thereto, interest coupons for each interest payment, such bonds shall be numbered from one upwards consecutively and each bond and coupon shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk; provided, however, that said coupons may, in lieu of being so signed, have printed or stamped thereon facsimile of the signatures of said officers. Each bond shall have the seal of the city affixed thereto and shall refer to the improvement to pay for which the same is issued and to the ordinance ordering the same. Each bond shall provide that the principal sum therein named and interest thereon shall be payable out of the local improvement fund created for the payment of the cost and expense of such improvement and not otherwise. Such bonds shall not be issued in any amount in excess of the cost and expense of such improvement.
(Prior code § 8.04.150)

2.120.160 Sale of bonds.
The bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter, or such portion of such bonds as may remain unsold, if the same is ordered as hereinafter provided, may be issued to the contractor constructing the improvement in payment therefor, or the ordinance directing the issue of such bonds may provide that the same may be sold by some duly authorized officer or officers of the city in the manner prescribed therein, at not less than their par value and accrued interest, and that the proceeds thereof shall be applied in payment of the cost and expense of the improvement.
(Prior code § 8.04.160)

2.120.170 Call and payment of bonds.
The city treasurer shall pay the interest on the bonds authorized to be issued by this chapter out of the respective local improvement funds from which they are payable. Whenever there shall be sufficient money in any local improvement fund against which bonds have been issued under the provisions of this chapter, over and above sufficient for the payment of interest on all unpaid bonds, to pay the principal of one or more bonds, the Treasurer shall call in and pay such bonds; provided, that such bonds shall be called in and paid in their numerical order; provided further, that such call shall be made by publication in the city official newspaper on the day following the delinquency of the installment of the assessment or as soon thereafter as practicable, and shall state that bonds No. _____ (giving the serial number or numbers of the bonds called) will be paid on the day the next interest coupon on said bonds shall become due, and interest upon such bonds shall cease upon such date.
(Prior code § 8.04.170)

2.120.180 Bonds—Form.
All bonds unless otherwise specially ordered by the council, issued in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter, may be in substantially the following form:LOCAL IMPROVEMENT BOND
DISTRICT NO.
CITY OF ABERDEEN
STATE OF WASHINGTON
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BOND No. _____.
N.B. This Bond is issued by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the Legislature of the State of Washington entitled "AN ACT relating to Local Improvements in cities and towns and repealing certain Acts and parts of Acts approved March 17, 1911", and also pursuant to an Act of the Legislature of the State of Washington entitled "AN ACT relating to Local Improvements and providing for the maintenance in cities and towns of Local Improvement Guaranty funds, passed and approved March 16, 1923", and as the last said Act was amended by an Act of the Legislature of the State of Washington entitled "An Act relating to Local Improvements and bonds issued therefor, amending sections 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Chapter 141 of the 1923 Session Laws of the State of Washington and repealing Section 6 thereof, approved January 18, 1926", Section 5 of which Act being as follows:
"Sec. 5. Neither the holder nor the owner of any bond issued under the provisions of this Act shall have any claim therefor against the city or town by which the same is issued, except for payment from the special assessments made for the improvement for which said bond was issued, and except as against the local improvement guaranty fund of such city or town, and the city or town shall not be liable to any holder or owner of such bond or warrant for any loss to the guaranty fund occurring in the lawful operation thereof by the city or town. The remedy of the holder or owner of a bond, in case of non-payment, shall be confined to the enforcement of the assessment and to the guaranty fund. A copy of the foregoing part of this section shall be plainly written, printed or engraved on each bond issued and guaranteed hereunder, and the writing, printing or engraving shall be deemed sufficient compliance with the requirements of Section 9405 of Remington's Compiled Statutes."
The City of Aberdeen, a municipal corporation of the State of Washington, hereby promises to pay to _______________ or bearer _______________ ($_______) Dollars, lawful money of the United States, with interest thereon at the rate of ________ per cent per annum, payable annually out of the fund established by Ordinance No. _____ of said City and known as Local Improvement Fund District No. ____ and not otherwise, except from the guaranty fund, as herein provided, both principal and interest payable at the office of the City Treasurer of said City.
A coupon is hereto attached for each installment of interest to accrue hereon and said interest shall be paid only on presentation and surrender of such coupon to the City Treasurer, but in case this bond is called for payment before its maturity, each and every coupon representing interest not accrued at the time this bond is payable under such call shall be void. This bond is payable on or before the _____ day of _______ 19____, and is subject to call by the City Treasurer of said City whenever there shall be sufficient money in said Local Improvement Fund to pay the same and all unpaid bonds of the series of which this bond is one, which are prior to this bond in numerical order, over and above sufficient for the payment of interest on all unpaid bonds of said series.
The City Council of said City as the agent of said Local Improvement District No. _____ established by section No. _____ has caused this bond to be issued in the name of the said City as the bond of said Local Improvement District, the bond or the proceeds thereof to be applied in part payment of so much of the cost and expense of the improvement of portions of _________ street, under said section No. _______ as is levied and assessed the property included in said Local Improvement District No. _______ of Aberdeen, has been established by ordinance for said purpose, and the holder or holders of this bond shall look only to said fund for the payment of either the principal or interest of this bond, and to the Local Improvement Guaranty Fund of the City of Aberdeen in the lawful operation thereof.
The call for payment of this bond, or of any bond, of the series of which this is one shall be made by the City Treasurer by publishing the same in the official newspaper of said city, and when such call is made for the payment of this bond it will be paid on the day the next interest coupon thereon shall become due after said call and upon said day interest upon this bond shall cease and any remaining coupons shall be void.
This bond is one of a series of _________ bonds aggregating _______________ ($_______) Dollars, to cover the expense of Local Improvement District No.      issued for said Local Improvement District, all of which bonds are subject to the same terms and conditions as herein expressed.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, The City of Aberdeen has caused these presents to be signed by its Mayor and attested by its City Clerk and sealed with its corporate seal this day of ____________, in the year of our Lord One Thousand Nine Hundred and __________________.
CITY OF ABERDEEN,
By __________________________________
Mayor
Attest:
__________________________
City Clerk
There shall be attached to each bond such a number of coupons, not exceeding ten (10) as shall be required to represent the interest thereon payable annually for the term of said bonds, which coupons shall be substantially in the following form:THE CITY OF ABERDEEN
INTEREST COUPON NO. __
On the ____________ day of ________, 19_____.
CITY OF ABERDEEN
STATE OF WASHINGTON
Promises to pay to the bearer at the office of its City Treasurer ________ ($______) Dollars being twelve months' interest due that day on Bond No. ___________ of the bonds of "Local Improvement Fund District No. ___________ of Aberdeen", and not otherwise, provided that this coupon is subject to the terms and conditions contained in the bond to which it is annexed, and if said bond shall be called for payment before maturity hereof, then this coupon shall be void.
CITY OF ABERDEEN,
By __________________________________
Mayor
Attest:
__________________________
City Clerk
The city treasurer shall keep in his office a register of all such bonds in which he shall enter the local improvement district for which the same are issued and the date, amount and number of each bond and the terms of payment.
(Prior code § 8.04.190)

2.120.190 Applicability of chapter and state law.
The laws of the state of Washington and the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all local improvements and proceedings therein initiated by petition or resolution subsequent to the passage and legal publication of this chapter; and all proceedings and the manner of the collection and enforcement of all assessments in such proceedings shall be in compliance therewith; this chapter shall not apply to any local improvement initiated prior to the passage and legal publication of this chapter; all local improvements initiated prior to the passage and legal publication of this chapter shall be completed in accordance with and the collection and delinquency of all assessments now levied or which may hereafter be levied therefor shall be governed by the ordinances and laws of the State of Washington in force at the time of the initiation of such improvement proceedings.
(Prior code § 8.04.190)

Chapter 2.124 ISSUANCE OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENT WARRANTS

Sections:
2.124.010    Improvements by city.
2.124.020    Improvements by contract.
2.124.030    Interest and maturity date on warrants issued to any contractor.
2.124.040    Redemption of warrants.
2.124.050    Application of chapter to prior improvements.

2.124.010 Improvements by city.
Whenever the city council of the city of Aberdeen shall provide in any ordinance ordering any local improvement that such work shall be done by the city instead of by contract, the total cost and expense of making such improvement shall be paid in local improvement fund warrants, drawn upon the local improvement established by such ordinance.
(Prior code § 8.06.010)

2.124.020 Improvements by contract.
Whenever the city council shall provide in any ordinance ordering any local improvement that such work shall be done by contract, the city council may order the issuance of local improvement warrants against the local improvement fund established in the ordinance ordering such improvement to pay the cost and expense of such local improvement; that in the event the city council intends to provide for the issuance of local improvement warrants when the work is to be done by contract, it shall so provide in the ordinance ordering such improvement, and such warrants shall be issued to such contractors on monthly estimates in amounts not exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of such monthly estimates as made by the City Engineer; and the remaining twenty-five (25) percent to be paid in such warrants upon acceptance of work as completed, by the city council.
(Prior code § 8.06.020)

2.124.030 Interest and maturity date on warrants issued to any contractor.
All warrants issued to any contractor shall be redeemed out of the special fund of such local improvement district upon call by the city treasurer and shall bear interest at the rate of not to exceed eight percent per annum from their date until the date of maturity provided therein, after which they shall not draw any interest; that the date of maturity provided in such warrants shall be a date sixty (60) days after the date provided for the completion of the contract as set out in the specifications and contract.
(Prior code § 8.06.030)

2.124.040 Redemption of warrants.
All warrants shall be redeemable either in cash or bonds at the option of the city council of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 8.06.040)

2.124.050 Application of chapter to prior improvements.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to a local improvement which has heretofore been ordered made by ordinance by the city of Aberdeen but shall not apply to any work heretofore ordered by the city council to be done by contract.
(Prior code § 8.06.050)

Chapter 2.128 ENGINEER AS PURCHASING AGENT FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:
2.128.010    City engineer made purchasing agent.
2.128.020    City engineer—Duties.

2.128.010 City engineer made purchasing agent.
The city engineer of the city of Aberdeen is created a purchasing agent of the city of Aberdeen for the purchase of materials and supplies and in the employment of labor for the making of local improvements within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 8.08.010)

2.128.020 City engineer—Duties.
The city engineer is authorized to discharge employees engaged in doing work in any local improvement district and to reject unsuitable material supplied the city of Aberdeen in the making of any local improvement.
(Prior code § 8.08.020)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.04         Budget
3.08         Claims against the City
3.12         Equipment Rental Fund
3.16         Finance Director's Fees
3.20         Advance Travel Revolving Fund
3.24         Petty Cash Fund
3.28         Tort Claims
3.32         Capital Improvement Fund
3.36         Drug Enforcement Action Fund
3.40         Warrants—Interest Rate
3.44         Cumulative Reserve Fund for Revenue Stabilization
3.48         Property Tax Investment and Distribution
3.52         Good Neighbors Revolving Loan Program
3.56         City Pooled Investment Fund
3.60         Open Space Taxation
3.68         Polygraph Fees
3.72         Admissions Tax
3.76         Utility Tax
3.78         Aberdeen Transportation Benefit District
3.80         Gambling Tax
3.84         Excise Tax on Real Estate Sales
3.88         Sales or Use Tax
3.92         Lodging Tax
3.96         Leasehold Excise Tax
3.100        Downtown Parking and Business Improvement District
3.104        Foreclosure of Delinquent Assessments
3.108        Sale of LID Trust Properties
3.112        Management of LID Trust Properties
3.116        Water Department Cumulative Reserve Fund
3.120        Shannon Slough Fund

Chapter 3.04 BUDGET

Sections:
3.04.010     Budget—Generally.
3.04.020     City clerk to keep accounts.
3.04.030     Specifications of certain sums.
3.04.040     Uniform accounting system for street costs.
3.04.050     Emergency account.
3.04.060     Monthly balance sheets.

3.04.010 Budget—Generally.
Whenever the city council of the city of Aberdeen shall adopt an annual budget as a basis for tax levy the different items comprising the budget shall be fully set forth either in the motion, resolution or ordinance adopting the budget, or by appropriate reference to the estimates on file with the city clerk, so that the different items comprising the budget may be definitely and accurately determined from an inspection of the records. Except in case of urgent emergency calling for additional expenditures, such emergency being declared to exist by a two-thirds vote of all councilmen elect, and except in cases of necessity, the expenditures of the city of Aberdeen and officers thereof, shall be limited to the amounts specified in the annual budget as adopted by the council. Provided that the limitation of expenditures contained in this chapter shall not apply in case of judgment and other compulsory obligation of the city.
(Ord. 6207, Amended, 12/02/1998. Prior code § 1.04.010)

3.04.020 City clerk to keep accounts.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk of the city of Aberdeen to keep an appropriate account with each office, department and subject covered by the annual budget adopted by the council, in which account there shall be credited to each office, department, and subject the amount allowed thereto for the current year's expense as shown in the adopted budget, to be itemized so far as necessary for a proper understanding of the same. As fast as the expenditures are made and warrants issued, the city clerk shall make proper segregations and shall charge up in such account against each office, department and subject the expenditures properly chargeable thereto. He shall take off a monthly trial balance from such books of account and submit the same to the council once a month. When the amount allowed in the adopted budget for any office, department or subject is exhausted, the city clerk shall notify the council of that fact.
(Prior code § 1.04.020)

3.04.030 Specifications of certain sums.
The specifications of certain sums for certain items in the budget within any fund of the city shall not necessarily limit the expenditure in that fund to the particular item specified, but the money appropriated in the budget for a particular item in a particular fund if not needed for that particular item and if needed for other items within the same fund, may be expended for other items; provided, that the aggregate expenditure of that fund shall not in the aggregate exceed the amount fixed in the adopted budget for the year.
(Ord. 6207, Amended, 12/02/1998. Prior code § 1.04.030)

3.04.040 Uniform accounting system for street costs.
The uniform accounting system for city street costs of the state of Washington, as prepared by the state auditor, is adopted as the accounting method to be used by the city street fund of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 1.04.034)

3.04.050 Emergency account.
In cases of necessity, and cases of emergency, where the council shall by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected declare the existence of such emergency, where an expenditure of money outside of the adopted budget may be required, such expenditure may be made, and all such expenditures shall be shown in the account books of the city clerk, except as hereinbefore provided, under the head of "emergency account," so that the clerk's books shall at all times show the expenditures made by the city outside of the adopted budget.
(Prior code § 1.04.040)

3.04.060 Monthly balance sheets.
The monthly balance sheets to be prepared by the city clerk and furnished to the council, as herein provided, shall be published, after submission to the council in the official newspaper of the city.
(Prior code § 1.04.050)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Sections:
3.08.010     Claims against city—Procedure.
3.08.020     Investigation of claims.
3.08.030     Advance warrants.
3.08.040     Certain payments authorized.
3.08.050     Certification of regular payrolls.
3.08.060     Signing of warrants.
3.08.070     Claims for supplies and materials—Supporting invoice.
3.08.080     Limitations on chapter.
3.08.090     Claims fund created.
3.08.100     Payroll fund created.

3.08.010 Claims against city—Procedure.
All claims against the city of Aberdeen for labor, services, supplies and/or materials shall be upon forms prescribed and furnished by the finance director, filed in the finance office, and shall be authenticated and certified by the department head of the department to which the labor, services, supplies and/or materials were furnished; provided, that the department head may designate the authority to authenticate and certify such claims to an employee within the department. A list of employees so designated shall be filed with the finance director.
(Prior code § 1.08.010)

3.08.020 Investigation of claims.
It shall be the duty of the finance director to investigate and audit the claims regulated by Section 3.08.010, and recommend to the city council whether said claims should be allowed or rejected. At each regular meeting of the city council all claims having been so audited shall be allowed or disallowed by the city council, as in its judgment deems right, and the finance director shall issue warrants for the payment of such claims that have been allowed by the city council. The finance committee may audit such claims as it deems necessary on behalf of the city council.
(Prior code § 1.08.020)

3.08.030 Advance warrants.
A. The finance director shall be authorized to issue warrants for claims in advance of council approval for claims requiring payment prior to the next regularly scheduled council meeting. Subsequent to such issue, the finance director shall include the advance warrants with the regular warrants for council review and approval in accordance with Section 3.08.020.
B. If the council disapproves the claims after the warrant has been issued, the finance director shall cause the disapproved claim to be recognized as a receivable of the city and to pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the council is satisfied and approves the claim.
(Prior code § 1.08.025)

3.08.040 Certain payments authorized.
The finance director shall be authorized to issue checks for the following items: postage, express and freight, pay for city employees terminating between regular paydays, payroll adjustments due to preparation errors or omissions, payments to the city fiscal agent for debt service, refunds of overpayments, transmittal of collections on behalf of the state and county, refunds of overpayments made to the city, redemption of warrants, and expenses for special police investigation purposes. Requests for checks must be accompanied by a properly executed request form signed by the department head or the department head's designee requesting the check. Requests for special police investigation funds shall be made only by the chief of police or the chief's designee and must be supported by a properly executed claim signed by the chief or the chief's designee. The finance director shall develop such additional procedures as are necessary for the handling of cash payments.
(Prior code § 1.08.030)

3.08.050 Certification of regular payrolls.
Except as provided in Section 3.08.040, all regular payrolls must be certified to by the head of the department submitting such payrolls and must be approved by the finance committee and the city council before warrants are drawn by the finance director in payment of the same; provided, however, that if the payroll date as provided by ordinance is such that said payroll cannot be approved by the city council prior to said payroll date, the finance director shall issue warrants upon said certified payroll. Such payroll, however, may be audited by the finance committee. Any such payroll shall be submitted to the city council for approval at its next regular meeting.
(Prior code § 1.08.040)

3.08.060 Signing of warrants.
All warrants shall be signed by the mayor, or the president of the council in the absence of the mayor, and attested by the finance director, or designee in the absence of the finance director. Facsimile signatures may be used as provided by state law.
(Prior code § 1.08.050)

3.08.070 Claims for supplies and materials—Supporting invoice.
All claims for supplies or materials shall be supported by an invoice accompanying said claim.
(Prior code § 1.08.060)

3.08.080 Limitations on chapter.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed as permitting the finance director to make any cash advances or the finance director to issue any warrant for any unearned wages to any city employee, and such payment is hereby expressly prohibited.
(Prior code § 1.08.080)

3.08.090 Claims fund created.
There is created a fund to be known as the "claims fund," into which may be paid moneys from time to time as directed by the city council from any funds which are available and upon which warrants may be issued and paid in payment of claims against the city for any purpose. The accounts of the city shall be so kept that they will show the department or departments and the respective amounts for which the warrant is issued and paid.
(Prior code § 1.08.100)

3.08.100 Payroll fund created.
There is created a fund to be known as the "payroll fund," into which fund there may be placed from time to time such amounts from any funds available as the city council shall in its discretion direct, and upon which fund warrants may be drawn and cashed for the purpose of paying any moneys due city employees for salaries and wages. Appropriate accounting records shall be kept to show the department or departments and the various amounts to which payments from the payroll fund are properly chargeable.
(Prior code § 1.08.110)

Chapter 3.12 EQUIPMENT RENTAL FUND

Sections:
3.12.010     Establishment.
3.12.020     Director.
3.12.030     Operation.
3.12.040     Accounting procedure.
3.12.050     Withdrawals and expenditures.

3.12.010 Establishment.
There are created and established two special funds to be known and designated as the "equipment rental funds," to be used as revolving funds to be expended for salaries, wages and operations required for the repair, replacement, purchase and operation of all self-propelled motor vehicles equipment, and all other equipment designated by the various department heads of the city of Aberdeen. The equipment rental funds shall include the purchase of all equipment, materials and supplies to be used in the administration and operation of each fund. One fund shall be termed "equipment rental operating fund" and the other shall be termed "equipment rental reserve fund."
(Prior code § 1.09.010)

3.12.020 Director.
The equipment rental funds created herein shall be under the direction of the street superintendent.
(Prior code § 1.09.020)

3.12.030 Operation.
A. The charges for the rental for the use of such motor vehicle equipment, or other equipment as designated, shall be sufficient to cover the maintenance, operation and replacement of such equipment, and the terms for the rental thereof shall be on an annual, monthly, daily or hourly basis as determined by the director. A schedule of such charges shall be prepared by the director subject to the approval of the city council. Such rental rates may be reviewed and if needed, be revised at least annually, to meet changing costs of maintenance, operation and replacement.
B. It shall also be the responsibility of the head of the department primarily using any equipment unit, to supply the director with complete specifications for new or replacement equipment prior to time set for purchasing.
C. When new or additional types of equipment which are substantially higher in cost, or in greater quantities are required by a department, this department shall budget the acquisition cost and transfer these funds to the equipment rental fund reserve. Where two or more departments intend to use the new or additional equipment the acquisition cost will be prorated on the amount of expected use given by each user department. Funds from the various departments may be transferred to the reserve fund, described in Section 3.12.040, one or more years prior to anticipated purchase of new equipment if the cost is deemed to be in excess of what one year's budget will afford, based on the approval of the city council.
D. Equipment damage, other than to tires or glass, caused by accident or by abuse not covered by insurance shall be repaired and billed to the department using the vehicle at the time the damage occurs. In cases where equipment is damaged beyond repair the department using the equipment will be billed the differential amount when the replacement cost is subtracted from the amount previously credited to said equipment unit in the reserve fund described in Section 3.12.040.
(Prior code § 1.09.030)

3.12.040 Accounting procedure.
A. There shall be kept, by those directed by the director, such books, accounts and records as are necessary to control and report the financial operations of the equipment rental funds. These funds shall be accounted for separately as follows:
    1. Equipment rental operating fund, into which shall be placed those portions of the charges made to the various departments of the city of Aberdeen, in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.12.030, which are specifically billed said departments to provide sufficient moneys to pay the salaries and wages, materials, overhead or other costs necessary to operate and maintain all motor vehicle equipment rented thereto. There shall also be placed into the operating fund moneys which may from time to time be made specifically available thereto by action of the city council;
    2. Equipment rental reserve fund, into which shall be placed those portions of the charges made to the various departments, in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.12.030, which are specifically billed said departments to provide sufficient moneys, having first taken into consideration the necessary operating and maintenance costs billed under the preceding paragraph, to pay the costs of purchasing new equipment and replacing used equipment as required to carry out the purposes of the equipment rental fund. There shall also be placed in the reserve fund moneys which are derived from the direct sale of any of the equipment or other capital assets of the fund and any moneys which may from time to time be made specifically available thereto by action of the city council.
    3. It is intended that both equipment rental funds be subdivided into individual equipment unit accounts that will insure that each unit will be self-sustaining and worthwhile.
(Prior code § 1.09.040)

3.12.050 Withdrawals and expenditures.
A. Any withdrawals of expenditures from the equipment rental funds shall be made only in the following manner:
    1. Expenditures from the operating fund shall be made only upon duly approved payrolls and vouchers for the purposes herein before ascribed to said account;
    2. Expenditures from the reserve fund shall be made only upon duly approved vouchers for the purposes herein before ascribed to said account.
    3. All moneys deposited in each equipment rental fund and not expended as provided herein shall remain in such fund from year to year and shall not be transferred to any other fund or expended for any other purpose whatsoever, except by popular vote of the people at the next general election. Such a popular vote is only necessary if the particular equipment rental fund is still in existence and if, at any time hereafter, the city council of the city of Aberdeen shall abolish either equipment rental fund, then all moneys on deposit therein shall revert to and be deposited in the funds of the several departments participating in the fund.
(Prior code § 1.09.050)

Chapter 3.16 FINANCE DIRECTOR'S FEES

Sections:
3.16.010     Documents—Fees for copies.
3.16.020     Returned item fees for nonsufficient funds.

3.16.010 Documents—Fees for copies.
The finance director shall collect fees hereinafter prescribed for his official services:
A. For certified documents, two dollars ($2.00) for the first page and fifty cents ($0.50) for every page thereafter.
B. For making a copy of any uncertified document filed in the office, a charge of fifteen cents ($.15) per page. Provided, however, that no charge shall be made for the certification of documents furnished to the state of Washington or to any municipal corporation of the state of Washington, for public use.
(Ord. 6131, Amended, 08/07/1996. Prior code § 1.10.010)

3.16.020 Returned item fees for nonsufficient funds.
A minimum fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), and maximum of fifty dollars ($50.00), is established to be assessed by the finance director when items deposited in the city's bank account are returned by the bank as uncollected. The finance director shall set guidelines for the consistent application of these fees and any other collection action to be taken against the payer, which may include legal action according to city ordinance and the laws of the state of Washington.
(Ord. 6321, Amended, 04/10/2002. Prior code § 1.10.020)

Chapter 3.20 ADVANCE TRAVEL REVOLVING FUND

Sections:
3.20.010     Advance travel revolving fund.

3.20.010 Advance travel revolving fund.
There is created a revolving fund to be used solely for the purpose of making advance payments for travel expenses. The finance director of Aberdeen is designated as the official responsible for the fund. The revolving fund will be maintained in a bank as a checking account and advances to officials or employees will be by check. The fund will be replenished by a warrant. The city treasurer shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations in regard to the advance payment for travel expenses and such rules and regulations shall be approved by the city council. The finance director of Aberdeen shall be responsible for auditing the fund.
(Prior code § 1.11.010)

Chapter 3.24 PETTY CASH FUND

Sections:
3.24.010     Petty cash fund - Creation.
3.24.020     Operation of petty cash funds.

3.24.010 Petty cash fund - Creation.
The following petty cash and change funds are established in the amounts authorized for each of the departments as listed below.
+-----------------+---------+
| Municipal Court | $ 50.00 |
+-----------------+---------+
| Finance         | 200.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Police          | 200.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Fire            | 400.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Engineering     | 200.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Parks           | 100.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Water           | 300.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
| Sewer           | 300.00  |
+-----------------+---------+
+-----------------+----------+
| Finance         | 1,450.00 |
+-----------------+----------+
| Municipal Court | 120.00   |
+-----------------+----------+
(Ord. 6561, Amended, 08/27/2014; Ord. 6473, Amended, 02/25/2009; Ord. 6408, Amended, 08/09/2006; Ord. 6336, Amended, 12/18/2002)

3.24.020 Operation of petty cash funds.
The department head responsible for the amount specified in Section 3.24.010 shall be responsible for the petty cash and change funds.
A. The following procedure shall be followed by the department head for maintaining the petty cash funds:
    1. The petty cash fund is only for purchases of supply items and expenses less than thirty dollars ($30.00);
    2. The petty cash fund shall be reconciled and replenished at least monthly by claim voucher and warrant;
    3. The funds may not be used for personal cash advances;
    4. All purchases must have receipts and the receipts should be attached to the reimbursement voucher.
B. The change funds shall be used for making change and at all times the balance of the change fund must remain at the authorized amount for each department.
(Ord. 6408, Amended, 08/09/2006)

Chapter 3.28 TORT CLAIMS

Sections:
3.28.010     Claims—Cumulative reserve fund.
3.28.020     Payments.

3.28.010 Claims—Cumulative reserve fund.
There is created a cumulative reserve fund for the payment of claims for damages and judgments against the city of Aberdeen for any indemnified officer or employee of the city of Aberdeen. All funds now or hereafter transferred to this cumulative reserve fund shall be used only for the payment of claims for damages and judgments; adjustment, investigation, administration, and litigation expenses associated with such claims or judgments; and the purchase of insurance, membership in an insurance pool, or risk management services related to the purposes of this fund. A minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be maintained in said fund.
(Prior code § 1.15.010)

3.28.020 Payments.
A. Claims and judgments amounting to less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and all adjustment, investigation, administration, and litigation expenses may be paid upon the approval of the Finance Committee with the consultation with the city attorney and the department head from which the claim arises.
B. Claims and judgments in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) may be paid upon resolution of the Aberdeen City Council.
(Prior code § 1.15.020)

Chapter 3.32 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND

Sections:
3.32.010     Establishment.
3.32.020     Operation.
3.32.030     Budgeting.
3.32.040     Accounting procedure.

3.32.010 Establishment.
There is established a capital projects fund designated as the "capital improvement fund" to provide financial administration of all general (nonutility) capital improvement projects.
(Prior code § 1.17.010)

3.32.020 Operation.
A. The finance department shall have responsibility for the financial administration of the capital improvement fund. It shall maintain a separate record of accounts showing receipts and disbursements for each project assigned to the fund.
B. The city department responsible for project execution shall maintain records and documents, prepare reports as may be required of the project or city council, and approve all related expenditures.
(Prior code § 1.17.020)

3.32.030 Budgeting.
Projects will use the original estimate of receipts and disbursements authorized by the city council as a continuing budget extending over the life of the project. An estimate of remaining project resources and outlays shall be included in the annual budget should such project extend beyond the city's regular budget period.
(Prior code § 1.17.030)

3.32.040 Accounting procedure.
Moneys received for each project shall be accounted for as follows:
A. Receipts. All monies shall be identified by project when deposited in the capital improvement fund. Moneys may include grants, bonds, interfund transfers, or any other revenue source authorized by the city council. Interest and other miscellaneous earnings will be allocated to each project as appropriate or in an equitable manner as determined by the Finance Director.
B. Disbursements. Costs and expenses shall be paid from moneys available for each project. Costs may include disbursements necessary for acquisition, construction, or improvements related to completion of each project. Any remaining moneys after projects are completed may be reassigned as designated by source of funds or city council.
(Prior code § 1.17.040)

Chapter 3.36 DRUG ENFORCEMENT ACTION FUND

Sections:
3.36.010     Establishment.
3.36.020     Director.

3.36.010 Establishment.
There is created a special revenue fund for receipt of moneys restricted in use to activities incidental to application of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (RCW 69.50).
(Prior code § 1.19.010)

3.36.020 Director.
The drug enforcement fund created herein shall be administered by the police chief or his designated representative. Accounting procedures shall be established by the finance director.
(Prior code § 1.19.020)

Chapter 3.40 WARRANTS—INTEREST RATE

Sections:
3.40.010     Rate of interest on city warrants.

3.40.010 Rate of interest on city warrants.
That from and after the effective date of this chapter, all interest bearing warrants issued by the city of Aberdeen shall be issued to bear interest at the rate of two percent per annum.
(Prior code § 1.20.010)

Chapter 3.44 CUMULATIVE RESERVE FUND FOR REVENUE STABILIZATION

Sections:
3.44.010     Establishment.
3.44.020     Operation.
3.44.030     Budgeting.

3.44.010 Establishment.
There is established a reserve fund for revenue stabilization.
(Prior code § 1.21.010)

3.44.020 Operation.
The finance department shall have responsibility for the financial administration of the cumulative reserve fund for revenue stabilization. These funds shall be used solely during the year for the purpose of guaranteeing an adequate flow of monthly revenue and shall not be used to subsidize operational expenses or for any other purpose without an approving vote by a two-thirds majority of the city council.
(Prior code § 1.21.020)

3.44.030 Budgeting.
On January 1st, 1990, and on January 1st of each subsequent year, this fund shall be reestablished at an amount not to exceed five percent of the budgeted general fund annual expenditures.
(Prior code §1.21.030)

Chapter 3.48 PROPERTY TAX INVESTMENT AND DISTRIBUTION

Sections:
3.48.010     Property taxes available for investment.
3.48.020     County treasurer directed to invest property taxes.
3.48.030     County treasurer authorized to deduct investment service fee.
3.48.040     County treasurer directed to distribute property.

3.48.010 Property taxes available for investment.
The city council finds that property taxes collected by the Grays Harbor County Treasurer for and on behalf of the city of Aberdeen are moneys which are not required for immediate expenditure by the city while held by the county treasurer and are surplus moneys available for investment.
(Prior code § 1.23.010)

3.48.020 County treasurer directed to invest property taxes.
The Grays Harbor County Treasurer is authorized and directed, pursuant to the provisions of RCW 36.29.020, to invest in the manner specified and in the investments authorized by state law any and all funds which are due to the city for property taxes while retained in the custody pending distribution to the city. This includes all property taxes collected for the city and retained by the county treasurer pending an official accounting.
(Prior code § 1.23.020)

3.48.030 County treasurer authorized to deduct investment service fee.
Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 36.29.020, when the county treasurer invests property tax moneys for the city while in his custody, he may deduct and retain the investment service fee provided by state law when the interest earnings on the investment of the property tax moneys become available to the city.
(Prior code § 1.23.030)

3.48.040 County treasurer directed to distribute property.
The county treasurer is authorized and directed to distribute all property taxes collected as frequently as daily and all interest accrued on the investment thereof at the time of the distribution of the property tax moneys to the city. The county treasurer is authorized to give a receipt therefor whenever funds are delivered to the city. Delivery may be in money or as a transfer of an investment authorized by RCW 36.29.020.
(Prior code § 1.23.040)

Chapter 3.52 GOOD NEIGHBORS REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM

Sections:
3.52.010     Establishment.
3.52.020     Description.
3.52.030     Funding.
3.52.040     Committee.
3.52.050     Term of office.
3.52.060     Vacancies—Removal of members.
3.52.070     Powers and duties.
3.52.080     Eligible improvements.
3.52.090     Application and loan fees.
3.52.100     Loan provisions.
3.52.110     Loan security required.
3.52.120     Foreclosure procedures.
3.52.130     Leveraged funding opportunities.

3.52.010 Establishment.
The good neighbors revolving loan program is established for the purpose of making loans to private property and business owners to make exterior, interior and safety improvements to commercial buildings and property in the downtown development district and along the state routes.
(Ord. 6618 § 1, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6175, Amended, 01/21/1998. Prior code § 1.25.010)

3.52.020 Description.
The program shall serve commercially zoned and legal nonconforming commercial properties located within the following district boundaries:
A. State Route (SR) Boundaries.  East Aberdeen – The East Aberdeen area shall consist of property located within the following boundaries: beginning from a point where the centerline of Fairfield Street meets the centerline of the platted alley between East Wishkah Street (SR 12) and Summit Street, then south along said centerline to the northern bank of the Chehalis River, then southwest along the northern bank of the Chehalis River to its intersection with the southeast bank of the Wishkah River, then northwest and north along the east bank of the Wishkah River, to its intersection with the centerline of the originally platted alley between East Wishkah Street (SR 12) and Summit Street, then east to the point of beginning. West Aberdeen – Beginning from a point where the centerline of North Division and Sumner Avenue meet, then north to its intersection with the platted alley between SR 101 (Sumner Avenue) and Cherry Street, then west along the centerline of said alley to the western city corporate limit along Myrtle Street, then south along Myrtle Street to the intersection with the platted alley between SR 101 (Simpson Avenue) and Aberdeen Avenue, then east along the centerline of said alley to the intersection of Division, then North to the point of beginning. South Aberdeen – The boundaries shall consist of lots abutting State Route 105 from the eastern city corporate limit north to the intersection of SR 105 and SR 101 (West Curtis Street); and lots abutting SR 101 (West Curtis Street, Northwest Boulevard and Southwest Boulevard) to the southern city corporate limit. Central Aberdeen – The Central Aberdeen area boundaries shall consist of lots abutting State Route 101 along Alder Street and Park Street, from State Street to Simpson Avenue.
B. Downtown Aberdeen Business District. This district shall consist of property located within the following boundaries: beginning from a point where the centerline of North “D” Street meets the western bank of the Wishkah River, then northwest along said centerline to its intersection with the platted alley between East First Street and East Second Street, then southwest along the centerline of said alley to its intersection with the centerline of Michigan Street, then southeast to its intersection with the centerline of West State Street, then northeast along the centerline of said street to its intersection with the centerline of South “H” Street, then southeast along said centerline to the north bank of the Chehalis River, then northeast along the north bank of the Chehalis River to its intersection with the west bank of the Wishkah River, then northwest and north to the point of beginning.
C. Downtown Aberdeen Historic District. This district shall consist of property located within the following boundaries: beginning from a point where the centerline of North “H” Street meets the centerline of East Market Street, then southwest along said Market Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of North “K” Street, then southeast along the said “K” Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of West Wishkah Street, then southwest along the West Wishkah Street centerline to its intersection with the western boundary of lot 3 and lot 10 of block 30 in the Weatherwax and Benns Addition to the centerline of East Heron Street, then northeast along the East Heron Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of South “K” Street, then southeast along the said South “K” Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of State Street, then northeast along the said State Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of South “I” Street, then northwest along said centerline of South “I” Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Heron Street, then northeast to its intersection with the centerline of South “H” Street, then northwest along said “H” Street centerline to its intersection with the centerline of East Wishkah Street, then northeast along said East Wishkah Street centerline to its intersection with the southeast corner of lot 7, block 37 of Benn’s Plat, then northwest along the eastern boundary of lot 7, block 37 to its intersection with the centerline of the alley between East Wishkah Street and East Market Street, then southwest along said alley centerline to its intersection with North “H” Street, then north to the point of beginning.
Additional eligible loan improvements will be considered in the Downtown Historic District for building owners who list their property on the local register and apply for permits valued at least twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value of the building (excluding property value).
(Ord. 6618 § 2, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6175, Amended, 01/21/1998. Prior code § 1.25.015)

3.52.030 Funding.
The good neighbors revolving loan program shall be funded through the urban development action grant fund. The finance director shall establish a special account within the urban development action grant fund for the purpose of financing loans extended under this chapter. The principal balance of loans receivable at any point in time from the special account shall not exceed three hundred thousand dollars $300,000.00). Repayments from loans shall be returned to the urban development action grant fund.
(Ord. 6618 § 3, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6255, Amended, 08/23/2000. Prior code § 1.25.020)

3.52.040 Committee.
A. A revolving loan fund committee is created and shall consist of five (5) members, two (2) of whom shall represent Aberdeen business and property owners, one (1) from the financial community, one (1) Aberdeen city council member and one (1) citizen-at-large. Members shall be appointed to the committee by the mayor with confirmation of the city council.
B. The committee shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman among its members who shall hold office for (1) one year. Meetings shall be held whenever deemed necessary by the chairman or a majority of its members. A written record of its minutes shall be maintained by the planning division of the community development department. A majority of the membership of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Members shall serve without compensation; however, they may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in performing their official duty.
(Ord. 6618 § 4, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6175, Amended, 01/21/1998. Prior code § 1.25.030)

3.52.050 Term of office.
The terms of office for members of the revolving loan program committee shall be two years each and shall expire on December 31st of the second year. Original terms shall be established so that the first three members' terms will expire December 31, 1991; the second three on December 31, 1992, and the seventh position to expire on December 31, 1993.
(Prior code § 1.25.040)

3.52.060 Vacancies—Removal of members.
Vacancies occurring other than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for unexpired terms pursuant to the appointment procedure in Section 3.52.040. Members may be removed for cause by the city council. Unexcused absences from three consecutive meetings shall constitute cause for removal of a member from the revolving loan fund committee.
(Prior code § 1.25.0500)

3.52.070 Powers and duties.
A. The revolving loan program committee shall be responsible for administering the good neighbors revolving loan program. The committee shall:
    1. Establish rules and procedures for soliciting loan applications from interested business and property owners;
    2. Evaluate loan applicants for credit worthiness;
    3. Award loans as provided in Section 3.52.100 to qualified applicants for eligible improvements;
    4. Monitor existing loans by supervising repayments and collection activities by city staff; and
    5. Develop and implement a promotional program to encourage public use of the revolving loan fund.
B. To accomplish these responsibilities, the committee shall be assisted by the department of planning and economic development and other city officers when directed by the mayor.
(Prior code § 1.25.060)

3.52.080 Eligible improvements.
A. The revolving loan program committee may provide loan funds to a business or property owner for the following kinds of exterior improvements and/or repairs within the downtown and East Aberdeen districts:
    1. Exterior painting;
    2. Repair/replacement of original building ornamentation;
    3. Masonry cleaning or repair;
    4. Repair/replacement of windows and casings;
    5. Purchase or repair of awnings;
    6. Repair and purchase of signs;
    7. Landscaping;
    8. Sidewalk repair;
    9. Parking lot improvement and/or repair;
    10. Removal of asbestos or other hazardous materials;
    11. Code-required fire safety improvements and floodplain requirements;
    12. Other similar exterior improvements meeting committee approval;
    13. HVAC repairs; and
    14. Interior historic renovations meeting HPC and committee approval.
B. Prior to any loan commitment, the committee may require applicants to provide plans and/or estimates of work anticipated with the loan funds to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 6618 § 5, Amended, 12/13/2017. Prior code § 1.25.070)

3.52.090 Application and loan fees.
The city shall require the following fees for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
A. A nonrefundable application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged for each application at the time of submittal;
B. A late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for payment received ten (10) days after the due date established by the committee through the provisions of Section 3.52.100.
(Ord. 6618 § 6, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6364, Amended, 07/28/2004)

3.52.100 Loan provisions.
Loans may be extended by the revolving loan program committee only to applicants demonstrating an ability to repay. The committee may determine the appropriate conditions for any loan; provided, however, that:
A. Individual loan principal shall not be greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00);
B. Repayment of a loan shall not extend beyond five (5) years from the date of any contract. The committee may recommend, to the Aberdeen city council, longer loan terms based on loan amount, number of employees and location. If approved, loan terms shall not extend beyond twenty (20) years;
C. Interest rates are no less than two (2) percent per annum;
D. No more than one (1) loan shall be extended per property at any one (1) time.
(Ord. 6618 § 7, Amended, 12/13/2017; Ord. 6364, Amended, 07/28/2004)

3.52.110 Loan security required.
The revolving loan program committee shall ensure that each loan be reasonably secured in a manner acceptable to the corporation counsel. Reasonable security may consist of a lien on the property or a subordinate lien if a loan is made in conjunction with a private lender to leverage project funding.
(Prior code § 1.25.090)

3.52.120 Foreclosure procedures.
In the event a borrower fails to honor the repayment contract with the city, the revolving loan program committee shall immediately inform the mayor who in turn shall direct appropriate city staff to take necessary action to ensure recovery of funds.
(Prior code § 1.25.100)

3.52.130 Leveraged funding opportunities.
The revolving loan program committee may work in cooperation with other private lenders to develop loan programs designed to increase project funding available to borrowers.
(Prior code § 1.25.110)

Chapter 3.56 CITY POOLED INVESTMENT FUND

Sections:
3.56.010     Establishment.
3.56.020     Director.
3.56.030     Operation.

3.56.010 Establishment.
There is established a city pooled investment fund for the purpose of pooling excess cash in a common investment portfolio, purchasing and holding investments, and recording and allocating related investment earnings.
(Prior code § 1.30.010)

3.56.020 Director.
The city pooled investment fund shall be under the direction of the finance director.
(Prior code § 1.30.020)

3.56.030 Operation.
At the beginning of each month, the cash balance of each individual fund shall be determined, and excess cash either deposited in the city pooled investment fund or cash withdrawn from the investment portfolio to meet the individual fund's cash flow needs. Investment earnings of the portfolio shall be apportioned as earned, to the individual funds based on their degree of participation (average monthly balance during life of investment) in the pooled investment fund.
(Prior code § 1.30.030)

Chapter 3.60 OPEN SPACE TAXATION

Sections:
3.60.010     Processing fee.

3.60.010 Processing fee.
The processing fee required of an owner of land desiring current use assessment as open space land, farm and agricultural land or timber land for property within the city of Aberdeen under RCW 4.34 is fixed at one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Prior code § 1.84.010)

Chapter 3.68 POLYGRAPH FEES

Sections:
3.68.010     Municipal fees—Polygraph.

3.68.010 Municipal fees—Polygraph.
The chief of police is empowered to establish fees for the use of the city polygraph instrument and polygraph examiner by other governmental entities. Such fees shall be filed with the office of finance director and the finance director shall collect the fees prescribed. In setting a fee schedule, the chief of police shall set a rate that, at the minimum, will cover the costs of the city of Aberdeen in providing this service. Such fees shall take into consideration the examiner's salary, travel time, witness fees, and other expenses. Use of the polygraph instrument for private enterprise is prohibited.
(Prior code § 1.90.010)

Chapter 3.72 ADMISSIONS TAX

Sections:
3.72.010     Purpose of chapter.
3.72.020     Definitions and interpretations.
3.72.030     Admissions tax imposed.
3.72.035     Admissions tax suspended.
3.72.040     Exemptions—Enumerated.
3.72.050     Rate and measure of tax—Enumerated.
3.72.060     Price to be printed on ticket.
3.72.070     Collection and payment of tax—Quarterly returns.

3.72.010 Purpose of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city of Aberdeen to impose an admissions tax for the purpose of revenue and regulation.
(Prior code § 5.04.100)

3.72.020 Definitions and interpretations.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, save when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the definitions and interpretations found in Chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.20, and the definitions that follow, shall apply to the terms and phrases found herein:
"Admission charge," in addition to its usual and ordinary meaning, shall include:
1. A charge made for season tickets or subscriptions;
2. A cover charge or a charge made for use of seats and tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations;
3. A charge made for food and refreshments in any place where any free entertainment, recreation or amusement is provided;
4. A charge made for rental or use of equipment or facilities for purposes of recreation or amusement, and where the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of the privilege for which a general admission is charged, the combined charge shall be considered as the admission charge;
5. A charge made for automobile parking where the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in an automobile.
"Place" includes, but is not restricted to, theatres, dance halls, amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums, athletic pavilions and fields, baseball and athletic parks, circuses, side shows, swimming pools, outdoor amusement parks, and such attractions as merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, dodge 'ems, roller coasters, and observation towers.
(Prior code § 5.04.110)

3.72.030 Admissions tax imposed.
An admissions tax is levied upon and shall be collected from any person (including children, without regard to age) who pays an admission charge to any place within the city of Aberdeen, including persons who are admitted free of charge or at reduced rates to any place for which other persons pay a charge or a regular higher charge for the same or similar privileges or accommodations. The tax shall be collected and remitted to the city of Aberdeen as herein provided by the person that made and received such charge for admission. The admissions tax shall be required in addition to all other tax and license fees as imposed by any other chapter of the city code, unless specifically provided otherwise.
(Prior code § 5.04.200)

3.72.035 Admissions tax suspended.
The admission tax levied in AMC 3.72.035 shall be suspended for the time period beginning January 1, 2016, and ending on December 31, 2018. No admissions tax imposed under AMC 3.72.035 shall be levied during the period of suspension. The levy of the admissions tax shall resume on January 1, 2019.
(Ord. 6583, Added, 11/23/2015)

3.72.040 Exemptions—Enumerated.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Any person paying an admission charge to any activity of an elementary or secondary school;
B. Any person paying ten cents ($0.10) or less as an admission charge;
C. Any person who is admitted free and from whom no compensating payment is obtained for such free admission;
D. Any person paying an admission charge to any public performance or event promoted or produced by any nonprofit organization;
E. Any person paying an admission charge to any public performance or event primarily featuring live musical or theatrical performances in the Downtown Parking and Business Improvement District. For the purposes of this exemption "primarily" shall mean the use of recorded music or visual displays are incidental to or part of the live performance.
(Ord. 6504, Amended, 09/08/2010)

3.72.050 Rate and measure of tax—Enumerated.
The admissions tax shall be determined by applying the rate of five percent, against the total amount of the admission charge.
(Prior code § 5.04.220)

3.72.060 Price to be printed on ticket.
The price, inclusive of the city admissions tax, at which an admission ticket or card is sold shall be conspicuously and indelibly printed or written on the face or back of that part of the ticket which is to be taken up by the management of the place to which admission is gained; and it is unlawful for any person to sell an admission ticket or card on which the name of the vendor or the price is not so printed, stamped or written, or to sell an admission ticket or card at a price in excess of the price printed thereon.
(Prior code § 5.04.230)

3.72.070 Collection and payment of tax—Quarterly returns.
Every person receiving any payment for admissions on which a tax is levied under this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making the admission payment. The tax shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until paid to the city as herein provided. The tax shall be collected at the time the admission charge is paid by the person seeking admission to any place and shall be reported and remitted by the person receiving the tax in quarterly installments. The remittance shall be made to the city as provided in Chapter 5.07. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information given on the return is true and correct and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.
(Ord. 6504, Amended, 09/08/2010. Prior code § 5.04.300)

Chapter 3.76 UTILITY TAX

Sections:
3.76.010     Purpose of chapter.
3.76.020     Definitions and interpretations.
3.76.030     Utility tax imposed.
3.76.040     Rates and measure of tax-.
3.76.045     Rate change - cellular telephone service.
3.76.050     Calculating tax due—Exceptions and Deductions.
3.76.055     Allocation of income - cellular telephone service.
3.76.060     Payment of tax—Quarterly returns.
3.76.070     Utility tax levied on water and sewer funds.
3.76.080     Utility tax levied on solid waste and recylable materials collection.
3.76.090     Utility tax levied on Storm and Surface Water Drainage Utility.

3.76.010 Purpose of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city of Aberdeen to impose a utility tax for the purpose of revenue and regulation.
(Prior code § 5.05.100)

3.76.020 Definitions and interpretations.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, save when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the definitions and interpretations found in Title 5 AMC, and the definitions that follow, shall apply herein:
1. "Cable television service" means the one-way transmissions of video programming and associated nonvideo signals to subscribers together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is provided in connection with video programming.
2. "Cellular telephone service" is a voice or data telephone/telecommunications system based in whole or substantial part on wireless radio communications and whether or not the communications are subject to regulation by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission (WUTC). This includes cellular mobile service. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services such as specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications services (PCS), and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology which accomplishes the same purpose as cellular mobile service.
3. "Competitive telephone service" means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, directory advertising and lease of telephone street directories, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which may be provided by persons not subject to regulation as telephone companies under Title 80 RCW, and for which a separate charge is made. Transmission of communication through cellular telephones is classified as "telephone business" rather than "competitive telephone service."
4. "Electrical energy business" means the business of operating a plant or system for the generation, production or distribution of electrical energy for hire or sale.
5. "Natural gas business" means the business of operating a plant or system for the production or distribution of natural gas for hire or sale.
6. "Pager service" means service provided by means of an electronic device which has the ability to send or receive voice or digital messages transmitted through the local telephone network, via satellite or any other form of voice or data transmission.
7. "Telephone business" means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, cellular or mobile telephone service, coin telephone services, pager service or the providing of telephonic, video, data, or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. The term includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating exchanges. The term also includes the provision of transmission to and from the site of an internet provider via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communication or transmission system. Telephone business does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, or the providing of cable television service, or other providing of broadcast services by radio or telephone stations.
(Ord. 6569, Amended, 12/29/2014; Ord. 6444, Amended, 08/29/2007)

3.76.030 Utility tax imposed.
A utility tax is levied upon and shall be collected from and paid by every person that engages in the cable television, telephone, electrical energy, or natural gas business within the city, whether their office or place of business be within and/or without the city. The utility tax shall be required in addition to all other tax and license fees as imposed by any other chapter of the city code, unless specifically provided otherwise.
(Ord. 6569, Amended, 12/29/2014. Prior code § 5.05.200)

3.76.040 Rates and measure of tax-.
The utility tax shall be determined by applying the rates herein established against the gross value of products, including by-products, gross proceeds of sales or gross income of business, as the case may be, for each quarterly period.
A. Upon any telephone business there shall be levied a tax equal to six percent of the total gross operating revenues, including one hundred (100) percent of revenues from intrastate toll, derived from the operation of such business within the city of Aberdeen. Gross operating revenues for this purpose shall not include charges to another telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services.
B. Upon any person engaging or carrying on the business of manufacturing or distributing electric energy, the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to six percent of the total gross revenue from business and residential service and/or sale in the city of Aberdeen.
C. Upon any person engaging or carrying on the business of selling and/or distributing natural gas, the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to six percent of the total gross revenue from business and residential service and/or sale in the city of Aberdeen.
D. Upon any person engaging or carrying on the business of providing cable television services, the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the total gross revenue from business and residential service or sales in the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6569, Amended, 12/29/2014; Ord. 6444, Amended, 08/29/2007)

3.76.045 Rate change - cellular telephone service.
No change in the rate of tax upon persons engaging in providing cellular telephone service shall apply to business activities occurring before the effective date of the change and, except for a change in the tax rate authorized by RCW 35.21.870, no change in the rate of the tax may take effect sooner than sixty (60) days following the enactment of the ordinance establishing the change. The city shall send to each cellular telephone service company at the address on its license, a copy of any ordinance changing the rate of tax upon cellular telephone service promptly upon its enactment.
(Ord. 6444, Added, 08/29/2007)

3.76.050 Calculating tax due—Exceptions and Deductions.
A. There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the license fee or tax is computed the following:
    1. That portion of the gross income derived from charges to another telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for connecting fees, switching charges, or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services.
    2. Charges by a taxpayer engaging in a telephone business or to a telecommunications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for telephone service that the purchaser buys for the purpose of resale.
    3. Adjustments made to a billing or to a customer account or to a telecommunications company accrual account in order to reverse a billing or charge that had been made as a result of third-party fraud or other crime and was not properly a debt of a customer.
    4. All cash discounts allowed and actually granted to customers of the taxpayer during the tax year.
    5. So much thereof as is derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce, or from business done for the government of the United States, its officers or agents in their official capacity, and any amount paid by the taxpayer to the United States, the state of Washington, or the city as excise taxes levied or imposed on the sale or distribution of property or service.
B. There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the tax is computed all bad debts for services incurred, rendered or charged for during the tax year. Debts shall be deemed bad and uncollectible when they have been written off the books of the taxpayer. In the event debts are subsequently collected, the income shall be reported in the return for the quarter in which the debts are collected and at the rate prevailing in the tax year when collected.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring a license, or the payment of a license fee or tax, or the doing of any act, which would constitute an unlawful burden or interference in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United States or which would not be consistent with the Constitution or law of the State of Washington.
(Ord. 6569, Amended, 12/29/2014; Ord. 6444, Amended, 08/29/2007; Ord. 6173, Amended, 12/17/1997)

3.76.055 Allocation of income - cellular telephone service.
A. Service Address. Payments by a customer for the telephone service from telephones without a fixed location shall be allocated among taxing jurisdictions to the location of the customer’s principal service address during the period for which the tax applies.
B. Presumption. There is a presumption that the service address a customer supplies to the taxpayer is current and accurate, unless the taxpayer has actual knowledge to the contrary.
C. Roaming Phones. When the service is provided while a subscriber is roaming outside the subscriber’s normal cellular network area, the gross income shall be assigned consistent with the taxpayer’s accounting system to the location of the originating cell site of the call, or to the location of the main cellular switching office that switched the call.
D. Dispute Resolution. If there is a dispute between or among the city and one or more other cities, as to the service address of a customer who is receiving cellular telephone services and the dispute is not resolved by negotiation among the parties, then the dispute shall be resolved by the city and the other city or cities by submitting the issue for settlement to the Association of Washington Cities (AWC). Once the taxes on the disputed revenues have been paid to one of the contesting cities, the cellular telephone service company shall have no further liability with respect to additional taxes on the disputed revenues so long as it changes its billing records for future revenues to comport with the settlement facilitated by AWC.
(Ord. 6444, Added, 08/29/2007)

3.76.060 Payment of tax—Quarterly returns.
The utility tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. The remittance shall be made as provided in Chapter 5.04 and shall be accompanied by a return on a form to be provided by the director. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information given on the return is true and correct and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.
(Prior code § 5.05.300)

3.76.070 Utility tax levied on water and sewer funds.
There is levied and shall be collected from the water and sewer departments of the city of Aberdeen a tax in the amount of four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross receipts of the residential and commercial accounts for utility services within the city limits. The tax levied shall be due and payable in monthly installments and shall be passed on to each utility's consumers and collected by the Finance Director in the same manner as fees and charges for utility services. The proceeds from the collection of the tax levied shall be deposited to the general fund.
(Ord. 6567, Amended, 12/29/2014; Ord. 6429, Amended, 12/13/2006; Ord. 6360, Added, 05/26/2004)

3.76.080 Utility tax levied on solid waste and recylable materials collection.
There is levied and shall be collected from the Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Collection Utility of the city of Aberdeen and its franchisees a tax in the amount of four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross receipts of the residential and commercial accounts for utility services within the city limits. The tax levied shall be due and payable in monthly installments and shall be passed on to the utility's consumers and collected in the same manner as fees and charges for utility services. The proceeds from the collection of the tax levied shall be deposited to the general fund.
(Ord. 6568, Amended, 12/29/2014)

3.76.090 Utility tax levied on Storm and Surface Water Drainage Utility.
There is levied and there shall be collected from the Storm and Surface Water Drainage Utility of the city of Aberdeen a tax in the amount of four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross receipts of the residential and commercial accounts for utility services within the city limits. The tax levied shall be due and payable in monthly installments and shall be passed on to each utility's consumers and collected by the Finance Director in the same manner as fees and charges for utility services. The proceeds from the collection of the tax levied shall be deposited to the general fund.
(Ord. 6570, Added, 12/29/2014)

Chapter 3.78 ABERDEEN TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:
3.78.010     Transportation benefit district assumed by the city.
3.78.020     Governing body.
3.78.030     Functions of the city council.
3.78.040     Transportation improvements funded.

3.78.010 Transportation benefit district assumed by the city.
The city council hereby assumes all rights, powers, immunities, functions and obligations of that certain transportation benefit district established by Ordinance No. 6531 and known as the Aberdeen transportation benefit district with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the city as they currently exist or as they may exist following future annexations. The Aberdeen transportation benefit district shall hereby cease to exist as a separate entity.
(Ord. 6614 § 3, Amended, 10/25/2017; Ord. 6531, Added, 09/12/2012)

3.78.020 Governing body.
A. The Aberdeen city council shall have the authority to exercise the statutory powers set forth in Chapter 36.73 RCW.
B. The city finance director shall perform all financing and treasurer functions required by Chapter 36.73 RCW.
C. The city council shall develop a material change policy to address major plan changes that affect project delivery or the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1). At a minimum, if a transportation improvement exceeds its original cost by more than twenty (20) percent, as identified in the original plan, a public hearing shall be held to solicit public comment regarding how the cost changes should be resolved.
D. The city council shall issue an annual report, pursuant to the requirements of RCW 36.73.160(2).
(Ord. 6614 § 3, Amended, 10/25/2017; Ord. 6531, Added, 09/12/2012)

3.78.030 Functions of the city council.
A. The city council may, by ordinance, authorize a vehicle tax fee of up to the limits as provided by RCW 82.80.140. Any expansion of the authorized transportation improvement purposes shall be undertaken only after notice, hearing and adoption of an ordinance in accordance with RCW 36.73.050(2)(b) or a vote of the people pursuant to RCW 36.73.065(3).
B. When authorized by the voters pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 36.73 RCW, other taxes, fees, charges and tolls or increases in these revenue services may be assessed for the preservation, maintenance and operations of the city streets. Additional transportation improvements may be added to the functions of the city council acting pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW upon compliance with the requirements of said chapter.
C. The city council shall have and exercise all powers and functions provided by Chapter 36.73 RCW to fulfill the functions set forth therein.
(Ord. 6614 § 3, Amended, 10/25/2017; Ord. 6531, Added, 09/12/2012)

3.78.040 Transportation improvements funded.
The funds generated under the authority of Chapter 36.73 RCW shall be used for transportation improvements that construct, preserve, maintain and operate the existing transportation infrastructure of the city, consistent with the requirements of Chapter 36.73 RCW. The funds may be utilized for any lawful purpose under the chapter; but all funds raised pursuant to the chapter shall be expended only for such preservation, maintenance and operation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 36.73 RCW as the same exists or is hereafter amended. The funds expended by the city shall construct, preserve, maintain and operate the city’s previous investments in the transportation infrastructure, reduce the risk of transportation facility failure, improve safety, continue the cost-effectiveness of the city’s infrastructure investments, and continue the optimal performance of the transportation system. Additional transportation improvement projects may be funded only after compliance with the provisions of RCW 36.73.050(2)(b) following notice, public hearing and enactment of an authorizing ordinance.
(Ord. 6614 § 3, Amended, 10/25/2017; Ord. 6531, Added, 09/12/2012)

Chapter 3.80 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:
3.80.010     Purpose of chapter.
3.80.020     Definitions and interpretations.
3.80.030     Gambling tax imposed.
3.80.040     Rates and measure of tax—Enumerated.
3.80.050     Exemptions—Enumerated.
3.80.060     Calculating tax due—Minimum tax due.
3.80.070     Payment of tax—Quarterly returns.

3.80.010 Purpose of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter are an exercise of the power of the city of Aberdeen to authorize and impose a gambling tax on bingo, raffles, amusement games, pull-tabs, punchboards, and card games, pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated by the Gambling Commission of the State of Washington, and by the laws, rules and regulations of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 5.15.100)

3.80.020 Definitions and interpretations.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, save when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the definitions and interpretations found in Chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.20, and the definitions that follow, shall apply to the terms and phrases found herein:
"Amusement game" means a game played for entertainment in which:
    1. The contestant actively participates;
    2. The outcome depends in a material degree upon the skill of the contestant;
    3. Only merchandise prizes are awarded;
    4. The outcome is not in control of the operator;
    5. The wagers are placed, the winners are determined, and a distribution of prizes or property is made in the presence of all persons placing wagers at such game;
    6. Said game is conducted or operated by any agricultural fair, person, association, or organization in such manner and at such locations as may be authorized by rules and regulations adopted by the Washington State Gambling Commission pursuant to Chapter 9.46 of the Revised Code of Washington as now or hereafter amended.
"Bingo" means a game in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designating numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random and in which no cards are sold except at the time and place of the game, when the game is conducted by a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization which does not conduct or allow its premises to be used for conducting bingo on more than three occasions per week and which does not conduct bingo on any location which is used for conducting bingo on more than three occasions per week.
"Commission" means the Washington State Gambling Commission.
"Public card room" means that area of the premises of a profit-seeking retail business which has been specifically set aside or designated by the licensee and approved by the commission for the playing of cards by members of the public as a commercial stimulant to that business in accordance with state law and rules of the commission.
"Social card game" means a card game, including but not limited to the game commonly known as "Mah-Jongg," which constitutes gambling and contains each of the following characteristics:
    1. There are two or more people and each of them are players;
    2. Players' success at winning money or other thing of value by overcoming chance is in the long run largely determined by the skill of the player;
    3. No person collects or obtains or charges any percentage of, or collects or obtains any portion of the money or thing of value wagered or won by any of the players; provided, that this shall not preclude a player from collecting or obtaining their winnings;
    4. No organization, corporation or person collects or obtains any money or thing of value from, or charges or imposes any fee upon, any person which either enables them to play or results in or from their playing, provided, that this shall not apply to the membership fee in any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization or to an admission fee allowed by the commission pursuant to RCW 9.46.070;
    5. The type of card game is one specifically approved by the Washington State Gambling Commission;
    6. The extent of wages, money or thing of value which may be wagered or contributed by any player does not exceed the amount or value specifically provided by the Washington State Gambling Commission.
(Prior code § 5.15.110)

3.80.030 Gambling tax imposed.
A gambling tax is levied upon and shall be collected from and paid as hereinafter provided by every person operating any gambling business. The taxes levied in this chapter shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinances of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 5.15.200)

3.80.040 Rates and measure of tax—Enumerated.
The gambling tax shall be determined by applying the rates herein established against the gross proceeds of sales or gross income of business, as the case may be, for each quarterly period.
A. Amusement Games. Upon every person conducting amusement games as authorized pursuant to this chapter, the tax rate shall be two percent of the gross revenue received from such amusement games less the amount paid for as prizes.
B. Bingo and Raffles. Upon every person conducting bingo and raffles as authorized pursuant to this chapter, the tax rate shall be five percent (5.0%) of the gross revenue received from such bingo and raffles less the amount paid for as prizes.
C. Punchboards and Pull-Tabs. Upon every person utilizing punchboards and pull-tabs as authorized pursuant to this chapter, the tax rate shall be five percent of the gross revenue of punchboards and pull-tabs, provided that beginning on October 1, 1998, the tax rate shall be ten percent of the gross revenue received directly from the operation of the punchboards and pull-tabs less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes.
D. Social Card Games. Upon every person licensed by the State of Washington Gambling Commission to conduct social card games, the tax rate shall be one percent (1.0%) of the gross revenue received.
(Ord. 6560, Amended, 08/27/2014; Ord. 6406, Amended, 07/12/2006; Ord. 6224, Amended, 08/11/1999; Ord. 6194, Amended, 08/19/1998)

3.80.050 Exemptions—Enumerated.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person with respect activities or any combination thereof which are conducted by any bona fide or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020(3), which organization has no paid operating or management personnel and has gross income from bingo, raffles or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year less the amount paid for as prizes.
(Prior code § 5.15.220)

3.80.060 Calculating tax due—Minimum tax due.
Whenever a taxpayer calculates their tax liability to the city to be less than five dollars ($5.00) for any quarterly period, they shall be liable for the minimum tax amount of five dollars ($5.00) on each quarterly return that such calculation is made.
(Prior code § 5.15.300)

3.80.070 Payment of tax—Quarterly returns.
The gambling tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. The remittance shall be made as provided in Chapter 5.04 and shall be accompanied by a return on a form to be provided by the director. The taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information given on the return is true and correct and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so.
(Prior code § 5.15.310)

Chapter 3.84 EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES

Sections:
3.84.010     Imposition.
3.84.020     Rate.
3.84.030     Administration, collection and interpretation.
3.84.040     Deposit of proceeds.

3.84.010 Imposition.
There is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property in the corporate limits of the city of Aberdeen, as authorized by RCW 82.46.010.
(Prior code § 5.69.010)

3.84.020 Rate.
The rate of tax imposed by this chapter shall be one quarter of one percent of the selling price of each sale of real property in the corporate limits of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 5.69.020)

3.84.030 Administration, collection and interpretation.
The taxes imposed under this chapter shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws, and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the state under Chapter 82.45 RCW. The administration and collection of this tax shall be as provided in Chapter 82.46 RCW.
(Prior code § 5.69.030)

3.84.040 Deposit of proceeds.
The finance director shall place the proceeds of this tax in a municipal capital improvement fund. Proceeds from this capital improvement fund shall be used by the city for local improvements, including those listed in RCW 35.43.040.
(Prior code § 5.69.040)

Chapter 3.88 SALES OR USE TAX

Sections:
3.88.010     Imposition.
3.88.020     Rate.
3.88.030     Administration and collection.
3.88.040     Optional sales tax—Imposition.
3.88.050     Optional sales tax—Rate.
3.88.060     Optional sales tax—Administration and collection.
3.88.070     Inspection of records.
3.88.080     Contract with state.

3.88.010 Imposition.
There is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020 occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.12.
(Prior code § 5.70.010)

3.88.020 Rate.
The rate of the tax imposed by Section 5.70.010 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Grays Harbor County, the rate of tax imposed by this chapter shall be four hundred twenty-five one thousandths of one percent.
(Prior code § 5.70.020)

3.88.030 Administration and collection.
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050.
(Prior code § 5.70.030)

3.88.040 Optional sales tax—Imposition.
There is imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city of Aberdeen. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to Chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. The tax authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to the tax authorized by Ordinance No. 4972, as amended.
(Prior code § 5.70.070)

3.88.050 Optional sales tax—Rate.
The rate of the tax imposed by Section 3.88.040 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be provided that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Grays Harbor County under RCW 82.14,030, the county shall receive from the tax imposed under Section 3.88.040 that amount of revenues equal to the lesser of fifteen (15) percent of the tax imposed by the county under said statute.
(Prior code § 5.70.080)

3.88.060 Optional sales tax—Administration and collection.
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050.
(Prior code § 5.70.090)

3.88.070 Inspection of records.
The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330.
(Prior code § 5.70.100)

3.88.080 Contract with state.
The mayor and finance director are authorized and directed to enter into the contract, as authorized by law with the Department of Revenue of the state of Washington for the administration of the sales tax and optional sales tax authorized by this chapter, and are instructed to comply with and apportion the proceeds of the optional tax as provided by RCW Chapter 82.14.
(Prior code § 5.70.110)

Chapter 3.92 LODGING TAX

Sections:
3.92.010     Imposition of tax.
3.92.020     Definitions.
3.92.030     Tax imposed additional to others.
3.92.040     Special fund created.
3.92.050     Administration and collection of tax.
3.92.060     Lodging tax advisory committee — Submission of proposal for imposition of or change in tax or use — Comments.

3.92.010 Imposition of tax.
There is levied a special excise tax of two percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property; provided, that it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or to enjoy the same.
(Prior code § 5.71.010)

3.92.020 Definitions.
The definitions of "selling price," "seller," "buyer," "consumer," and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, and subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax levied herein.
(Prior code § 5.71.020)

3.92.030 Tax imposed additional to others.
The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any license fee or any tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 5.71.030)

3.92.040 Special fund created.
There is created a special fund in the treasury of the city of Aberdeen. All such taxes collected herein shall be placed in such fund for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquisition, construction, or operating of stadium facilities, convention center facilities, performing arts center facilities and/or visual arts center facilities, or to pay or secure the payment of all or any portion of general obligation bonds or revenue bonds issued for such purpose or purposes under this chapter, or to pay for advertising, publicizing, or otherwise distributing information for the purpose of attracting visitors and encouraging tourist expansion. Until withdrawn for use, the monies accumulated in this fund may be invested in interest-bearing securities by the finance director in any manner authorized by law.
(Prior code § 5.71.040)

3.92.050 Administration and collection of tax.
For the purposes of the tax levied herein:
A. The Department of Revenue of the state of Washington is designated as the agent of the city of Aberdeen for the purpose of collection and administration.
B. The administration provisions contained in RCW Sections 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and Chapter 68.28 shall apply with respect to administration and collection by the department.
C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of Chapter 82.08 RCW are adopted.
D. The department is empowered, on behalf of the city of Aberdeen, to prescribe such special forms and reporting procedures as the department may deem necessary.
(Prior code § 5.71.050)

3.92.060 Lodging tax advisory committee — Submission of proposal for imposition of or change in tax or use — Comments.
A. Creation — Membership. There is created an advisory board of the city council to be known as the "Lodging Tax Advisory Committee" to review and submit comments prior to final action or passage of any proposed imposition of a new tax under chapter 67.28 RCW, an increase in the rate of the tax imposed under this chapter, repeal of an exemption from the tax imposed under this chapter, or a change in the use of revenue received under this chapter. The Lodging Tax Advisory Committee shall consist of at least five (5) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The committee membership shall include: (a) At least two members who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter; and (b) at least two members who are persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter. Persons who are eligible for appointment under (a) of this subsection are not eligible for appointment under (b) of this subsection. Persons who are eligible for appointment under (b) of this subsection are not eligible for appointment under (a) of this subsection. Organizations representing businesses required to collect tax under this chapter, organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter, and local agencies involved in tourism promotion may submit recommendations for membership on the committee. The number of members who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter shall equal the number of members who are involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter. One member shall be an elected official of the municipality who shall serve as chair of the committee. The committee may include one nonvoting member who is an elected official of the county in which the city or town is located.
B. Term. Members of the committee shall each serve one-year terms, ending on the second Monday in January. members appointed in mid-term to fill a vacant or newly created position shall serve only until the second Monday in January following their appointment. The mayor shall review the membership of the advisory committee annually and make changes in membership as necessary to keep the number of members who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under this chapter equal the number of members who are involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under this chapter.
C. Meetings — Quorum. The committee shall hold such regular and special meetings as it may determine are necessary. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the current members of the committee by providing written notice to all members of the committee at least five (5) days in advance. Notice of all regular and special meetings shall be posted at city hall and shall be open to the public. the members present at any regular or special meeting shall constitute a quorum.
D. Submission of proposal — Comments. Any action by the city council that proposes imposition of a tax under this chapter, an increase in the rate of a tax imposed under this chapter, repeal of an exemption from a tax imposed under this chapter, or a change in the use of revenue received under this chapter shall be submitted to the committee for review and comment. The submission shall occur at least forty-five days before final action on or passage of the proposal by the municipality. The committee shall submit comments on the proposal in a timely manner. The comments shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and the extent to which the proposal will affect the long-term stability of the fund created under this chapter. Failure of the advisory committee to submit comments before final action on or passage of the proposal shall not prevent the city council from acting on the proposal. A proposal which has been submitted for review and comment may be amended by the city council without submitting the amended proposal to the committee.
(Ord. 6200, Added, 10/14/1998)

Chapter 3.96 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:
3.96.010     Imposition of tax.
3.96.020     Rate of tax.
3.96.030     Administration and collection.

3.96.010 Imposition of tax.
There is levied and shall be collected a leasehold excise tax upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city of Aberdeen through a "leasehold interest" as defined by RCW 82.29A.020. The tax shall be paid, collected, and remitted to the Department of Revenue of the state of Washington at the time and in the manner prescribed by RCW 82.29A.050.
(Prior code § 5.72.010)

3.96.020 Rate of tax.
The rate of tax imposed by Section 3.96.010 shall be four percent of the taxable rent as defined by RCW 82.29A.130; provided, that the credits specified in the State Act be allowed in determining the tax payable; and provided further, that leasehold interest exempted by RCW 82.29A.130, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter.
(Prior code § 5.72.020)

3.96.030 Administration and collection.
The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of the State Act, and the city of Aberdeen consents to the inspection of such records of the Department of Revenue pursuant RCW 82.32.330.
(Prior code § 5.72.030)

Chapter 3.100 DOWNTOWN PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT

Sections:
3.100.010    District established.
3.100.020    Purpose and scope.
3.100.030    Definitions.
3.100.040    Description.
3.100.050    Special assessment rates.
3.100.070    New businesses—Pro-rated assessment.
3.100.080    Return, payment and charge-initial assessment year - initial assessment year.
3.100.090    Penalty, interest.
3.100.100    Two or more business premises.
3.100.110    Downtown parking and business improvement district committee.
3.100.120    Proceeds of assessments.
3.100.130    Disestablishment of district.
3.100.140    Administration and appeals.
3.100.150    Change of assessment rate.
3.100.160    Penalties.

3.100.010 District established.
The downtown parking and business improvement district is established under the authority of RCW 35.87A.
(Prior code § 5.80.010)

3.100.020 Purpose and scope.
The purpose of the parking and business improvement district is to aid general economic development and neighborhood revitalization, and to facilitate the cooperation of merchants, businesses, and residential property owners in order to assist trade, economic viability, and livability through:
A. The acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the district;
B. Decoration of any public place in the district;
C. Sponsorship or promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the district;
D. Furnishing of music in any public place in the district;
E. Providing professional management, planning, and promotion for the district, including the management and promotion of retail trade activities in the district;
F. Providing maintenance and security for common, public areas;
G. Levying special assessments on all businesses and multifamily residential or mixed-use projects within the district and specially benefited by a parking and business improvement area to pay in whole or in part the damages or costs incurred therein as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 6394, Amended, 02/22/2006)

3.100.030 Definitions.
The following terms are defined in this section:
"Business" means any regular activity pursued for profit or gain and/or occupying premises within the district as hereinafter defined. Such activities may include, but are not limited to, the furnishings of services or the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, or a combination of either, and shall include all gainful pursuits, whether they are termed professional or otherwise, and whether they are otherwise regulated or taxed. The term businesses shall exclude the activity of any charitable organization which is organized under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, governmental agencies, and the lease or rental of real property located within the district.
"District" means that area defined in Section 3.100.040.
"Premises" means any fixed or definite location.
(Ord. 6394, Amended, 02/22/2006. Prior code § 5.80.030)

3.100.040 Description.
The downtown parking and business improvement district shall include all businesses which front on, have addresses on, or have public access from the following streets or portions thereof:
A. The East side of 100 block of North "L" Streee;
B. The 100 block. North "K" Street, North Broadway; North "I" Stree, North "H" Street, North "G: Street, and North "F" Street;
C. The East side of 100 block of South "L" Street;
D. The 100 Block South "K" Street, South Broadway, South "I" Street, South "H" Street, South "G" Street, and South "F" Street;
E. The East side of 200 block of South "L" Street;
F. The 200 block of South "K" Street, South Broadway, South "I" Street, South "H" Street, South "G" Street and South "F" Street;
G. The East side of 300 block of South "L" Street;
H. The 300 block of South "K" Street, South Broadway, South "I" Street, South "H" Street, South "G" Street, and South "F" Street;
I. The South side of the 100 block of West 1st Street;
J. The 100 Block of West Market Street, West Wishkah Street, and West Heron Street;
K. The North side of the 100 block of West State Street;
L. The South side of the 200 block of West 1st Street;
M. The 200 Block of West Market Street, West Wishkah Street, and West Heron Street;
N. The North side of the 200 block of West State Street;
O. The South side of the 100 block of East 1st Street;
P. The 100 block of East Market Street, East Wishkah Street, and East Heron Street;
Q. The North side of the 100 block of East State Street;
R. The South side of the 200 block of East 1st Street;
S. The 200 block of East Market Street, East Wishkah Street, and East Heron Street;
T. The North side of the 200 block of East State Street;
U. The South side of the 300 block of East 1st Street;
V. The 300 block of East Market Street, East Wishkah Street, and East Heron Street;
W. The North side of the 300 block of East State Street;
X. The South side of the 400 block of East 1st Street;
Y. The 400 block of East Market Street, East Wishkah Street and East Heron Street;
Z. The North side of East State Street.
(Ord. 6505, Amended, 11/10/2010)

3.100.050 Special assessment rates.
All businesses operating within the district described in AMC 3.100.040 shall pay a special assessment of $120.00 a year.
(Ord. 6465, Amended, 07/23/2008)

3.100.070 New businesses—Pro-rated assessment.
New businesses opening within the area covered by the district shall pay a pro-rated special assessment in their initial year of operation at the rate of $10.00 per month for the remaining months of the fiscal year ending June 30. All assessments for new businesses shall be due when the business license is issued or the business opens, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 6465, Amended, 07/23/2008)

3.100.080 Return, payment and charge-initial assessment year - initial assessment year.
The finance director's office shall prepare return forms and collect assessments under this chapter. The charge year shall be from July 1 through June 30 of each year. All payments shall be paid in full on or before their due date. The assessment for the initial year shall be pro-rated at the rate of $10.00 per month for the remaining days in the calendar months of the July 1 through June 30 fiscal year following the effective date of this ordinance.
(Ord. 6465, Amended, 07/23/2008. Prior code § 5.80.080)

3.100.090 Penalty, interest.
All assessments which are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date they are due shall bear a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount due. In addition to the penalty, all unpaid assessments shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from thirty (30) days after the date due until the assessment is paid.
(Prior code § 5.80.090)

3.100.100 Two or more business premises.
The conducting of the same business at two or more separate premises within the district shall, for the purposes hereof, be deemed to be separate businesses and each such business shall be subject to the assessment herein provided for. If two or more separate but related businesses are conducted on the same premises by the same owners, one special assessment shall be paid for the business to which the premises are primarily appropriated.
(Ord. 6465, Amended, 07/23/2008)

3.100.110 Downtown parking and business improvement district committee.
There shall be a committee appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, which shall be known as the downtown parking and business improvement district committee. The function of the committee shall be to make recommendations and advise the mayor and city council on parking matters within the district, on the special assessment rates and formula, on other proposals within the gambit of RCW 35.87A, and on such other matters as may be delegated to the committee. The committee shall be composed of no less than five members and no more than nine members representing businesses within the district provided; however, that no more than two members shall be appointed from businesses within the same street block in the district. The term of office for three of the initially appointed committee members shall be four years from January 1, 1985, and the term of office for the remaining two members shall be two years from January 1, 1985, all as determined by lot at the first organizational meeting. After the initial terms have expired new members or reappointed members shall be appointed for a term of four years. The chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting of the committee and thereafter a chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting after January 1, of each succeeding year.
(Ord. 6394, Amended, 02/22/2006. Prior code § 5.80.110)

3.100.120 Proceeds of assessments.
The finance department shall keep a separate accounting of the proceeds of the assessments from the downtown parking and business improvement district. Expenditures of the proceeds of the assessment shall be made at the discretion of the city council for the purposes specified in this chapter and as authorized by RCW 35.87A.
(Prior code § 5.80.120)

3.100.130 Disestablishment of district.
The disestablishment of the district shall be done in accordance with the provisions of RCW 35.87A. Upon the disestablishment of the district, any proceeds of the special assessments, or assets acquired with such proceeds, or liabilities incurred as a result of the formation of such district, shall be subject to disposition as the city council shall determine; provided, however, that any liabilities, either current or future, incurred as a result of action taken to accomplish the purposes of RCW 35.87A.010 shall not be an obligation of the general fund or of any special fund of the city or town, but such liability shall be provided for entirely from available revenues generated from the projects or facilities authorized by RCW 35.87A.010 or from the special assessments on the property specially benefitted within the district.
(Prior code § 5.80.130)

3.100.140 Administration and appeals.
The levying and collection of assessments under this chapter shall be administered by the finance director of the city of Aberdeen, who may seek the advice of the downtown parking and business improvement district committee. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the finance director may appeal that decision by a written notice of appeal served on the finance director within ten days of the date of the decision. Such an appeal shall be heard by the downtown parking and business improvement district committee, or a subgroup of that committee appointed by the chairperson. The committee shall promptly schedule the matter for a hearing and shall render a decision within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The petitioner or the finance director may appeal a decision of the downtown parking and business improvement district committee to the city council by serving a written notice of appeal upon the Mayor and mailing a copy to the chairperson of the committee within ten days after the date of the decision. The city council, or a subcommittee thereof appointed by the mayor, shall conduct a hearing on the matter. If the hearing is before a committee of the council, the committee's decision shall be submitted to the full council for approval or modification. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ord. 6465, Amended, 07/23/2008. Prior code § 5.80.140)

3.100.150 Change of assessment rate.
Changes in the rate of assessment, the formula for assessment, or additional rates of special assessments may be made by the city council. The city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to change the assessment rate, formula, or to levy additional rate of special assessment and setting a hearing which shall be held at least fifteen (15) days prior to the adoption of the ordinance changing the assessment. This resolution shall specify the proposed change and shall give the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be advertised by notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city published at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. In the event protest is made by businesses in the affected district which would pay a majority of the proposed increase or additional special assessment, the proceedings to change the rate, formula, or to impose an additional rate of special assessment shall terminate.
(Prior code § 5.80.150)

3.100.160 Penalties.
A. It is an infraction for any person to do business within the downtown parking and business improvement district without having paid the assessment required in this chapter. In the trial of any alleged violations of this chapter, evidence that the defendant or the defendant's employer made a public representation, by way of advertisement, by newspaper, radio, television, or similar media, or by signs, notices, or lettering displayed for public view, that such business or occupation was being conducted within the district, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was transacting the business within the parking district on the date or dates during which such representatives were made.
B. Any person or business violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, by punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00).
C. Every full business day during which any business activity continued to be conducted in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense, and every business day during which any person conducts or transacts business in the course of an activity for which the assessment herein required has not been paid shall be deemed a separate offense by such person.
D. The remedies specified in this section shall not be deemed exclusive and, at the option of the city, amounts due and payable hereunder may be collected in any manner prescribed by law.
(Prior code § 5.80.160)

Chapter 3.104 FORECLOSURE OF DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS

Sections:
3.104.010    Foreclosure—Procedure.

3.104.010 Foreclosure—Procedure.
The city of Aberdeen does authorize and direct that the foreclosure of all delinquent local improvement district assessments, or installment or installments thereof, may be conducted, and the mode of procedure therefore shall be, as provided by RCW Sections 35.50.220—35.50.270, inclusive; and that such procedure shall be in lieu of the code of procedure prescribed by RCW Sections 35.50.030 to 35.50.210, inclusive.
(Prior code § 8.10.010)

Chapter 3.108 SALE OF LID TRUST PROPERTIES

Sections:
3.108.010    Applications for purchase.
3.108.020    Value of property to be determined by appraisers.
3.108.030    Terms of sale.
3.108.040    Public sale—When held.
3.108.050    Public sale—Where held.
3.108.060    Public sale—Notice.
3.108.070    Public sale—Proceeds.
3.108.080    Appraisal fee.

3.108.010 Applications for purchase.
Applications for the purchase of property held in trust by the city of Aberdeen for the benefit of local improvement districts, the title to which has been acquired by the city from Grays Harbor County by tax deed, shall be made to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall report said application to the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council, giving the legal description of said property and the amount of local improvement district assessments outstanding and unpaid against said property, the number of each district effected, and the amount paid to Grays Harbor County for said property.
(Prior code § 8.12.010)

3.108.020 Value of property to be determined by appraisers.
The report of the city treasurer shall be referred to the finance committee of the city council, and the city treasurer, whose duty it shall be to determine the value of said property, and for that purpose may in its discretion employ a competent appraiser or appraisers for the purpose of appraising said property. The fees of said appraiser or appraisers shall be paid out of any money appropriated therefor in the budget of the city treasurer. When said value has been determined, the finance committee and the city treasurer shall file a written report to the city council, which shall consider said report at its next regular meeting.
(Prior code § 8.12.020)

3.108.030 Terms of sale.
If, after considering the report of the finance committee and the city treasurer, with reference to the sale of any such property, the city council shall determine to sell said property, it shall pass a resolution providing for the sale of said property, the manner said property shall be sold, whether at private or public sale, the minimum price for which said property may be sold and whether for cash or upon terms, and said property shall be offered for sale in the manner provided in said resolution.
(Prior code § 8.12.030)

3.108.040 Public sale—When held.
If the city council determines to offer any such property for sale, for which no application for purchase is pending, it shall cause the value of said property to be fixed in the manner herein provided,
shall pass a resolution providing for said sale at public sale to the highest and best bidder, for a price not less than the minimum price fixed by the city council.
(Prior code § 8.12.040)

3.108.050 Public sale—Where held.
Whenever the city council shall order any property sold at public sale, as herein provided, said sale shall be at public auction, conducted by the city treasurer at the front door of the city hall in the city of Aberdeen, at the time fixed in said resolution for said sale.
(Prior code § 8.12.050)

3.108.060 Public sale—Notice.
When the city council has ordered any property sold at public sale, the city treasurer shall give notice of said sale by publication as provided in the resolution authorizing said sale, which publication however, shall be for at least one issue in the official newspaper of the city of Aberdeen, and such other publication as the city council may determine in said resolution, the first publication of which shall be at least ten days prior to the date fixed for said sale.
(Prior code § 8.12.060)

3.108.070 Public sale—Proceeds.
Any amount received by the city from the sale of any such property shall be applied first for the purpose of reimbursing the city of Aberdeen for the amount expended by the city in the purchase of said property, and the balance shall be apportioned among the various local improvement districts affected in the manner provided by law.
(Prior code § 8.12.070)

3.108.080 Appraisal fee.
When application is made to purchase any property under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city treasurer the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each lot included in said application as an appraisal fee. All money collected under the provisions of this section shall be deposited to the credit of local improvement district working fund. No refund of such appraisal fees shall be made if said appraisal is ordered by the city council. If the city council determines not to order an appraisal, such appraisal fee shall thereupon be refunded, to the applicant.
(Prior code § 8.12.080)

Chapter 3.112 MANAGEMENT OF LID TRUST PROPERTIES

Sections:
3.112.010    City treasurer to collect all sums due city.
3.112.020    Rental or lease of properties—Applications for.
3.112.030    Rental or lease of properties—Approval of city council.
3.112.040    Inventory—Required.
3.112.050    Delinquent payments—Report of.
3.112.060    Unauthorized occupancy of properties.

3.112.010 City treasurer to collect all sums due city.
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer of the city of Aberdeen to collect all rentals accruing from said properties, and payments due to the city from the purchasers of any of said property.
(Prior code § 8.14.010)

3.112.020 Rental or lease of properties—Applications for.
All applications for the lease or rental of any of said properties shall be filed with the city treasurer and by him referred to the finance committee of the city council for their investigation and recommendation to the city council.
(Prior code § 8.14.020)

3.112.030 Rental or lease of properties—Approval of city council.
No such property shall be leased or rented except upon the approval of the city council by resolution; all rental shall be as fixed by the city council in said resolutions.
(Prior code § 8.14.030)

3.112.040 Inventory—Required.
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to keep in his office available for use of various city officials, an up-to-date inventory of all of said properties, showing the amount of local improvement district assessments outstanding against said property, and the date and manner in which the city acquired title to said property.
(Prior code § 8.14.040)

3.112.050 Delinquent payments—Report of.
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to report to the finance committee of the city council any delinquencies in the payment of rental due as rent for the use of any such property or delinquencies arising on land contracts given for the sale of any such property.
(Prior code § 8.14.050)

3.112.060 Unauthorized occupancy of properties.
Whenever the city treasurer shall find any person occupying any city owned property without the same having been regularly rented or leased to such person, it shall be his duty to immediately notify the finance committee of the city council for their investigation and report to the city council.
(Prior code § 8.14.060)

Chapter 3.116 WATER DEPARTMENT CUMULATIVE RESERVE FUND

Sections:
3.116.010    Established.
3.116.020    Source of moneys.
3.116.030    Accumulation of moneys.
3.116.040    Expenditure of moneys.

3.116.010 Established.
There is established a cumulative reserve fund for the water department for certain planned improvements and replacements and for certain unexpected repairs or replacements.
(Prior code § 10.22.010)

3.116.020 Source of moneys.
The cumulative reserve fund for the water department shall consist of appropriations made by the city council for the purpose, together with any other funds which the city council shall transfer into the fund.
(Prior code § 10.22.020)

3.116.030 Accumulation of moneys.
The moneys in the fund may be allowed to accumulate from year to year until the city council shall determine to extend the moneys in the fund for such purposes.
(Prior code § 10.22.030)

3.116.040 Expenditure of moneys.
Any moneys in the fund shall never be expended for any other purpose or purposes other than those specified without an approving vote by the majority of the electors of the city at a general or special election voting on a proposal submitted to the electors to allow other specified uses in the proposals to be made of the fund.
(Prior code § 10.22.040)

Chapter 3.120 SHANNON SLOUGH FUND

Sections:
3.120.010    Establishment of Shannon Slough fund.
3.120.020    Operation of fund.
3.120.030    Permitted uses of fund.
3.120.040    Shannon Slough advisory board.
3.120.050    Powers and duties of the board—Limitations.
3.120.060    Secretary to the board.

3.120.010 Establishment of Shannon Slough fund.
There is created a special fund designated as the "Shannon Slough Fund" for receipt and disbursement of funds transferred form the "Shannon Slough Trust Fund" pursuant to that certain order entered November 22, 1994, in United States of America v. Weyerhaeuser Co., Cause No. CR90-298S, United States District Court (W.D. of Wash.).
(Ord. 6113 § 1, Amended, 1995)

3.120.020 Operation of fund.
The finance department shall have responsibility for the financial administration of the Shannon Slough Fund. The moneys in the fund shall be extended only for the purposes and in the manner set forth herein.
(Ord. 6113 § 2, Amended, 1995)

3.120.030 Permitted uses of fund.
The moneys in the Shannon Slough Fund may be expended only for the purpose of maintaining the plantings along Shannon Slough and funding related projects of the Science Club for junior and senior high school students in the Aberdeen School District.
(Ord. 6113 § 3, Amended, 1995)

3.120.040 Shannon Slough advisory board.
There is created an advisory board of the city council to be known as the "Shannon Slough Representatives" to oversee and direct expenditures from the Shannon Slough Fund. The representatives shall be composed of the manager of the Weyerhaeuser Company Sawmill on Shannon Slough in south Aberdeen, mayor of the city of Aberdeen, the district two commissioner of the board of county commissioners for Grays Harbor County, Washington, and a representative selected by the Regional Administrator for the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 6113 § 4, Amended, 1995)

3.120.050 Powers and duties of the board—Limitations.
All proposals for specific efforts and projects requesting funding from the Shannon Slough Fund shall be submitted to the representative for approval. The representatives may adopt by-laws or such other rules as they may deem necessary for the conduct of their affairs. The representatives, by majority vote, shall direct distributions from the fund as deemed by them to be necessary, appropriate, and consistent with the purposes as set forth in Section 3.120.030. The authority of the Shannon Slough Representatives to direct distributions to specific efforts and projects which may be proposed to them shall not include the authority to enter into contracts or other agreements, or to create any obligation on the part of the city of Aberdeen to expend moneys from the fund. All contracts or other agreements with recipients necessary to ensure the proper expenditure of funds shall be made in the name of the city of Aberdeen as approved by the city council.
(Ord. 6113 § 5, Amended, 1995)

3.120.060 Secretary to the board.
The city engineer, or another member of the paid staff of the city as may be designated by the mayor, shall serve as secretary to the board without additional compensation.
(Ord. 6113 § 6, Amended, 1995)

Title 4 RESERVED

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:
5.03         Business & Occupation Tax
5.06         Residential Rental Business License
5.07         Administrative Provisions for Business & Occupation Tax
5.10         Business Licensing and Registration
5.12         Circus and Tent Shows
5.16         Theaters
5.28         Cable Television Rate Regulation
5.32         Pawnbrokers
5.34         Cabarets and Adult Entertainment
5.36         Advertising
5.40         Hotels
5.48         Street Merchants Prohibited

Chapter 5.03 BUSINESS & OCCUPATION TAX

Sections:
5.03.010     Purpose.
5.03.020     Exercise of revenue license power.
5.03.028     Administrative Provisions.
5.03.030     Definitions.
5.03.040     Agency - sales and services by agent, consignee, bailee, factor or auctioneer.
5.03.050     Imposition of the tax - tax or fee levied.
5.03.070     Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes.
5.03.075     Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing activities and prior to January 1, 2008, transactions involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax.
5.03.076     Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles.
5.03.077     Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.
5.03.078     Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.
5.03.090     Exemptions.
5.03.100     Deductions.
5.03.120     Tax part of overhead.
5.03.130     Severability clause.

5.03.010 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the city of Aberdeen to impose a license tax, for revenue purposes, on every kind of business transacted or carried on within the city.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.020 Exercise of revenue license power.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to license for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the City code.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.028 Administrative Provisions.
The administrative provisions contained in chapter 5.07 shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.030 Definitions.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular.
A. "Advance," "reimbursement."
    1. "Advance" means money or credits received by a taxpayer from a customer or client with which the taxpayer is to pay costs or fees on behalf of the customer or client.
    2. "Reimbursement" means money or credits received from a customer or client to repay the taxpayer for money or credits expended by the taxpayer in payment of costs or fees of the customer or client.
B. "Agricultural product," "farmer."
    1. "Agricultural product" means any product of plant cultivation or animal husbandry including, but not limited to: A product of horticulture, grain cultivation, vermiculture, viticulture, or aquaculture as defined in RCW 15.85.020; plantation Christmas trees; turf; or any animal including but not limited to an animal that is a private sector cultured aquatic product as defined in RCW 15.85.020, or a bird, or insect, or the substances obtained from such an animal. "Agricultural product" does not include animals intended to be pets.
    2. "Farmer" means any person engaged in the business of growing or producing, upon the person's own lands or upon the lands in which the person has a present right of possession, any agricultural product whatsoever for sale. "Farmer" does not include a person using such products as ingredients in a manufacturing process, or a person growing or producing such products for the person's own consumption. "Farmer" does not include a person selling any animal or substance obtained therefrom in connection with the person's business of operating a stockyard or a slaughter or packing house. "Farmer" does not include any person in respect to the business of taking, cultivating, or raising timber.
C. "Artistic or cultural organization". As used in this chapter:
    1. The term "artistic or cultural organization" means an organization which is organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of providing artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs, as defined in subsection (10) of this section, for viewing or attendance by the general public.
    2. The organization must be a not-for-profit corporation under chapter 24.03 RCW.
    3. The organization must be managed by a governing board of not less than eight (8) individuals none of whom is a paid employee of the organization or by a corporation sole under chapter 24.12 RCW.
    4. No part of its income may be paid directly or indirectly to its members, stockholders, officers, directors, or trustees except in the form of services rendered by the corporation in accordance with its purposes and bylaws.
    5. Salary or compensation paid to its officers and executives must be only for actual services rendered, and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the state.
    6. Assets of the corporation must be irrevocably dedicated to the activities for which the exemption is granted and, on the liquidation, dissolution, or abandonment by the corporation, may not inure directly or indirectly to the benefit of any member or individual except a non-profit organization, association, or corporation which also would be entitled to the exemption.
    7. The corporation must be duly licensed or certified when licensing or certification is required by law or regulation.
    8. The amounts received that qualify for exemption must be used for the activities for which the exemption is granted.
    9. Services must be available regardless of race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, Vietnam or disabled veteran status, or the presence of any mental or physical disability.
    10. The term "artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs" is limited to:
        a. An exhibition or presentation of works of art or objects of cultural or historical significance, such as those commonly displayed in art or history museums;
        b. A musical or dramatic performance or series of performances; or
        c. An educational seminar or program, or series of such programs, offered by the organization to the general public on an artistic, cultural, or historical subject.
D. "Business. " “Business” includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.
E. “Business and occupation tax.” “Business and occupation tax” or “gross receipts tax” means a tax imposed on or measured by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the business.
F. "Commercial or industrial use." "Commercial or industrial use" means the following uses of products, including by-products, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:
    1. Any use as a consumer; and
    2. The manufacturing of articles, substances or commodities;
G. “Competitive telephone service.” "Competitive telephone service" means the providing by any person of telecommunications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under Title 80 RCW and for which a separate charge is made.
H. "Consumer." "Consumer" means the following:
    1. Any person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses any tangible or intangible personal property irrespective of the nature of the person's business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for a consumer other than for the purpose of:
        a. resale as tangible or intangible personal property in the regular course of business;
        b. incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of real or personal property when installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, improving, constructing, or decorating such real or personal property of or for consumers;
        c. incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of a new product or as a chemical used in processing a new product when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new product; or
        d. consuming the property in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon;
    2. Any person engaged in any business activity taxable under section .050 (1) (g);
    3. Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any competitive telephone service as herein defined, other than for resale in the regular course of business;
    4. Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any personal, business, or professional service defined as a retail sale or retail service in section .030C, other than for resale in the regular course of business;
    5. Any person who is an end user of software;
    6. Any person engaged in the business of "public road construction" in respect to tangible personal property when that person incorporates the tangible personal property as an ingredient or component of a publicly-owned street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle by installing, placing or spreading the property in or upon the right-of-way of a publicly-owned street, place, road, highway, easement, bridge, tunnel, or trestle or in or upon the site of a publicly-owned mass public transportation terminal or parking facility;
    7. Any person who is an owner, lessee or has the right of possession to or an easement in real property which is being constructed, repaired, decorated, improved, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;
    8. Any person who is an owner, lessee, or has the right of possession to personal property which is being constructed, repaired, improved, cleaned, imprinted, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;
    9. Any person engaged in "government contracting." Any such person shall be a consumer within the meaning of this subsection in respect to tangible personal property incorporated into, installed in, or attached to such building or other structure by such person;
    Nothing contained in this or any other subsection of this section shall be construed to modify any other definition of "consumer."
I. “Delivery” means the transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the seller and the buyer or the buyer's representative. Delivery to an employee of a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer's representative first takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over the property. Dominion and control means the buyer has the ability to put the property to the buyer's own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer’s representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property, and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to itself. A buyer's representative is a person, other than an employee of the buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a buyer's representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and other provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (Title 62A RCW) do not determine when or where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.
J. "Director." "Director" means the Finance Director of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director's behalf.
K. "Digital automated service," "digital code," and "digital goods" have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192.
L. "Digital products" means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(b).
M. "Eligible gross receipts tax." The term "eligible gross receipts tax" means a tax which:
    1. is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within section .050; and
    2. is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts and is not an income tax or value added tax; and
    3. is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price; and
    4. is not a sales or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment for the use and enjoyment of property, property right or a privilege; and
    5. is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the state of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other non-local jurisdiction above the county level.
N. “Engaging in business” means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business, and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.
    1. This subsection sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the city, and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the city without having to pay a business license fee. The activities listed in this subsection are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of “engaging in business” in this subsection. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the city shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.
    2. Without being all-inclusive, any one (1) of the following activities conducted within the city by a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf, constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license:
        a. Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the city.
        b. Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the city.
        c. Soliciting sales.
        d. Making repairs or providing maintenance or service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.
        e. Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.
        f. Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.
        g. Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.
        h. Collecting current or delinquent accounts.
        i. Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.
        j. Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services including the listing of homes and managing real property.
        k. Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, veterinarians.
        l. Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.
        m. Training or recruiting agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the city, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.
        n. Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.
        o. In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.
        p. Delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.
    3. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the city but the following, it need not register and obtain a business license:
        a. Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.
        b. Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.
        c. Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf. This provision does not apply to any board of directors member or attendee engaging in business such as a member of a board of directors who attends a board meeting.
        d. Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the city.
        e. Attending, but not participating in, a “trade show” or “multiple vendor events.” Persons participating at a trade show shall review the city’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.
        f. Conducting advertising through the mail.
        g. Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the city.
    4. A seller located outside the city merely delivering goods into the city by means of common carrier is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the city. Such activities do not include those in subsection (N)(3) of this section.
The city expressly intends that engaging in business include any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the license fee under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the state of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus-generating contact or subsequent contacts.
O. “Extracting.” “Extracting” is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under the extracting classification
P. "Extractor." "Extractor" means every person who from the person's own land or from the land of another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes or produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral or other natural resource product; or fells, cuts or takes timber, Christmas trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or takes fish, shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products. "Extractor" does not include persons performing under contract the necessary labor or mechanical services for others; or persons meeting the definition of farmer.
Q. "Extractor for Hire" “Extractor for hire” means a person who performs under contract necessary labor or mechanical services for an extractor.
R. "Gross income of the business." "Gross income of the business" means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the transaction of the business engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discount, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.
S. "Gross proceeds of sales." "Gross proceeds of sales" means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services or for other services rendered, without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.
T. "In this City," "within this City." "In this City " or "within this City" includes all federal areas lying within the corporate city limits of the City.
U. “Manufacturing.” “Manufacturing” means the activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under the manufacturing classification.
V. "Manufacturer," "to manufacture."
    1. "Manufacturer" means every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from the person’s own materials or ingredients any products. When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than twenty percent (20%) of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be deemed to be a processor for hire, and not a manufacturer. A business not located in this City that is the owner of materials or ingredients processed for it in this City by a processor for hire shall be deemed to be engaged in business as a manufacturer in this City.
    2. "To manufacture" means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:
        a. The production of special made or custom made articles;
        b. The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations, substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or dental technician;
        c. Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and
        d. The producing of articles for sale, or for commercial or industrial use from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials, articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables.
        e. “To manufacture” shall not include the production of digital goods or the production of computer software if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to the purchaser.
W. "Newspaper," "magazine," "periodical."
    1. "Newspaper" means a publication offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once a week and printed on newsprint in tabloid or broadsheet format folded loosely together without stapling, glue, or any other binding of any kind.
    2. "Magazine, or periodical" means any printed publication, other than a newspaper, issued and offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once every three (3) months, including any supplement or special edition of the publication. Any publication meeting this definition qualifies regardless of its content.
X. "Non-profit corporation or non-profit organization." "Non-profit corporation or non-profit organization" means a corporation or organization in which no part of the income can be distributed to its members, directors, or officers and that holds a current tax exempt status as provided under Sec. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, or is specifically exempted from the requirement to apply for its tax exempt status under Sec. 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended. Where the term non-profit organization is used, it is meant to include a non-profit corporation.
Y. "Office", "place of business." "Office" or "place of business" means a fixed location or permanent facility where the regular business of the person is conducted and which is either owned by the person or over which the person exercises legal dominion and control.
    1. The regular business of the person is presumed conducted at a location:
        a. Whose address the person uses as its business mailing address;
        b. Where the place of primary use is shown on a telephone billing or a location containing a telephone line listed in a public telephone directory or other similar publication under the business name; and
        c. Where the person holds itself out to the general public as conducting its regular business through signage or other means; and
        d. Where the person is required to obtain any appropriate state and local business license or registration unless they are exempted by law from such requirement.
    2. A vehicle such as a pick-up, van, truck, boat or other motor vehicle is not an office or place of business. A post office box is not an office or place of business.
    3. If a person has an office or place of business, the person's home is not an office or place of business unless it meets the criteria for office or place of business above. If a person has no office or place of business, the person's home or apartment within the City will be deemed the place of business.
Z. "Person." "Person" means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, non-profit, or otherwise and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.
AA. "Precious metal bullion or monetized bullion."
    1. "Precious metal bullion" means any precious metal which has been put through a process of smelting or refining, including, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, rhodium, and palladium, and which is in such state or condition that its value depends upon its contents and not upon its form.
    2. "Monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, or other metals and heretofore, now, or hereafter used as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign nation, but does not include coins or money sold to be manufactured into jewelry or works of art.
BB. "Processing for hire." "Processing for hire" means the performance of labor and mechanical services upon materials or ingredients belonging to others so that as a result a new, different or useful product is produced for sale, or commercial or industrial use. A processor for hire is any person who would be a manufacturer if that person were performing the labor and mechanical services upon that person's own materials or ingredients. If a person furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to twenty percent (20%) or more of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product the person will be deemed to be a manufacturer and not a processor for hire.
CC. "Product", "Byproduct."
    1. "Product" means tangible personal property, including articles, substances, or commodities created, brought forth, extracted, or manufactured by human or mechanical effort.
    2. "Byproduct" means any additional product, other than the principal or intended product, which results from extracting or manufacturing activities and which has a market value, without regard to whether or not such additional product was an expected or intended result of the extracting or manufacturing activities.
DD. “Retailing.” “Retailing” means the activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported under the retailing classification.
EE. "Retail Service." “Retail service” shall include the sale of or charge made for personal, business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest, rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated, received by persons engaging in the following business activities:
    1. Amusement and recreation services including but not limited to golf, pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and tows, basketball, racquet ball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers. "Amusement and recreation services" also include the provision of related facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term "amusement and recreation services" does not include instructional lessons to learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or archery lessons;
    2. Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services;
    3. Credit bureau services;
    4. Automobile parking and storage garage services;
    5. Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding (i) horticultural services provided to farmers and (ii) pruning, trimming, repairing, removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an electric utility;
    6. Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting events; and
    7. The following personal services: Physical fitness services, tanning salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, turkish bath services, escort services, and dating services.
    8. The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.
FF. "Royalties." "Royalties" mean compensation for the use of intangible property, such as copyrights, patents, licenses, franchises, trademarks, tradenames, and similar items.
GG. "Sale," "casual or isolated sale."
    1. "Sale" means any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of, property for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a "sale at retail," "retail sale,” or “retail service.” It includes renting or leasing, conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether consumed upon the premises or not.
    2. "Casual or isolated sale" means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis.
HH. "Sale at retail," "retail sale."
    1. "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 and who:
        a. Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or
        b. Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs, or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal property without intervening use by such person; or
        c. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale; or
        d. Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or
        e. Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as part of competitive telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any activity classified as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even though such property is resold or utilized as provided in (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this subsection following such use.
        f. Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person's obligations under an extended warranty as defined in subsection (7) of this section, if such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such person.
    2. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” also means every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any business activity which is taxable under .050(1)(g).
    3. "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall include the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following:
        a. The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges made for the use of coin-operated laundry facilities when such facilities are situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry service to nonprofit health care facilities, and excluding services rendered in respect to live animals, birds and insects;
        b. The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming or agriculture;
        c. The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession, or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any other means to the original owner;
        d. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing or moving of existing buildings or structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services; and for purposes of this section the term "janitorial services" shall mean those cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing, floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes and upholstery. The term "janitorial services" does not include painting, papering, repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal or sandblasting;
        e. The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services, but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under chapter 82.16 RCW;
        f. The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one month or more to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to enjoy the same;
        g. The installing, repairing altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers;
        h. The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor and services to persons taxable under (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of this subsection when such sales or charges are for property, labor and services which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the performance of any activity defined as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even though such property, labor and services may be resold after such use or consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify subsection (1) of this section and nothing contained in subsection (1) of this section shall be construed to modify this subsection.
    4. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers.
    5. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include:
        a. The sale of prewritten software other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 , regardless of the method of delivery to the end user. For purposes of this subsection (5)(a) the sale of prewritten computer software includes the sale of or charge made for a key or an enabling or activation code, where the key or code is required to activate prewritten computer software and put the software into use. There is no separate sale of the key or code from the prewritten computer software, regardless of how the sale may characterized by the vendor or by the purchaser. The term "sale at retail" or "retail sale" does not include the sale of the charge made for:
            (i) Custom software; or
            (ii) The customization of prewritten software.
        
            (b)(i) The term also includes the charge made to consumers for the right to access and use prewritten computer software, where possession of the software is maintained by the seller or a third party, regardless of whether the charge for the service is on a per use, per user, per license, subscription, or some other basis, and the right to access and use prewritten software to perform data processing.
            (ii) For purposes of the subsection "data processing" means the systematic performance of operations on data to extract the required information in an appropriate form or to convert the data to usable information. Data processing includes check processing, image processing, form processing, survey processing, payroll processiing, claim processing, and similar activities.
    6. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road, highway, easement, right of way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, the State of Washington, or by the United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind. (Public road construction)
    7. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a consumer. For purposes of this subsection, "extended warranty" means an agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the occurrence of specified events. The term "extended warranty" does not include an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of extended warranty in this subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property covered by the agreement.
    8. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority created pursuant to chapter 35.82 RCW, including the installing, or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation (government contracting).
    9. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other byproducts of weapons production and nuclear research and development. [This should be reported under the service and other classification.]
    10. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered for environmental remedial action [This should be reported under the service and other classification.]
    11. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods, digital codes, and digital automated services:
        a. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of permanent use;
        b. Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use that is less than permanent;
        c. Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale; and
        d. Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale.
        A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services under this subsection includes any services provided by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for such services. For purposes of this subsection, "permanent" means perpetual or for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition subsequent.
    12. “Sale at retail” or “retail sale” shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers.
II. "Sale at wholesale," "wholesale sale." "Sale at wholesale" or "wholesale sale" means any sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, prewritten computer software, or services described in section 5(b)(i), which is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property and retail services, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale or retail service when rendered to or for consumers. Sale at wholesale also includes the sale of telephone business to another telecommunications company as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated by RCW 35.21.715
JJ. “Services.” means those activities that do not fall within one of the other tax classifications used by a city.
KK. "Software", "prewritten software," "custom software," "customization of canned software," "master copies," "retained rights."
    1. "Prewritten software” or “Canned software" means computer software, including prewritten upgrades, that is not designed and developed by the author or other creator to the specifications of a specific purchaser. The combining of two or more prewritten computer software programs or prewritten portions thereof does not cause the combination to be other than prewritten computer software. Prewritten computer software includes software designed and developed by the author or other creator to the specifications of a specific purchaser when it is sold to a person other than such purchaser. Where a person modifies or enhances computer software of which such persons is not the author or creator, the person shall be deemed to be the author or creator only of the person's modifications or enhancements. Prewritten computer software or a prewritten portion thereof that is modified or enhanced to any degree, where such modification or enhancement is designed and developed to the specifications of a specific purchaser, remains prewritten computer software; however where there is a reasonable, separately stated charge or an invoice or other statement of the price given to the purchaser for the modification or enhancement, the modification or enhancement shall not constitute prewritten computer software.
    2. "Custom software" means software created for a single person.
    3. "Customization of canned software" means any alteration, modification, or development of applications using or incorporating canned software to specific individualized requirements of a single person. Customization of canned software includes individualized configuration of software to work with other software and computer hardware but does not include routine installation. Customization of canned software does not change the underlying character or taxability of the original canned software.
    4. "Master copies" of software means copies of software from which a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor makes copies for sale or license. The software encoded on a master copy and the media upon which the software resides are both ingredients of the master copy.
    5. "Retained rights" means any and all rights, including intellectual property rights such as those rights arising from copyrights, patents, and trade secret laws, that are owned or are held under contract or license by a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor.
    6. "Software" means any information, program, or routine, or any set of one (1) or more programs, routines, or collections of information used, or intended for use, to convey information that causes one or more computers or pieces of computer-related peripheral equipment, or any combination thereof, to perform a task or set of tasks. "Software" includes the associated documentation, materials, or ingredients regardless of the media upon which that documentation is provided, that describes the code and its use, operation, and maintenance and that typically is delivered with the code to the consumer. All software is classified as either canned or custom.
LL. "Taxpayer." "Taxpayer" means any person required to have a business license under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax or fee is imposed by this chapter.
MM. "Tuition fee." "Tuition fee" includes library, laboratory, health service and other special fees, and amounts charged for room and board by an educational institution when the property or service for which such charges are made is furnished exclusively to the students or faculty of such institution. "Educational institution," as used in this section, means only those institutions created or generally accredited as such by the state and includes educational programs that such educational institution cosponsors with a non-profit organization, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), as hereafter amended, if such educational institution grants college credit for coursework successfully completed through the educational program, or an approved branch campus of a foreign degree-granting institution in compliance with chapter 28B.90 RCW, and in accordance with RCW 82.04.4332 or defined as a degree-granting institution under RCW 28B.85.010(3) and accredited by an accrediting association recognized by the United States secretary of education, and offering to students an educational program of a general academic nature or those institutions which are not operated for profit and which are privately endowed under a deed of trust to offer instruction in trade, industry, and agriculture, but not including specialty schools, business colleges, other trade schools, or similar institutions
NN. "Value proceeding or accruing." "Value proceeding or accruing" means the consideration, whether money, credits, rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer.
OO. "Value of products."
    1. The value of products, including by-products, extracted or manufactured, shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or by-products by the seller.
    2. Where such products, including by-products, are extracted or manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products, including by-products, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the City, or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or article extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The Director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values. (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) above, the value of a product manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the development of a new or improved product shall correspond to (a) the retail selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or (2) the value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the new or improved product is not offered for sale.
PP. “Wholesaling.” “Wholesaling” means engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is reported under the wholesaling classification.
(Ord. 6633 § 1, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6540, Amended, 12/26/2012; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.040 Agency - sales and services by agent, consignee, bailee, factor or auctioneer.
A. Every person, including agents, consignees, bailees, factors or auctioneers having either actual or constructive possession of tangible personal property or having possession of the documents of title thereto, with power to sell such tangible personal property in the person’s own name and actually so selling shall be deemed the seller of such tangible personal property within the meaning of this chapter. The burden shall be upon the taxpayer in every case to establish the fact that such taxpayer is not engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property but is acting merely as broker or agent in promoting sales or making purchases for a principal. Such claim will be recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:
    1. The books and records of the broker or agent show the transactions were made in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the name of the actual owner of the property for whom the sale was made, or the actual buyer for whom the purchase was made.
    2. The books and records show the amount of the principal's gross sales, the amount of commissions and any other incidental income derived by the broker or agent from such sales. The principal's gross sales must not be reflected as the agent's income on any of the agent's books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement.
    3. No ownership rights may be conferred to the agent unless the principal refuses to pay, or refuses to abide by the agency agreement. Sales or purchases of any goods by a person who has any ownership rights in such goods shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.
    4. Bulk goods sold or purchased on behalf of a principal must not be co-mingled with goods belonging to another principal or lose their identity as belonging to the particular principal. Sales or purchases of any goods which have been co-mingled or lost their identity as belonging to the principal shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.
B. If the above requirements are not met the consignor, bailor, principal or other shall be deemed a seller of such property to the agent, consignee, bailee, factor or auctioneer.
C. For purposes of this subsection, an agent is a person who acts under the direction and control of the principal in procuring services on behalf of the principal that the person could not itself render or supply. Amounts received by an agent for the account of its principal as advances or reimbursements are exempted from the measure of the tax only when the agent is not primarily or secondarily liable to pay for the services procured. Any person who claims to be acting merely as agent in obtaining services for a principal will have such claim recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:
    1. The books and records of the agent show that the services were obtained in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the actual principal for whom the purchase was made.
    2. The books and records show the amount of the service that was obtained for the principal, the amount of commissions and any other income derived by the agent for acting as such. Amounts received from the principal as advances and reimbursements must not be reflected as the agent's income on any of the agent's books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.050 Imposition of the tax - tax or fee levied.
A. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, there is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within the City, whether the person’s office or place of business be within or without the City. The tax shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, as follows:
    1. Upon every person engaging within the City in business as an extractor; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including by-products, extracted within the city for sale or for commercial or industrial use, multiplied by the rate of 2 tenths of one percent (.002). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including by-products, so extracted, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the City.
    2. Upon every person engaging within the City in business as a manufacturer, as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including by-products, manufactured within the city, multiplied by the rate of 2 tenths of one percent (.002). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including by-products, so manufactured, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the City.
    3. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales at wholesale, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of 3 tenths of one percent (.003).
    4. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales at retail, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business, without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of 3 tenths of one percent (.003).
    5. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of (i) printing, (ii) both printing and publishing newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, music, and other printed items, (iii) publishing newspapers, magazines and periodicals, (iv) extracting for hire, and (v) processing for hire; as to such persons, the amount of tax on such business shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of 3 tenths of one percent (.003).
    6. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales of retail services; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of sales multiplied by the rate of 3.75 tenths of one percent (.00375).
    7. Upon every other person engaging within the City in any business activity other than or in addition to those enumerated in the above subsections; as to such persons, the amount of tax on account of such activities shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of 3 tenths of one percent (.003). This subsection includes, among others, and without limiting the scope hereof (whether or not title to material used in the performance of such business passes to another by accession, merger or other than by outright sale), persons engaged in the business of developing, or producing custom software or of customizing canned software, producing royalties or commissions, and persons engaged in the business of rendering any type of service which does not constitute a sale at retail, a sale at wholesale, or a retail service.
B. The gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, from all activities conducted within the City during any calendar year is equal to or less than $20,000, or is equal to or less than $5,000 during any quarter if on a quarterly reporting basis.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.070 Multiple activities credit when activities take place in one or more cities with eligible gross receipt taxes.
A. Persons who engage in business activities that are within the purview of two (2) or more subsections of .050 shall be taxable under each applicable subsection.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if imposition of the City's tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the City's tax, and still apply the City tax to as much of the taxpayer's activities as may be subject to the City's taxing authority.
C. To take the credit authorized by this section, a taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which the credit is applied.
D. Credit for persons that sell in the City products that they extract or manufacture. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid (a) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold in the City, and (b) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the ingredients used in the products, sold in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.
E. Credit for persons that manufacture products in the City using ingredients they extract. Persons taxable under the manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts tax paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the products manufactured in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing of those products.
F. Credit for persons that sell within the City products that they print, or publish and print. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the printing and publishing, of the products sold within the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.075 Deductions to prevent multiple taxation of manufacturing activities and prior to January 1, 2008, transactions involving more than one city with an eligible gross receipts tax.
A. Amounts subject to an eligible gross receipts tax in another city that also maintains nexus over the same activity. For taxes due prior to January 1, 2008, a taxpayer that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax on the same activity in more than one jurisdiction may be entitled to a deduction as follows:
    1. A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax, with respect to a sale of goods or services, to a jurisdiction in which the goods are delivered or the services are provided may deduct an amount equal to the gross receipts used to measure that tax from the measure of the tax owed to the City.
    2. Notwithstanding the above, a person that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax in more than one jurisdiction on the gross income derived from intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall assign those gross receipts to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located).
    3. A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax on the privilege of accepting or executing a contract with another city may deduct an amount equal to the contract price used to measure the tax due to the other city from the measure of the tax owed to the City.
B. A person manufacturing products within the City using products manufactured by the same person outside the City may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax the value of products manufactured outside the City and included in the measure of an eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction with respect to manufacturing such products.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.076 Assignment of gross income derived from intangibles.
Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located).
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.077 Allocation and apportionment of income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.
Gross income, other than persons subject to the provisions of chapter 82.14A RCW, shall be allocated and apportioned as follows:
A. Gross income derived from all activities other than those taxed as service or royalties under 5.03.050(1) (g) shall be allocated to the location where the activity takes place.
B. In the case of sales of tangible personal property, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs.
C. In the case of sales of digital products, the activity takes place where delivery to the buyer occurs. The delivery of digital products will be deemed to occur at:
    1. The seller's place of business if the purchaser receives the digital product at the seller's place of business;
    2. If not received at the seller's place of business, the location where the purchaser or the purchaser's donee, designated as such by the purchaser, receives the digital product, including the location indicated by instructions for delivery to the purchaser or donee, known to the seller;
    3. If the location where the purchaser or the purchaser's done receives the digital product is not known, the purchaser's address maintained in the ordinary course of the seller's business when use of this address does not constitute bad faith;
    4. If no address for the purchaser is maintained in the ordinary course of the seller's business, the purchaser's address obtained during the consummation of the sale, including the address of a purchaser's payment instrument, if no other address is available, when use of this address does not constitute bad faith; and
    5. If no address for the purchaser is obtained during the consummation of the sale, the address where the digital good or digital code is first made available for transmission by the seller or the address from which the digital automated service or service described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) or (6)(b) was provided, disregarding for these purposes any location that merely provided the digital transfer of the product sold.
D. If none of the methods in subsection 5.03.077(C) for determining where the delivery of digital products occurs are available after a good faith effort by the taxpayer to apply the methods provided in subsection 5.03.077(C), then the city and the taxpayer may mutually agree to employ any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products. The taxpayer will be responsible for petitioning the city to use an alternative method under this subsection. The city may employ an alternative method for allocating the income from the sale of digital products if the methods provided in subsection 5.03.077(C) are not available and the taxpayer and the city are unable to mutually agree on an alternative method to effectuate an equitable allocation of income from the sale of digital products.
E. For purposes of subsection 5.03.077(C), "Receive" has the same meaning as in RCW 82.32.730.
F. Gross income derived from activities taxed as services and other activities taxed under 5.03.050(1) (g) shall be apportioned to the city by multiplying apportionable income by a fraction, the numerator of which is the payroll factor plus the service-income factor and the denominator of which is two.
    1. The payroll factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total amount paid in the city during the tax period by the taxpayer for compensation and the denominator of which is the total compensation paid everywhere during the tax period. Compensation is paid in the city if:
        a. The individual is primarily assigned within the city;
        b. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period and the employee performs fifty percent or more of his or her service for the tax period in the city; or
        c. The individual is not primarily assigned to any place of business for the tax period, the individual does not perform fifty percent or more of his or her service in any city and the employee resides in the city.
    2. The service income factor is a fraction, the numerator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer in the city during the tax period, and the denominator of which is the total service income of the taxpayer everywhere during the tax period. Service income is in the city if:
        a. The customer location is in the city; or
        b. The income-producing activity is performed in more than one location and a greater proportion of the service-income-producing activity is performed in the city than in any other location, based on costs of performance, and the taxpayer is not taxable at the customer location; or
        c. The service-income-producing activity is performed within the city, and the taxpayer is not taxable in the customer location.
    3. If the allocation and apportionment provisions of this subsection do not fairly represent the extent of the taxpayer's business activity in the city or cities in which the taxpayer does business, the taxpayer may petition for or the tax administrators may jointly require, in respect to all or any part of the taxpayer's business activity, that one of the following methods be used jointly by the cities to allocate or apportion gross income, if reasonable:
        a. Separate accounting;
        b. The use of a single factor;
        c. The inclusion of one or more additional factors that will fairly represent the taxpayer's business activity in the city; or
        d. The employment of any other method to effectuate an equitable allocation and apportionment of the taxpayer's income.
G. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.
    1. "Apportionable income" means the gross income of the business taxable under the service classifications of a city's gross receipts tax, including income received from activities outside the city if the income would be taxable under the service classification if received from activities within the city, less any exemptions or deductions available.
    2. "Compensation" means wages, salaries, commissions, and any other form of remuneration paid to individuals for personal services that are or would be included in the individual's gross income under the federal internal revenue code.
    3. "Individual" means any individual who, under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship, has the status of an employee of that taxpayer.
    4. "Customer location" means the city or unincorporated area of a county where the majority of the contacts between the taxpayer and the customer take place.
    5. "Primarily assigned" means the business location of the taxpayer where the individual performs his or her duties.
    6. "Service-taxable income" or "service income" means gross income of the business subject to tax under either the service or royalty classification.
    7. "Tax period" means the calendar year during which tax liability is accrued. If taxes are reported by a taxpayer on a basis more frequent than once per year, taxpayers shall calculate the factors for the previous calendar year for reporting in the current calendar year and correct the reporting for the previous year when the factors are calculated for that year, but not later than the end of the first quarter of the following year.
    8. "Taxable in the customer location" means either that a taxpayer is subject to a gross receipts tax in the customer location for the privilege of doing business, or that the government where the customer is located has the authority to subject the taxpayer to gross receipts tax regardless of whether, in fact, the government does so.
H. Assignment or apportionment of revenue under this Section shall be made in accordance with and in full compliance with the provisions of the interstate commerce clause of the United States Constitution where applicable.
(Ord. 6540, Amended, 12/26/2012; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.078 Allocation and apportionment of printing and publishing income when activities take place in more than one jurisdiction.
Notwithstanding RCW 35.102.130, effective January 1, 2008, gross income from the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, shall be allocated to the principal place in this state from which the taxpayer's business is directed or managed. As used in this section, the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, have the same meanings as attributed to those terms in RCW 82.04.280(1) by the department of revenue.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.090 Exemptions.
A. Non-profit corporations or non-profit organizations. This chapter shall not apply to non-profit organizations exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(C) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, except with respect to retail sales of such persons.
B. Health maintenance organization, health care service contractor, certified health plan. This chapter does not apply to any health maintenance organization, health care service contractor, or certified health plan in respect to premiums or prepayments that are taxable under RCW 48.14.0201.
C. Public utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically imposed under the provisions of chapter 3.76 AMC (utility tax).
D. Investments - dividends from subsidiary corporations. This chapter shall not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its subsidiary corporations.
E. International banking facilities. This chapter shall not apply to the gross receipts of an international banking facility. As used in this subsection, an "international banking facility" means a facility represented by a set of asset and liability accounts segregated on the books and records of a commercial bank, the principal office of which is located in this state, and which is incorporated and doing business under the laws of the United States or of this state, a United States branch or agency of a foreign bank, an Edge corporation organized under Section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 United States Code 611-631, or an Agreement corporation having an agreement or undertaking with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 United States Code 601-604(a), that includes only international banking facility time deposits (as defined in subsection (a)(2) of Section 204.8 of Regulation D (12 CFR Part 204), as promulgated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), and international banking facility extensions of credit (as defined in subsection (a)(3) of Section 204.8 of Regulation D).
F. Insurance business. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by any person who is an insurer or their appointed insurance producer upon which a tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to RCW 48.14.020, and provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety, or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting contractor.
G. Farmers - agriculture. This chapter shall not apply to any farmer in respect to amounts received from selling fruits, vegetables, berries, butter, eggs, fish, milk poultry, meats or any other agricultural product that is raised, caught, produced, or manufactured by such persons.
H. Athletic exhibitions. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting boxing contests and sparring or wrestling matches and exhibitions for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the State Boxing Commission.
I. Racing. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting race meets for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the Washington State Horse Racing Commission.
J. Ride sharing. This chapter does not apply to any funds received in the course of commuter ride sharing or ride sharing for persons with special transportation needs in accordance with RCW 46.74.010.
K. Employees. 
    1. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the person’s employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of employee shall include those persons that are defined in the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended.
    2. A booth renter is an independent contractor for purposes of this chapter.
L. Amounts derived from sale of real estate. This chapter shall not apply to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest or similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or longer.
M. Mortgage brokers' third-party provider services trust accounts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage brokers for the payment of third-party costs if the accounts are operated in a manner consistent with RCW 19.146.050 and any rules adopted by the director of financial institutions.
N. Amounts derived from manufacturing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel. This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or distributing motor vehicle fuel, as the term "motor vehicle fuel" is defined in RCW 82.36.010 and exempt under RCW 82.36.440, provided that any fuel not subjected to the state fuel excise tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable under this chapter.
O. Amounts derived from liquor, and the sale or distribution of liquor. This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010 and exempt in RCW 66.08.120.
P. Casual and isolated sales. This chapter shall not apply to the gross proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.
O. Accommodation sales. This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of selling such property where (1) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article and (2) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within fourteen days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the seller.
P. Taxes collected as trust funds. This chapter shall not apply to amounts collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third party obligations to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax.
(Ord. 6540, Amended, 12/26/2012; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.100 Deductions.
In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the following items:
A. Compensation from public entities for health or social welfare services - exception. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts received from the United States or any instrumentality thereof or from the State of Washington or any municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof as compensation for, or to support, health or social welfare services rendered by a health or social welfare organization (as defined in RCW 82.04.431) or by a municipal corporation or political subdivision, except deductions are not allowed under this subsection for amounts that are received under an employee benefit plan. For purposes of this subsection, "employee benefit plan" includes the military benefits program authorized in 10 USC Sec. 1071 et seq., as amended, or amounts payable pursuant thereto.
B. Interest on investments or loans secured by mortgages or deeds of trust. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on non-transient residential properties.
C. Interest on obligations of the state, its political subdivisions, and municipal corporations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest paid on all obligations of the State of Washington, its political subdivisions, and municipal corporations organized pursuant to the laws thereof.
D. Interest on loans to farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, or their cooperatives. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts derived as interest on loans to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, or their cooperatives by a lending institution which is owned exclusively by its borrowers or members and which is engaged solely in the business of making loans and providing finance-related services to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, their cooperatives, rural residents for housing, or persons engaged in furnishing farm-related or aquatic-related services to these individuals or entities.
E. Receipts from tangible personal property delivered outside the State. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer’s representative at a location outside the State of Washington.
F. Cash discount taken by purchaser. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of this tax, have been computed according to the "value of product" provisions.
G. Credit losses of accrual basis taxpayers. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis.
H. Repair, maintenance, replacement, etc., of residential structures and commonly held property - eligible organizations. 
    1. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts used solely for repair, maintenance, replacement, management, or improvement of the residential structures and commonly held property, but excluding property where fees or charges are made for use by the public who are not guests accompanied by a member, which are derived by:
        a. A cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership from a person who resides in a structure owned by the cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership;
        b. An association of owners of property as defined in RCW 64.32.010, as now or hereafter amended, from a person who is an apartment owner as defined in RCW 64.32.010; or
        c. An association of owners of residential property from a person who is a member of the association. "Association of owners of residential property" means any organization of all the owners of residential property in a defined area who all hold the same property in common within the area.
    2. For the purposes of this subsection "commonly held property" includes areas required for common access such as reception areas, halls, stairways, parking, etc., and may include recreation rooms, swimming pools and small parks or recreation areas; but is not intended to include more grounds than are normally required in a residential area, or to include such extensive areas as required for golf courses, campgrounds, hiking and riding areas, boating areas, etc.
    3. To qualify for the deductions under this subsection:
        a. The salary or compensation paid to officers, managers, or employees must be only for actual services rendered and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the county wherein the property is located;
        b. Dues, fees, or assessments in excess of amounts needed for the purposes for which the deduction is allowed must be rebated to the members of the association;
        c. Assets of the association or organization must be distributable to all members and must not inure to the benefit of any single member or group of members.
I. Sales at wholesale or retail of precious metal bullion and monetized bullion. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from the sale at wholesale or retail of precious metal bullion and monetized bullion. However, no deduction is allowed on amounts received as commissions upon transactions for the accounts of customers over and above the amount paid to other dealers associated in such transactions, and no deduction or offset is allowed against such commissions on account of salaries or commissions paid to salesmen or other employees.
J. Amounts representing rental of real estate for boarding homes. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts representing the value of the rental of real estate for "boarding homes." To qualify for the deduction, the boarding home must meet the definition of "boarding home, and licensed by the State of Washington under RCW 18.20. The deduction shall be in the amount of twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross monthly billing when the boarder has resided within the boarding home for longer than thirty (30) days.
K. Radio and television broadcasting - advertising agency fees - national, regional, and network advertising - interstate allocations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by radio and television broadcasters amounts representing the following:
    1. advertising agencies' fees when such fees or allowances are shown as a discount or price reduction in the billing or that the billing is on a net basis, i.e., less the discount;
    2. actual gross receipts from national network, and regional advertising or a "standard deduction" as provided by RCW 82.04.280; and
    3. local advertising revenue that represent advertising which is intended to reach potential customers of the advertiser who are located outside the State of Washington. The Director may issue a rule that provides detailed guidance as to how these deductions are to be calculated.
L. Constitutional prohibitions. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the State of Washington or the Constitution of the United States.
M. Receipts From the Sale of Tangible Personal Property and Retail Services Delivered Outside the City but Within Washington. Effective January 1, 2008, amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from the sale of tangible personal property delivered to the buyer or the buyer’s representative outside the City but within the State of Washington may be deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or wholesaling classification.
N. Professional employer services. In computing the tax, a professional employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross income of the business derived from performing professional employer services that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits , workers' compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement.
O. Interest on investments or loans secured by mortgages or deeds of trust. In computing tax, to the extent permitted by Chapter 82.14A RCW, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on non-transient residential properties.
enefits, workers' compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement.
(Ord. 6540, Amended, 12/26/2012; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.120 Tax part of overhead.
It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the purchasers or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of doing business of such persons.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.03.130 Severability clause.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

Chapter 5.06 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL BUSINESS LICENSE

Sections:
5.06.010     Purpose.
5.06.020     Definitions.
5.06.030     Scope.
5.06.040     Residential rental business license requirement.
5.06.050     Inspection required.
5.06.060     Inspection consent.
5.06.070     Inspection checklist.
5.06.080     Deficiencies.
5.06.090     Violations.
5.06.100     Reinspections.
5.06.110     Notice of nonissuance of certificate of compliance.
5.06.120     Contents of certificate of compliance.
5.06.130     Certificate of compliance validity and renewal.
5.06.140     Notice.
5.06.150     Authority.
5.06.160     Administrative regulations.
5.06.170     Complaint-based inspections.
5.06.180     Voluntary inspection requests.
5.06.190     Penalties.
5.06.200     Appeal.
5.06.210     Annual review and report.
5.06.220     Immediate health and safety threats.
5.06.230     No warranty by city.

5.06.010 Purpose.
The city council finds that the establishment of a residential rental business license and inspection program for rental units is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring the proper maintenance of such housing, by identifying and requiring correction of substandard housing conditions and by preventing conditions of deterioration and blight that could adversely impact the quality of life in the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.020 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted using the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
A. “Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means a unit that meets the requirements of Section 17.04.070.
B. “Applicable laws” include, but are not limited to, the city’s zoning ordinance, the city’s rental registration and inspection ordinance and other city ordinances and other laws or regulations relating to the health and safety of city residents or the general public.
C. “Certificate of compliance” means the certificate issued by the city evidencing compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A certificate of compliance is required before a unit can be rented.
D. “Code official” means the department of community development director or his/her designee.
E. “City” means the city of Aberdeen, Washington.
F. “Deficiency” means any failure by a rental unit to comply with applicable laws.
G. “Department” means the city of Aberdeen department of community development.
H. “Inspection checklist” means the document submitted to the city as the result of an inspection conducted by an inspector which shows the true condition of the unit. An inspection checklist must be signed and dated by the inspector.
I. “Inspector” means:
    1. A city building code inspector;
    2. A city code enforcement officer;
    3. A private inspector, approved by the city upon evidence of at least one (1) of the following credentials: A.A.C.E. property maintenance and housing inspector certification, I.C.C. property maintenance and house inspector certification or I.C.C. residential building code inspector;
    4. A Washington State licensed architect; or
    5. A Washington State licensed home inspector.
J. “Lease” means any agreement that gives rise to relationship of landlord and tenant.
K. “Noncity inspector” means any inspector meeting the criteria in this section who is not a city code official.
L. “Occupant” means an individual, partnership, corporation or association or agent of any of them lawfully residing in a unit.
M. “Owner” means the owner of record as shown on the last Grays Harbor County tax assessment roll or such owner’s authorized agent.
N. “Rental unit” means a unit occupied or leased by a tenant.
O. “Single-family residence” means a building, modular home, or new manufactured home designed to contain no more than one (1) dwelling unit, plus one (1) accessory dwelling unit.
P. “Tenant” means an adult person granted temporary use of a rental unit pursuant to a lease or rental agreement with the owner of the rental unit.
Q. “Unit” means any structure or part of a structure which is used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one (1) or more persons, including, but not limited to, single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, four-plexes, multifamily dwellings, apartment buildings, condominiums, mobile homes and similar living accommodations.
R. “Unit unavailable for rent” means a unit whose owner has filed with the director a statement signed under penalty of perjury that such unit is not offered or available for rent as a rental unit and that, prior to offering or making the unit available as a rental unit, the owner will apply or reapply for a residential rental business license and comply with any applicable administrative regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.030 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all rental units, with the exception of:
A. Owner-occupied rental units;
B. Units unavailable for rent;
C. Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns or tourist homes;
D. Housing accommodations in retirement or nursing homes;
E. Housing accommodations in any hospital, state-licensed community care facility, convent, monastery or other facility occupied exclusively by members of a religious order, or an extended medical care facility;
F. Housing accommodations that a government unit, agency or authority owns, operates or manages, or which are specifically exempted from municipal regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation. This exception shall not apply once the governmental ownership, operation or management regulation is discontinued.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.040 Residential rental business license requirement.
A. Every rental unit owner shall obtain an annual residential rental business license, to be issued pursuant to this chapter, prior to operating, leasing, or causing to be leased a rental unit. Rental unit owners must file a written application annually with the director covering each rental unit to be leased. Each rental unit and each unit unavailable for rent must be separately identified in the application. Multiple rental units owned and operated by the same business entity on more than one (1) premises may be included in a single license. To be considered for approval, residential rental business license application must be completed and include:
    1. Completed and signed residential rental business license application provided by the city.
    2. Appropriate application fee as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. Late fees will be due for applications filed after March 1st.
B. Failure to obtain a residential rental business license will result in the inability to rent the unit.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.050 Inspection required.
The property owner is responsible for obtaining an inspection of each rental unit and submitting the inspection checklist to the code official no later than September 30th of the year the certificate of compliance expires. When a unit changes from owner occupancy to a rental, the inspection must occur before the unit is occupied by the tenant. An inspection is not required the year a certificate of occupancy is issued for a newly constructed building and thereafter for a period of five (5) years. After the five (5) year period expires, the building will be inspected according to the quadrant in which it is located. Owners of rental properties may utilize a city inspector or a noncity inspector, as defined herein. The city shall provide the inspection checklist to the owner with the application form. The code official shall issue a certificate of compliance for rental units that comply with applicable laws based on a submitted inspection checklist. If using a noncity inspector, the owner shall be responsible for making the inspection arrangements with the noncity inspector.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.060 Inspection consent.
Owners shall make every effort to make units available for inspection pursuant to this chapter. If the owner fails to arrange for a noncity inspector and/or the owner or occupants do not consent to city entry for inspection, the code official may not force or otherwise attempt to gain entry except in accordance with a court warrant authorizing entry for the purpose of inspection.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.070 Inspection checklist.
As a condition of the issuance of a residential rental business license, the owner shall provide a completed inspection checklist signed by the inspector showing the current condition of the rental unit. The code official shall issue a certificate of compliance upon receipt of the inspection results indicating compliance with the applicable laws pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.080 Deficiencies.
The inspector shall provide the owner and the city written notice of each deficiency disclosed by inspection. Repairs required to bring the unit into compliance are the responsibility of the owner. Rental units shall be subject to reinspections pursuant to Section 5.06.100.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.090 Violations.
If an inspection of a rental unit conducted pursuant to this chapter reveals deficiencies on the inspection checklist, the violation must be cured within thirty (30) days. If, upon reinspection, the unit still reveals deficiencies, the city’s code official may seek any remedies permitted by law including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of a residential rental business license for that unit pursuant to this title, and abatement proceedings pursuant to Chapter 15.50. The city may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any act or practice that constitutes or will constitute a violation of any regulation under this chapter.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.100 Reinspections.
A rental unit that exhibits deficiencies on the inspection checklist shall be subject to a reinspection. The first reinspection is not subject to a reinspection fee. More than one (1) reinspection trip by a city inspector will be subject to additional reinspection fees as set forth in the city’s fee schedule.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.110 Notice of nonissuance of certificate of compliance.
If, upon reinspection, the inspector determines a rental unit is unfit for occupancy by failing an inspection, the city shall provide the owner with written notice of nonissuance of a certificate of compliance. Such notice shall specify the date of the nonissuance determination, the rental unit address, the name of the owner, the name of the inspector and the specific reasons for the nonissuance determination. Failure to obtain a certificate of compliance will result in the nonissuance or revocation of the rental business license for that unit. The unit shall be posted unfit for occupancy. Tenants, if any, shall be required to vacate.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.120 Contents of certificate of compliance.
The certificate of compliance shall specify the date of issuance, the rental unit address, the name of the owner to whom the certificate is issued, the expiration date of the certificate, and an indication the rental unit complies with applicable laws as far as could be determined by inspection.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.130 Certificate of compliance validity and renewal.
Certificates of compliance expire three (3) years from the date of issuance by the city. Failure to renew the certificate of compliance every three (3) years shall result in the nonissuance or revocation of the rental business license for that unit.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.140 Notice.
All notices issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide the address and phone number where additional information concerning the inspection may be obtained. Notice to the owner and occupants shall be mailed by first-class mail to the owner’s last known address as it appears in the records of the County Assessor or other address provided by the owner.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.150 Authority.
The code official shall be responsible for enforcement and administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.160 Administrative regulations.
The code official is authorized and directed to promulgate administrative regulations pertaining to the implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.170 Complaint-based inspections.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent or restrict the authority of the city’s code official to inspect any unit or premises thereof in response to a complaint alleging code violations or other violations of law at such unit and to pursue all code enforcement remedies available under this code or other laws following such a complaint-based inspection of a unit.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.180 Voluntary inspection requests.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an owner from voluntarily requesting an inspection to determine whether a rental unit complies with applicable laws, even though such inspection requests shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the provisions governing applications and fees.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.190 Penalties.
A. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as prescribed in Chapter 15.50 and the issuance of a notice of violation in accordance with Section 15.50.160.
B. Any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate health or safety threat shall constitute a public nuisance.
C. In addition to penalties, the city shall not issue or shall revoke the unit’s business license and require that the unit be vacated until the unit is brought into compliance.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.200 Appeal.
A. The owner may appeal the nonissuance of a certificate of compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within ten (10) calendar days following receipt of the notice of nonissuance. The notice of appeal must state the grounds for appeal, including a detailed explanation of why the decision was incorrect. The notice of appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee in accordance with the fee scheduled adopted by resolution of the city council. A timely notice of appeal shall stay the effect of the notice of nonissuance until the city’s building code commission or other hearing body issues a written decision on the appeal.
B. Upon timely filing of a notice of appeal, the director shall schedule a hearing on the appeal before the city’s building code commission or other hearing body. The hearing shall be conducted no later than thirty (30) business days from the date of the notice of appeal, unless an extension is agreed to by the appellant or otherwise ordered by the building code commission or other hearing body for good cause shown. Notice of the hearing will be mailed to the owner.
C. The hearing shall be de novo. The decision of the building code commission or other hearing body shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant. The building code commission or other hearing body may affirm, reverse or modify the director’s decision.
D. Within twenty (20) business days, excluding holidays recognized by the city of Aberdeen, from the date of the hearing on an appeal under this section the building code commission or other hearing body shall issue a written decision, which shall set forth the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.210 Annual review and report.
The code official shall conduct an annual review of the residential rental business license and inspection program and shall submit an annual report of the program’s effectiveness to the city council.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.220 Immediate health and safety threats.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city’s ability to inspect properties and issue citations for property-related conditions that may constitute an immediate health or safety threat.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

5.06.230 No warranty by city.
By enacting and undertaking to enforce this program, the city, city council, its agents and employees do not warrant or guarantee the safety, fitness or suitability of any dwelling in the city or any unit inspected under this program. Owners and occupants should take whatever steps they deem appropriate to protect their interests, health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 6634 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

Chapter 5.07 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR BUSINESS & OCCUPATION TAX

Sections:
5.07.010     Purpose.
5.07.015     Application of chapter stated.
5.07.020     Definitions.
5.07.025     Defninitions - references to Chapter 82.32 RCW.
5.07.030     Registration/license certificates.
5.07.040     When due and payable - Reporting periods - Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns - Threshold provisions or Relief from filing requirements - Computing time periods - Failure to file returns.
5.07.050     Payment methods - Mailing returns or remittances - Time extensions - Deposits - Recording payments - Payment must accompany return - NSF checks.
5.07.060     Records to be preserved - Examination - Estoppel to question assessment.
5.07.070     Accounting methods.
5.07.080     Public work contracts - Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.
5.07.090     Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty - Interest.
5.07.095     Time in which assessment may be made.
5.07.100     Over payment of tax, penalty, or interest - Credit or refund - Interest rate - Statute of limitations.
5.07.110     Late payment - Disregard of written instructions - Evasion - Penalties.
5.07.120     Cancellation of penalties.
5.07.130     Taxpayer quitting butiness - Liability of successor.
5.07.140     Administrative appeal - Hearing before city council.
5.07.150     Judicial Review of City Council Decision.
5.07.160     Director to make rules.
5.07.170     Ancillary allocation authority of Director.
5.07.180     Mailing of notices.
5.07.190     Tax declared additional.
5.07.200     Public disclosure - Confidentiality - Information sharing.
5.07.210     Tax constitutes debt.
5.07.220     Unlawful actions - Violation - Penalties.
5.07.230     Suspension or revocation of business license.
5.07.240     Closing agreement provisions.
5.07.250     Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.
5.07.260     Severability.

5.07.010 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall supplement, clarify and apply with full force and effect to all other Title Five provisions, except where a section in this chapter shall contradict or conflict with a provision already set forth in another chapter.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.015 Application of chapter stated.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the taxes imposed under chapters 5.03 and under other titles, chapters, and sections in such manner and to such extent as indicated in each such title, chapter or section.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.020 Definitions.
The definitions contained in chapter 5.03 shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions shall apply:
"Reporting period." "Reporting period" means:
A. A one-month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or
B. A three-month period beginning the first day of January, April, July or October of each year (quarterly); or
C. A twelve-month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual).
"Return." "Return" means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City and that has a statutorily defined due date.
"Successor." "Successor" means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.
"Tax year," "taxable year." "Tax year" or "taxable year" means the calendar year.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.025 Defninitions - references to Chapter 82.32 RCW.
Where provisions of Chapter 82.32 RCW are incorporated in 5.07.090 of this Title, "Department" as used in the RCW shall refer to the "Director" as defined in 5.03.030 and "warrant" as used in the RCW shall mean "citation or criminal complaint."
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.030 Registration/license certificates.
Registration and license requirements are contained in Chapter 5.10.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.040 When due and payable - Reporting periods - Monthly, quarterly, and annual returns - Threshold provisions or Relief from filing requirements - Computing time periods - Failure to file returns.
A. Other than any annual license fee or registration fee assessed under this chapter, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. At the Director's discretion, businesses may be assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period depending on the tax amount owing or type of tax. Tax payments are due on or before the last day of the next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the return.
B. Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a return on forms as prescribed by the Director. The return shall be signed by the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer. The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in the return is complete and true.
C. Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not any tax is owed.
D. For purposes of the tax imposed by chapter 5.03 any person whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, subject to tax after all allowable deductions, is equal to or less than Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) in the current quarter, shall file a return, declare no tax due on their return, and submit the return to the Director. The gross receipts and deduction amounts shall be entered on the tax return even though no tax may be due.
E. A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity.
F. Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or City or Federal legal holiday, in which case the last day of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or City or Federal legal holiday.
G. If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make a return as and when required in this chapter, the Director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the Director’s estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the City by the taxpayer. The Director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.050 Payment methods - Mailing returns or remittances - Time extensions - Deposits - Recording payments - Payment must accompany return - NSF checks.
A. Taxes shall be paid to the Director in United States currency by bank draft, certified check, cashier's check, personal check, money order, cash, or by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic payment is authorized by the Director. If payment so received is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer, by whom such payment is tendered, shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the Director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the full amount due.
B. A return or remittance that is transmitted to the City by United States mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation mark stamped by the Post Office upon the envelope containing it. The Director may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A return or remittance which is transmitted to the City electronically shall be deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the Director.
C. If a written request is received prior to the due date, the Director, for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and file returns.
D. The Director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received or refunded. The Director shall apply payments first against all penalties and interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the taxpayer.
E. For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this chapter.
F. Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a "non-sufficient funds" (NSF) charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is received by the Director. Any license issued upon payment with a NSF check will be considered void, and shall be returned to the Director. No license shall be reissued until payment (including the twenty dollars ($20.00) NSF fee) is received.
G. The Director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or fees, when and as due under this chapter.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.060 Records to be preserved - Examination - Estoppel to question assessment.
Every person liable for any fee or tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of five (5) years after filing a tax return, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which the person may be liable; which records shall include copies of all federal income tax and state tax returns and reports made by the person. All books, records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise, and other data including federal income tax and state tax returns and reports shall be open for examination at any time by the Director or its duly authorized agent. Every person’s business premises shall be open for inspection or examination by the Director or a duly authorized agent.
A. If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the City, it shall be sufficient if such person (a) produces within the City such books and records as may be required by the Director, or (b) bears the cost of examination by the Director's agent at the place where such books and records are kept; provided that the person electing to bear such cost shall pay in advance to the Director the estimated amount thereof including round-trip fare, lodging, meals and incidental expenses, subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.
B. Any person who fails, or refuses a Department request, to provide or make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business premises, shall be forever barred from questioning in any court action, the correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the City for any period for which such records have not been provided, made available or kept and preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business premises has been denied. The Director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the City by the taxpayer. The Director shall notify the taxpayer by mail the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.070 Accounting methods.
A. A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer's books of account are kept on a cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual method.
B. The taxes imposed and the returns required hereunder shall be upon a calendar year basis.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.080 Public work contracts - Payment of fee and tax before final payment for work.
The Director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any public work contract for the City, require such person to pay in full all license fees or taxes due under this title from such person on account of such contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the Director a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the person in connection with said public work.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.090 Underpayment of tax, interest, or penalty - Interest.
A. If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained by the Director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due has been paid, the Director shall assess the additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The Director shall notify the person by mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or within such time as the Director may provide in writing.
B)(1. All fees, taxes and other amounts due the city of Aberdeen pursuant to this title prior to January 1, 2005, and not paid by the due date, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or any portion thereof, to be assessed by applying the rate to the amount due, or any portion thereof, from the first date the amount becomes due and unpaid through the effective date of this ordinance.
    2. For tax periods after December 31, 2004 the Director shall compute interest in accordance with RCW 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended.
    3. If 5.07.090 2(b) is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of this ordinance shall apply
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.095 Time in which assessment may be made.
The Director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes, penalties, or interest due more than four years after the close of the calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the Director may issue an assessment:
A. Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period commencing 10 years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the person was contacted in writing by the Director;
B. Against a person that has committed fraud or who misrepresented a material fact; or
C. Against a person that has executed a written waiver of such limitations.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.100 Over payment of tax, penalty, or interest - Credit or refund - Interest rate - Statute of limitations.
A. If, upon receipt of an application for a refund, or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer's records and tax returns, the Director determines that the amount of tax, penalty, or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be credited to the taxpayer's account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no refund or credit shall be made for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than four (4) years prior to the beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or examination of records is completed.
B. The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying for, or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to, the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the Director discovers that a refund or credit is due.
C. Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the Director and by the issuance of a City check or warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the City may provide.
D. Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner, as provided in subsection (3) of this section, upon the filing with the Director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.
E. 
    1. For tax periods prior to January 1, 2005 the Director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed at the rate of one percent per month.
    2. For tax periods after December 31, 2004 the Director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended.
    3. If 5.07.100(5)(b) is held to be invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.060 existing at the effective date of this ordinance shall apply
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.110 Late payment - Disregard of written instructions - Evasion - Penalties.
A. If payment of any tax due on a return to be filed by a taxpayer is not received by the Director by the due date, the Director shall add a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as it may be amended
B. If the Director determines that any tax has been substantially underpaid as defined in RCW 82.32.090(2), there shall be added a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(2), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
C. If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the Director for the collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest or penalties, there shall be added thereto a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
D. If the Director finds that a person has engaged in any business or performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person has not obtained from the Director a license as required by Section 5.10, the Director shall impose a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be Amended. No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection (4) if the person who has engaged in business without a license obtains a license prior to being notified by the Director of the need to be licensed.
E. If the Director determines that all or any part of a deficiency resulted from the taxpayer's failure to follow specific written tax reporting instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
F. If the Director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable, the Director shall assess a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as it may be amended.
G. The penalties imposed under subsections (1) through (5) above of this section can each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.
H. The Director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due.
I. For the purposes of this section, “return” means any document a person is required by the City of Aberdeen to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City, and that has a statutorily defined due date.
J. If incorporation into the City of Aberdeen code of future changes to RCW 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.090 existing at the time this ordinance is effective shall apply.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.120 Cancellation of penalties.
A. The Director may cancel any penalties imposed under subsections 5.07.110(1) if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay the tax was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. Willful neglect is presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was, nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, unable to file or pay by the due date. The Director has no authority to cancel any other penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in subsection (3).
B. A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the Director within 30 days after the date the Department mails the notice that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause determination. In all cases the burden of proving the facts rests upon the taxpayer.
C. The Director may cancel the penalties in subsections 5.07.110(1) one time if a person:
    1. Is not currently licensed and filing returns,
    2. Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax, and
    3. Obtained business licenses and filed past due tax returns within 30 days after being notified by the Department.
D. The Director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.130 Taxpayer quitting butiness - Liability of successor.
A. Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due.
B. Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the city from the taxpayer until such time as: a) the taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the City showing payment in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due, or b) more than six (6) months has passed since the successor notified the Director of the acquisition and the Director has not issued and notified the successor of an assessment.
C. Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due such successor from the taxpayer.
D. Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the Director of the acquisition, and the Department does not within six (6) months of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be liable for the tax.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.140 Administrative appeal - Hearing before city council.
A. Any person, except one who has failed to comply with section 5.07.060, aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the Director to be required under the provisions of this chapter, may pay the amount due and appeal from such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director within (21) days from the date written notice of such amount was mailed to the taxpayer. The city council shall, as soon as practical, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, and shall cause a notice of the time and place thereof to be delivered or mailed to the parties. The city council may refer the matter to a standing committee to conduct the hearing and report its decision to the city council. At such hearing, the appellant shall be entitled to be heard and to introduce evidence. The city council shall ascertain the correct amount of the fee or tax by resolution, or by adoption of a committee report, and the director shall notify the appellant thereof by mail, which amount, together with the costs of the appeal, if appellant is unsuccessful therein, shall be immediately due and payable.
B. The mayor or the chairman of any committee before which the appeal is to be heard may, by subpoena, require the attendance of any person, and may also require the production of any pertinent books and records. Any person served with such subpoena shall appear at the time and place administered by the chairman in charge of the hearing on appeal as to any matter required of him pertinent to the appeal, and it is unlawful to fail or refuse so to do.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.150 Judicial Review of City Council Decision.
Any person, except one who has failed to comply with section 5.07.060, having paid any tax as required and feeling aggrieved by the amount of the tax assessed, and after first exhausting the right of administrative appeal set forth in this chapter, may seek judicial review in the Grays Harbor County Superior Court within (21) days of the date of the decision of the city council. The taxpayer shall set forth the amount of the tax imposed upon the taxpayer that the taxpayer concedes to be the correct amount of tax and the reason why the tax imposed should be reduced or abated. The trial in the Superior Court shall be de novo in accordance with the laws of the State of Washington. The burden shall rest upon the taxpayer to prove that the tax paid by the taxpayer is incorrect, either in whole or in part, and to establish the correct amount of the tax.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.160 Director to make rules.
The Director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with, any such rule or regulation.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.170 Ancillary allocation authority of Director.
The Director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington cities which impose an "eligible gross receipts tax":
A. To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor employed by the City of Aberdeen, another city, or a contract auditor, provided, that such contract auditor's pay is not in any way based upon the amount of tax assessed;
B. To allocate or apportion in a manner that fairly reflects the gross receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities the gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts tax to more than one Washington city.
C. To apply the City's tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or place of business within the City and has paid tax on all gross income to another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided that the other city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived from contracts with the City.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.180 Mailing of notices.
Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer or licensee shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer or licensee as shown by the records of the Director. Failure of the taxpayer or licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer or licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the Director in writing about a change in the taxpayer's address.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.190 Tax declared additional.
The license fee and tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City of Aberdeen except as herein otherwise expressly provided.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.200 Public disclosure - Confidentiality - Information sharing.
A. For purposes of this section, unless a different meaning is clearly established by context, the following definitions apply:
    1. “Disclose” means to make known to any person in any manner a return or tax information.
    2. “Tax information” means:
        a. A taxpayer’s identity;
        b. The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer’s income, payments, receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax liability deficiencies, over assessments, or tax payments, whether taken from the taxpayer’s books and records or any other source;
        c. Whether the taxpayer’s return was, is being, or will be examined or subject to other investigation or processing; or
        d. Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the city with respect to the determination or the existance, or possible existence, of liability, or the amount thereof, of a person uncer Chapter 5.03 AMC for a tax, penalty, interest, fine, forfeiture, or other imposition, or offense. Data, material or documents that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable taxpayer do not constitute tax information under this section. Nothing in this chapter requires any person possessing data, material, or documents made confidential and privileged by this section to delete information from such data, material or documents so as to permit its disclosure.
    3. "City" means every office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other agency of the city of Aberdeen.
    4. "Taxpayer identity" means the taxpayer's name, address, telephone number, registration number, or any combination thereof, or any other information disclosing the identify of the taxpayer.
B. Returns and tax information are confidential and privileged, and except as authorized by this section, neither the Director nor any other person may disclose any return or tax information.
C. This section does not prohibit the Director from:
    1. Disclosing such return or tax information in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or an administrative proceeding:
        a. In respect of any tax imposed under Chapter 5.03 AMC if the taxpayer or its officer or other person liable under this title is a party in the proceeding; or
        b. In which the taxpayer about whom such return or tax information is sought and another state agency are adverse parties in the proceeding.
    2. Disclosing, subject to such requirements and conditions as the Director prescribes by rules adopted pursuant to AMC 5.07.160, such return or tax information regarding a taxpayer to such taxpayer or to such person or persons as that taxpayer may designate in a request for, or consent to, such disclosure, or to any other person, at the taxpayer's request, to the extent necessary to comply with a request for information or assistance made by the taxpayer to such other person. However, tax information not received from the taxpayer must not be so disclosed if the director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or litigation by any federal, state, or local government agency in connection with the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is contrary to any agreement entered into by the department that provides for the reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any court.
    3. Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns or reports or items thereof.
    4. Disclosing such return or tax information, for official purposes only, to the mayor or city attorney, or to any City agency, or to any member of the city council or their authorized designees dealing with matters of taxation, revenue, trade, commerce, the control of industry or the professions;
    5. Permitting the City’s records to be audited and examined by the proper state officer, his or her agents and employees;
    6. Disclosing any such return or tax information to a peace officer as defined in RCW 9A.04.110 or county prosecuting attorney, for official purposes. The disclosure may be made only in response to a search warrant, subpoena, or other court order, unless the disclosure is for the purpose of criminal tax enforcement. A peace officer or county prosecuting attorney who receives the return or tax information may disclose that return or tax information only for use in the investigation and a related court proceeding, or in the court proceeding for which the return or tax information originally was sought or where otherwise allowed to be disclosed under this Section;
    7. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the proper officer of the internal revenue service of the United States, the Canadian government or provincial governments of Canada, or to the proper officer of the tax department of any state or city or town or county, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the United States, Canada or its provincial governments, or of such other state or city or town or county, as the case may be, grants substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the City;
    8. Disclosing any such return or tax information to the United States department of justice, including the bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosives, the department of defense, the immigration and customs enforcement and the customs and border protection agencies of the United States department of homeland security, the United States coast guard, the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau of the United States department of treasury, and the United States department of transportation, or any authorized representative of these federal agencies or their successors, for official purposes;
    9. Publishing or otherwise disclosing the text of a written determination designated by the director as a precedent pursuant to RCW 82.32.410;
    10. Disclosing, in a manner that is not associated with other tax information, the taxpayer name, entity type, business address, mailing address, revenue tax registration numbers and the active/closed status of such registrations, state or local business license registration identification and the active/closed status and effective dates of such licenses, reseller permit numbers and the expiration date and status of such permits, North American industry classification system or standard industrial classification code of a taxpayer, and the dates of opening and closing of business. Except that this subsection may not be construed as giving authority to the City or any recipient to give, sell, or provide access to any list of taxpayers for any commercial purpose;
    11. Disclosing such return or tax information that is also maintained by another Washington state or local governmental agency as a public record available for inspection and copying under the provisions of chapter 42.56 RCW or is a document maintained by a court of record and is not otherwise prohibited from disclosure;
    12. Disclosing such return or tax information to the United States department of agriculture, or successor department or agency, for the limited purpose of investigating food stamp fraud by retailers;
    13. Disclosing to a financial institution, escrow company, or title company, in connection with specific real property that is the subject of a real estate transaction, current amounts due the CIty for a filed tax warrant, judgment, or lien against the real property;
    14. Disclosing to a person against whom the department has asserted liability as a successor under AMC 5.03.130 return or tax information pertaining to the specific business of the taxpayer to which the person has succeeded;
    15. Disclosing real estate excise tax affidavit forms filed under City’s real estate excise tax code [if applicable] in the possession of the City, including real estate excise tax affidavit forms for transactions exempt or otherwise not subject to tax;
    16. Disclosing such return or tax information to the court or hearing examiner in respect to the City's application for a subpoena if there is probable cause to believe that the records in possession of a third party will aid the Director in connection with its official duties under this title or a civil or criminal investigation.
D. The Director may disclose return or taxpayer information to a person under investigation or during any court or administrative proceeding against a person under investigation as provided in this subsection (4). The disclosure must be in connection with the department's official duties under this Title, or a civil or criminal investigation. The disclosure may occur only when the person under investigation and the person in possession of data, materials, or documents are parties to the return or tax information to be disclosed. The department may disclose return or tax information such as invoices, contracts, bills, statements, resale or exemption certificates, or checks. However, the department may not disclose general ledgers, sales or cash receipt journals, check registers, accounts receivable/payable ledgers, general journals, financial statements, expert's workpapers, income tax returns, state tax returns, tax return workpapers, or other similar data, materials, or documents.
    2. Before disclosure of any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4), the Director must, through written correspondence, inform the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The correspondence must clearly identify the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The Director may not disclose any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4) until the time period allowed in (c) of this subsection has expired or until the court has ruled on any challenge brought under (c) of this subsection.
    3. The person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed by the department has twenty days from the receipt of the written request required under (b) of this subsection to petition the superior court of the county in which the petitioner resides for injunctive relief. The court must limit or deny the request of the Director if the court determines that:
        a. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure are cumulative or duplicative, or are obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;
        b. The production of the data, materials, or documents sought would be unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the department, the amount in controversy, limitations on the petitioner's resources, and the importance of the issues at stake; or
        c. The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure contain trade secret information that, if disclosed, could harm the petitioner.
    4. The Director must reimburse reasonable expenses for the production of data, materials, or documents incurred by the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed.
    5. Requesting information under (b) of this subsection that may indicate that a taxpayer is under investigation does not constitute a disclosure of tax return or tax information under this section.
E. Service of a subpoena issued by the court or under Aberdeen Municipal Code provisions authorizing the issuance of subpoenas does not constitute a disclosure of return or tax information under this section. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary in this section, a person served with such subpoena may disclose the existence or content of the subpoena to that person's legal counsel.
F. Any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information in the course of his or her employment with the City and any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information as provided under subsection (3)(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (k) of this section, who discloses any such return or tax information to another person not entitled to knowledge of such return or tax information under the provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person guilty of such violation is an officer or employee of the city, such person must forfeit such office or employment and is incapable of holding any public office or employment in this city for a period of two years thereafter.
(Ord. 6540, Amended, 12/26/2012; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.210 Tax constitutes debt.
Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City of Aberdeen and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.220 Unlawful actions - Violation - Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person liable for taxes or fees under this title:
    1. To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this title or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the Director;
    2. To make any false statement on any license application or tax return;
    3. To aid or abet any person in any attempt to evade payment of a license fee or tax;
    4. To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena issued pursuant to this title;
    5. To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this title.
B. Violation of any of the provisions of this title is a gross misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a violation of this title may be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000, imprisonment not to exceed 364 days, or both fine and imprisonment. The penalties or punishments provided in this section shall be in addition to all other penalties provided by law.
C. Any person, or officer of a corporation, convicted of continuing to engage in business after the revocation of a license shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or imprisonment not to exceed 364 days, or both fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6581, Amended, 08/26/2015; Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.230 Suspension or revocation of business license.
A. The Director, or designee, shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this title, unless otherwise provided. The Director, or designee, shall notify such licensee in writing by certified mail of the suspension or revocation of his or her license and the grounds therefor. Any license issued under this title may be suspended or revoked based on one or more of the following grounds:
    1. The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact.
    2. The licensee has failed to comply with any provisions of this title.
    3. The licensee has failed to comply with any provisions of the municipal code.
    4. The licensee is in default in any payment of any license fee or tax under this title.
    5. The licensee or employee has been convicted of a crime involving the business.
B. Any licensee may, within twenty-one (21) days from the date that the suspension or revocation notice was mailed to the licensee, appeal from such suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal ("petition") setting forth the grounds therefor with the Director. The hearing date before the city council shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in this chapter. The city council shall set a date for hearing said appeal and notify the licensee by mail of the time and place of the hearing. After the hearing thereon the city council shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the suspension or revocation and reinstate the license, and may impose any terms upon the continuance of the license.
No suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall take effect until twenty-one (21) days after the mailing of the notice thereof by the Department, and if appeal is taken as herein prescribed the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the city council. All licenses which are suspended or revoked shall be surrendered to the City on the effective date of such suspension or revocation.
The decision of the city council shall be final. The licensee and/or the Department may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Grays Harbor County within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court.
C. Upon revocation of any license as provided in this subchapter no portion of the license fee shall be returned to the licensee.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.240 Closing agreement provisions.
The Director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by the Director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:
A. The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the agreement modified, by the Director or the taxpayer, and
B. In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit made in accordance therewith, shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.250 Charge-off of uncollectible taxes.
The Director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a taxpayer, if the Director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to be collected from the taxpayer.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

5.07.260 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 6456, Added, 12/27/2007)

Chapter 5.10 BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGISTRATION

Sections:
5.10.010     Purpose.
5.10.020     Definitions.
5.10.030     Business license required.
5.10.040     Nature and duration of license.
5.10.050     Application to be made prior to commencing business activity.
5.10.060     Each location to be licensed.
5.10.070     Application fee required.
5.10.080     Licenses not clearly defined.
5.10.090     Business license personal and nontransferable.
5.10.100     Address, name and other changes to application.
5.10.110     Director to make rules.
5.10.120     Temporary license - tax deposit required.
5.10.130     Revocation of business license.
5.10.140     Applicability of title to city's business activities.
5.10.150     Interstate and foreign commerce - not obstructed.
5.10.160     Use of public ways or places - restricted.
5.10.170     Solicitation in residential areas - restricted.
5.10.180     Payment of fees required before issuance of any permit by city's building department.
5.10.190     Carnivals, menageries and circuses.
5.10.195     Supplemental license fees - regulated businesses.
5.10.200     Merchant patrols and private detectives.
5.10.210     Taxicabs, taxi stands and taxicab drivers.

5.10.010 Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city of Aberdeen to grant licenses and regulate persons who transact business within the city by imposing such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary to maintain the peace, welfare and good order of the city.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.020 Definitions.
The definitions found in Chapters 5.03 AMC shall apply to this chapter unless otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context. Words or phrases used in this chapter that are not expressly defined shall be interpreted using the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
(Ord. 6581, Amended, 08/26/2015; Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.030 Business license required.
Before engaging in business in the city of Aberdeen, a person must apply for and obtain a city business license on forms provided by the finance director. Applicants shall apply for either an “annual” or “temporary” license depending upon the nature and intent of the business activity to be conducted. After receiving proper application and application fee(s), the finance director will issue a business license to the applicant. When any person shall maintain an office, place of business, or other business presence in the city of Aberdeen, or when any person shall by the use of signs, circulars, cards or newspapers advertise any business in the city, it shall be considered evidence of their liability under this title and they shall be required to comply with all provisions herein.
A. Each applicant shall be required to provide the following information on their business license application:
    1. For an annual license, the following information shall be required:
        a. The full name, address and telephone number of the person or business applying for the license;
        b. A complete description of the business or solicitation activity to be carried on within the city of Aberdeen;
        c. The full name, address, telephone number, driver’s license number and birth date of each owner or principal of the business;
        d. A local business address while the applicant is engaged in business in the city.
    2. For a temporary license the following information shall be required in addition to the information required in subsection (A)(1) of this section:
        a. The exact dates the applicant intends to engage in business in the city of Aberdeen;
        b. A list of all persons, sellers or employees of the business that will be acting on behalf of the applicant while engaging in business in the city of Aberdeen, including the full name, address, driver’s license number, birthdate, and personal description for each;
        c. A statement of any prior criminal convictions for each person listed under subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section, including time, place and nature of crime.
B. All applications shall be subject to review by the chief of police, building inspector, fire chief, and other city departments. The issuance of a business license by the director in no way warrants that the license holder has complied with the requirements and regulations enforced by other city officials; it is the applicant’s responsibility to ascertain and comply with all city statutes and ordinances.
C. To the extent set forth in this section, the following persons and businesses shall be exempt from the registration, license and/or license fee requirements as outlined in this chapter:
    1. Any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) (or higher threshold as determined by city) and who does not maintain a place of business within the city shall be exempt from the general business license requirements in this chapter. The exemption does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit.
(Ord. 6633 § 1, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.040 Nature and duration of license.
Each business license shall be valid for a definite time period not to exceed one year from issuance. The expiration date shall be clearly printed on the face of the license.
A. Annual License. Any person who intends to engage in business within the city on a regular, recurring and year-round basis shall obtain an annual business license. All annual business licenses shall be valid until the end of the year for which issued, or as long as the taxpayer continues in business and pays the license fees or taxes required by this or any other chapter of Title Five, whichever event occurs first. If at year-end the license holder continues in business and has paid all current taxes and/or license fees due the city, the business license shall be renewed without further application or application fees.
B. Temporary License. Any person who does not maintain an office or other year-round business presence in the city and whose business activity in the city is "temporary in nature" shall obtain a temporary business license. Temporary licenses shall be issued for a period to include the dates of expected local business activity, and not to exceed one year.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.050 Application to be made prior to commencing business activity.
Applicants shall apply for a city business license at least two weeks prior to commencing business activity. The director shall make all applications available to the chief of police, building inspector, fire chief, and other city departments for investigation. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ascertain the regulations enforced by the various city departments and to comply therewith. The issuance of a business license by the director in no way warrants that the applicant has complied with the requirements and regulations enforced by other city departments.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.060 Each location to be licensed.
A separate business license and fee for each place business is transacted shall be required. Each business license shall be numbered, shall show the name, place and character of business of the taxpayer, such other information as the director shall deem necessary, and shall at all times be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which it is issued.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.070 Application fee required.
A twenty five dollar ($25.00) application fee must be paid by the applicant before any annual business license will be issued by the finance director, and a fifteen dollar ($15.00) application fee must be paid by the applicant before any temporary business license will be issued by the finance director. The application fee shall be required in addition to any other license fee or tax required by this code.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.080 Licenses not clearly defined.
Whenever a license shall be especially required by law of any business or employment where this chapter does not clearly define and provide for the same, the license may be granted according to the governing law, and may be subject to such restrictions as pertain thereto.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.090 Business license personal and nontransferable.
All business licenses shall be personal and nontransferable. No person to whom a license has been issued shall suffer or allow any other person for whom a separate license is required to operate under or display their license; nor shall such other person operate under or display such license.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.100 Address, name and other changes to application.
An applicant or licensee shall amend their application form whenever conditions change so that the information on the form remains current. All changes or updates to the application, except a change in ownership, may be made without further license fee. The license holder shall be required to return their business license to the director, provide the updated information, and a new business license shall be issued. Changes that may be made under this section include but are not limited to changes in: (1) business location, (2) business name, or (3) mailing address.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.110 Director to make rules.
The Director shall have the power to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations for the purpose of carrying out the out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation.
(Ord. 6581, Amended, 08/26/2015; Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.120 Temporary license - tax deposit required.
Any person making application for a temporary business license shall be required to pay a tax deposit before any business license can be issued, the amount of which shall be calculated by the finance director after considering the applicant's anticipated business volume within the city, but in no case shall the deposit be less than twenty dollars ($20.00).
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.130 Revocation of business license.
A. If a person defaults on the payment of any tax or fee required by this title, their business license shall be considered automatically revoked and invalid from the date of default. This revocation will have immediate force and effect without further notice to the license holder.
B. The director may revoke a business license by written notice to the license holder any time such person fails to comply with any provision of this title, unless otherwise provided. This revocation is effective upon the mailing of notice by the director.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, business or corporation, or employee or officer of a business or corporation, to engage in business after the revocation of a license.
(Ord. 6581, Amended, 08/26/2015; Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.140 Applicability of title to city's business activities.
Whenever the city through any department or division engages in any business activity which if engaged in by any other person would require a business license and/or the payment of a license fee, tax or other charge by such person under this title, the city department or division engaging in such business activity shall comply with the provisions of this title, and pay the amounts required hereunder from the funds of such department or division
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.150 Interstate and foreign commerce - not obstructed.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as interfering with, regulating, or taxing interstate or foreign commerce.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.160 Use of public ways or places - restricted.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as giving to any person the right to obstruct the streets, sidewalks or other public places. Furthermore, it is unlawful to:
A. Engage in business or make solicitations for profit, or charitable purposes, in public streets or alleys which are open to vehicular traffic, or to make a solicitation of any person who is in or upon said public streets or alleys;
B. Engage in business or make solicitations for profit, or charitable purposes, within ten feet of any marked pedestrian crosswalk, within ten feet of any entrance or exit of any building then in use by the general public, or from the area of any sidewalk within ten feet of its intersection with an alley or publicly used driveway;
C. Engage in business or make solicitations for profit, or charitable purposes, within any office, theater, store, factory, or other premises where business is conducted or services are rendered without the prior approval of the person or persons in charge of the premises;
D. Engage in business or make solicitations for profit, or charitable purposes, after an individual being solicited has indicated, by words or action, that they have no desire to transact business with or make a contribution to the solicitor.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.170 Solicitation in residential areas - restricted.
A. It is unlawful for any person to go in or about any private residence in the city of Aberdeen in the furtherance of their business unless they have first received a request or invitation from the owner or occupant of such residence to do so.
B. It is unlawful to solicit on public property or in the residential area of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Any person making a solicitation of any kind shall clearly identify to any person being solicited the name of the organization sponsoring their solicitation activity and the purpose of the solicitation.
D. Any person making a solicitation shall provide personal identification of himself or herself upon demand by any law enforcement officer or person being solicited.
E. No person shall for the purpose of soliciting business or contributions from persons in this city use the name of any other person, except that of an officer, director or trustee of the organization by or for which the solicitation is made, without the written consent of such other person.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.180 Payment of fees required before issuance of any permit by city's building department.
No building, demolition or other permit shall be issued to any contractor or person subject to any provision of this title until said person has obtained a business license and paid all fees, taxes or other amounts owed to the city as required by this title.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.190 Carnivals, menageries and circuses.
Any person operating a carnival, menagerie or circus shall be required to obtain a city business license and pay the license fees as provided herein.
A. Business license fees - enumerated. The fee for a carnival, menagerie or circus business license shall be the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per week, or thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day.
B. Bond required with application. Every carnival, menagerie or circus shall file with the director a cash bond of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that such carnival, menagerie or circus shall pay all damages that may be done to streets or public places and shall remove all advertising matter placed within the city of Aberdeen, within ten days after its business license has expired. The bond must be filed before any business license shall be issued to the carnival, menagerie or circus. Should the license fee payer fail to meet the above conditions, the director shall have the right to make claim against said bond, otherwise the bond shall be returned to the bondee within thirty (30) days from the date the license expired.
C. Business license - issuance, expiration and renewal. After an application and cash bond are received and the license fee paid, the director shall issue the carnival, menagerie or circus business license to the applicant, who shall then conspicuously display the license so that it may be inspected by the city of Aberdeen or its agent at any time. The business license shall clearly state the name of the licensee and the expiration date of the license. The license holder must renew a business license upon its expiration by filing a new application with the director, and paying the applicable business license fee.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.195 Supplemental license fees - regulated businesses.
There are hereby imposed additional business license fees and regulations upon businesses and occupations regulated by sections 5.10.190, 5.10.200, and 5.10.210, and Chapter 5.06 in order to protect the public safety and welfare. The business license fee applicable to each type of business is due and payable on an annual basis, unless otherwise provided, and must be paid prior to the issuance of a city business license.
(Ord. 6581, Added, 08/26/2015)

5.10.200 Merchant patrols and private detectives.
It is the intent of this section to license and regulate those persons who as independent contractors, agencies or businesses act or employ personnel who act in a capacity of a merchant patrolman and/or private detective. No person licensed as a merchant patrolman and/or private detective shall be deemed a city employee or agent.
A. Definitions. In addition to the definitions that apply generally to this chapter, the following definitions and interpretations shall apply to the terms and phrases found in this section:
    1. "Merchant patrol" means any person engaged in the merchant patrol business.
    2. "Merchant patrol agency" means any agency, firm, or corporation engaged in the merchant patrol business employing one or more persons as employees, assistants, clerks or operatives.
    3. "Merchant patrol business" means the business of or the representation of being engaged in the business for hire or reward and as an independent contractor to guard or protect persons or property or patrol buildings, streets or districts.
    4. "Private detective" means any person engaged in the private detective business including employees of a private detective agency.
    5. "Private detective agency" means any person engaged in the private detective business employing one or more persons as employees, assistants, clerks or operatives.
    6. "Private detective business" means the business of or the representation of being engaged in the business of making an investigation or investigations for hire or reward with reference to any of the following matters: detecting, discovering or revealing crime or criminals or securing secret information or evidence relating thereto, habits, conduct, movements, whereabouts, associates, reputation, character or acts of any person, the credibility of witnesses or other persons, the location or recovery of lost or stolen property, the causes, origin or responsibilities for fires, accidents and injuries to real or personal property, the securing of evidence to be used before authorized investigation committees or boards for the trial of civil or criminal cases.
B. Business License - exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
    1. Any officer or employee of any state, county, city or town, or any federal official performing official duties for that entity;
    2. To any person, firm or corporation whose business is the furnishing of information as to the business and financial standing and credit of persons, firms or corporations;
    3. To persons, firms or corporations inquiring into the personal habits and financial responsibilities of applications for insurance, indemnities, bonds or commercial credit, or of claimants or applicants under or pursuant to policies of insurance;
    4. To any attorney engaged in the practice of law;
    5. To a person employed as an in-house guard or investigator by only one employer and who provides services exclusively in connection with the affairs of such employer and where there exists an employer-employee relationship.
    6. A person whose sole investigative activity consists of administering polygraphs, psychological stress analysis, or other such tests to individuals when the tests are based entirely upon information provided by the client who retained the person to perform the test.
C. Application - requirements generally. Application for a merchant patrol agency license, detective agency license, or private detective license shall be accomplished by completion of the prescribed application form as furnished by the Aberdeen police department, rather than the city's finance director. Said application shall be submitted to the Aberdeen police department for processing. The applications:
    1. Shall be signed and verified by the applicant (or, in the case of a corporation, shall be signed by duly authorized officer of the corporation and shall have the local address and place of business of the corporation);
    2. Shall state the applicant's full name and age;
    3. Shall state residence and past residences during the previous five years;
    4. Shall state present and previous occupation(s) during the previous five years;
    5. If an employee, in the case of private detectives, the applicant shall state the address of the place of business and the name of the employer, including agency license number;
    6. Shall state whether or not a firearm is to be used in connection with the applicant's duties as a licensee;
    7. Shall include three recent photographs of the individual applicant, of a type to be prescribed by the chief of police;
    8. Shall state whether the applicant has pending or has been convicted of, or forfeited bail to any crime, excluding minor traffic offenses, and if so, state the crime, the name of the court in which the case was filed, and the circumstances and disposition of the case or scheduled trial date;
    9. Shall state all assumed names or aliases which have been or are used by the applicant;
    10. Shall state such other information as the chief of police may reasonably require in connection with the application.
D. Application - investigation. Upon receipt of an application, the chief of police will direct that an investigation be conducted to verify the veracity of statements contained therein and any other matters which might aid in determining whether or not the application should be approved and a license issued. The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and photographs by the police department to aid in its background investigation.
E. License – issuance - contents. If the results of the investigation conducted by the police department indicate that an applicant should be granted a license, upon receipt of the prescribed fee the chief shall recommend issuance to the city council. Final determination on the issuance of licenses shall be made by the city council. When approved by the city council, after preparation of the license by the police department, said licenses shall be issued by the finance director's office. The license shall contain the photograph of the applicant, the name, residence address, business address, physical description, date of birth, and thumb print of the licensee as well as the imprint of the seal of the city. Every licensee so licensed shall upon demand of any police officer, exhibit their license for inspection. Every person employed as a private detective by a detective agency pursuant to the terms of this chapter must be individually licensed as provided herein.
F. Licenses – denial – appeal. 
    1. The chief of police may deny a license to an applicant who has:
        a. Committed any act constituting fraud;
        b. Committed any act in the past two years which, if committed by a licensee, would be a ground for suspension or revocation of a license pursuant this chapter;
        c. Committed any act resulting in the conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude;
        d. A record, based upon reliable evidence, which leads to the reasonable conclusion that the applicant is not competent to perform the duties and fulfill the responsibilities of a licensee under the provisions of this chapter;
        e. Been refused a license under the provisions of this chapter or has had a license revoked; provided, however, that any applicant who has been refused a license or had a license revoked under the provisions of this chapter may reapply after six months if the basis for such denial no longer exists;
        f. Been an officer, director, or partner of an agency who knowingly participated or acquiesced in the acts or conduct of any person, as defined by this chapter, for which that person was refused a license, or whose license was revoked under the provisions of this chapter;
        g. While unlicensed, within the previous two years, committed or aided and abetted the commission of any act for which a license is required pursuant this chapter;
        h. Failed to successfully complete any required firearms tests;
        i. Made any false statement in their application;
        j. Failed to pay the required license fee; or
        k. Violated any of the terms of this chapter.
    2. If the chief of police determines that a license should not be issued, the chief shall notify the applicant in writing of his determination, and of the applicant's right to appeal to the council under subsection (6)(c) of this section. Unless appealed under subsection (6)(c), the chief's action to deny an applicant shall be final. A copy of the chief's letter of denial shall be given to the public safety committee at its next meeting.
    3. Within twenty one (21) days of the date of posting of the chief's letter notifying the applicant of denial, either the applicant or the public safety committee may file an appeal, in writing, with the city council. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city council shall schedule a hearing on the matter and shall notify the applicant of the date of the scheduled hearing. At the appeal, the city council shall consider evidence presented by the chief of police, the applicant, and other interested persons and shall make a determination as to whether or not the license should be issued. If the license is denied on appeal by the city council, the council shall state its reasons for denial in a resolution.
G. Agency application - bond required. For each agency license applied for, the applicant shall file with the chief of police at the time of filing of the application a surety company bond running to the city of Aberdeen, state of Washington, in a penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the license will faithfully comply with all the requirements of this chapter. Upon the effective date of cancellation of any bond furnished hereunder, any license shall without action by any city official be suspended and remain suspended until the effective date of inception of a replacement bond filed with the chief of police of the type and form specified for the original bond.
H. Insurance coverage required. No agency license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter unless the applicant files with the chief of police a certificate of insurance with minimum bodily injury and property damage coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and naming the city of Aberdeen as an additional insured. The maintenance of such insurance shall be a condition to retaining a license.
I. License - revocation or suspension. 
    1. The chief of police may suspend or revoke a license issued under the provisions of this chapter if he determines that any licensee has:
        a. Made any false statement or given any false information in connection with an application for a license or a renewal or reinstatement of license;
        b. Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
        c. Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
        d. Illegally used, carried or possessed a dangerous weapon;
        e. Violated any rule of the chief of police adopted pursuant to his authority contained in this chapter;
        f. Committed or permitted any employee to commit any act while the license was expired, which would be cause for the suspension or revocation of a license, or grounds for the denial of an application for a license;
        g. Knowingly violated, or advised, encouraged, or assisted the violation of any court order or injunction in the course of business as a licensee; or
        h. Committed any act which is a ground for denial of application for a license under the provisions of this chapter.
    2. If the chief determines a license should be revoked or suspended, the chief shall notify the licensee of his decision, with the reasons therefor, by certified or registered mail. The notice shall also include the licensee's right to a hearing or an appeal under this section.
    3. Within fourteen (14) days after mailing of the notice provided in subsection (9)(b) of this section, the licensee may request a hearing before the chief to show cause why such license should not be canceled or suspended. If the licensee does not request a hearing before the chief within fourteen (14) days of the mailing of the notice, the license will be revoked or suspended.
    4. If a hearing is requested, and, after such hearing, the chief decides that the license should be revoked or suspended, he shall so notify the licensee of his determination in writing. The licensee may appeal by filing written notice of appeal with the city council within twenty one (21) days of his notification by the chief. At his option, the chief of police may treat a licensee's request for a hearing before the chief as an appeal to the city council by so notifying the city council, which shall then treat the matter as an appeal under the following section.
    5. Upon receipt of an appeal, or notification by the chief that he is electing to treat at request for a hearing as an appeal, the council shall schedule a hearing at the earliest opportunity and shall notify the licensee and the chief of the date of the hearing. At the appeal, the city council shall consider evidence presented by the chief of police, the applicant, and other interested persons and shall make a determination as to whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked. Following a hearing the council may affirm, modify, or revise the decision of the chief suspending or revoking a license. If the license is revoked or suspended on appeal by the city council, the council shall state its reasons for in a resolution. Action by the council shall be final and effective immediately unless otherwise specified.
J. Agency license fees – term – purpose. 
    1. The initial license fee for a merchant patrol agency or a private detective agency shall be and is fixed in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable at the time of application. Annual renewal of a previously issued license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
    2. The initial license fee for each person employed by a detective agency as a private detective, other than the agency applicant himself, shall be and is fixed in the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) payable at the time of application. Annual renewal of a previously issued license shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
    3. In the event a license for a merchant patrol agency or a private detective agency is denied, one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the fee shall be refunded and the remainder forfeited. There shall be no refund of the individual private detective application nor shall there be refunds of any agency fees upon revocation of a license.
K. List of services – required - records to be kept. All licensed agencies must maintain a list of all services offered with a brief description of what the service consists of. All business transactions with customers must be conducted in accordance with the list of services. Records must be kept on the telephone numbers, names and addresses of customers, the type of service provided, and the amount of money paid by these customers for services. Such records shall be open to inspection by the Aberdeen Police Department at all reasonable times.
L. Information from detective's investigation - disclosure restrictions. It is unlawful for any person who is or has been an employee of a detective agency to disclose or divulge to any person other than their employer, or except as their employer may direct, or except as may be required by law, any information acquired by them during such employment with respect to any of the work to which he or any other employee of such agency have been assigned by such agency or with respect to any of the work, business or affairs of subject agency.
M. Unlawful to employ unlicensed persons. It is unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any detective agency regulated by this chapter to employ in such business any person who does not have a valid employee license issued pursuant to this chapter.
N. Unlawful to advertise without license. It is unlawful to advertise the services of any merchant patrol or private detective business which is not licensed according to the provisions of this chapter.
O. Advertisements - solicitation of business. 
    1. Every advertisement by a licensee advertising or soliciting a business shall contain their company name and address as they appear in the records of the chief of police.
    2. Licensees and employees of licensees shall assure that their literature or sales presentation shall be accompanied by an accurate and clear description of the services which the licensee offers or provides.
    3. Licensees and employees of licensees performing sales presentations to members of the public shall not carry visible weapons.
    4. A violation of any of the above provisions shall constitute grounds for license revocation proceedings, against either the employee and the agency, or both.
P. Premises and records to be open for inspection. The premises and all books and records of any business subject to this chapter for which a license has been applied for or issued shall be subject to inspection and audit at any reasonable time, with or without notice, upon demand by the chief of police or corporation counsel or their agent, for the purpose of determining compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. A refusal of such entry and inspection shall result in a denial or revocation of the business license.
Q. Merchant patrolman - private detective - reports to police. Every merchant patrolman or private detective shall report to the appropriate police agency any irregularities tending to show that a crime has been committed, or may be committed, immediately after the conclusion of the daily hours of work or sooner.
R. Procedures required of licensees. Licensees shall perform private security services in such fashion that no interference with the Aberdeen Police Department or other law enforcement agencies will result. Regarding this end, licensees shall:
    1. Recommend to their customers that, in the event of a police problem, the customer shall first call the police agency which serves the locale wherein the problem exists;
    2. Instruct the customer to call the police agency which serves the locale wherein the problem exists, if a customer calls about a police problem;
    3. Instruct their employees that if a situation involving possible law enforcement interest is observed, the employee will immediately notify the appropriate law enforcement agency;
    4. Instruct their employees to report any situation, circumstance, or evidence that a crime has been or is about to be committed to the appropriate police agency;
    5. Use all reasonable efforts to inform and advise their present and prospective officers, directors, partners, agents, representatives, employees, and all other persons acting under, for, or on behalf of the licensee, of the provisions of this chapter, and direct them to comply therewith;
    6. A violation of any of the above provisions shall constitute grounds for license revocation proceedings against the agency.
S. Certain practices prohibited. 
    1. It is unlawful for any licensee to represent to members of the public in any way, either directly or indirectly or by implication, that the license is an official or semi-official law enforcement organization or that employees, agents or solicitors of the licensee are authorized by the state of Washington or any of its political subdivisions to act as law enforcement officers, including, by way of example but not limitation, the following conduct:
        a. Use of name or initials in the course of business which has the capacity or tendency to convey said representation to the public, including but not limited to any name using the words "police," "department," "sheriff," or "deputy";
        b. Use of any uniform, badge, insignia, business card, stationery or any other device, object, or type of apparel, which is not readily distinguishable to average members of the consuming public from such devices, objects, or types of apparel which are used by authorized law enforcement officers;
        c. Use of any uniform, badge, insignia, title or identification card or make any statement with the intent to give an impression that a license is connected in any way with the federal government, a state government, or any political subdivision of either;
        d. Use of any letterhead, advertisement, or other printed matter, or in any manner illegally represents that the licensee is an instrumentality of the federal government, state government, or any political subdivision of either;
        e. Performance of any acts, practices, or conduct which hamper the operation of activities of authorized law enforcement and public safety officers.
    2. A violation of any of the above provisions shall constitute grounds for license revocation proceedings, both as against the employee and the agency, or both.
T. Firearms. An applicant for license who uses or intends to use firearms in connection with the employment regulated under the provisions of this chapter shall be tested by the chief of police or his designee in order to determine that such applicant has sufficient knowledge and ability to use such firearm in a competent and safe manner. The contents of such test shall be determined by the chief of police and shall be in form prescribed by him. The chief of police may, in his discretion, set reasonable testing and range fees. This requirement is for the benefit of the safety of the general public and shall not be deemed to create any liability on behalf of the city of Aberdeen to any person under any circumstances. All federal, state, and local laws, regulations and ordinances regarding the possession, carrying or use of firearms or other weapons shall be complied with.
U. License - surrender on employment termination. Upon termination of employment of any private detective or merchant patrol agency it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender the license immediately to the chief of police. Failure to do so constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

5.10.210 Taxicabs, taxi stands and taxicab drivers.
No person may own or operate a taxicab or taxicab business unless the vehicle is licensed under this chapter, and no person may drive a taxicab without a taxicab driver's permit issued under this chapter.
A. Definitions. In addition to the definitions that apply generally to this chapter, the following definitions and interpretations shall apply to the terms and phrases found in this section:
"Seal" shall mean such device prescribed by the chief of police as may be necessary to insure that the measurement or calculation function of the taximeter cannot be tampered with or adjusted without breaking said seal.
"Taxicab" means every motor vehicle having a capacity of seven passengers or less, used for the transportation of passengers for hire, and not operated over a fixed definite route.
"Taximeter" means any instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically measured or calculated, either for the distance traveled by such vehicle or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which such calculated charges are indicated by means of figures.
B. Taxicab business license fees - enumerated. The fee for a taxicab business license shall be the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) annually.
C. Application - requirements generally. At a minimum, the applicant for a taxicab business license shall provide:
    1. Full name and both the business address and residence address of the owner or lessee of each vehicle, and, if a partnership or corporation is seeking a license, a list of all stockholders or partners;
    2. Make, model, year of manufacture, color, motor or vehicle identification number, and state motor vehicle license number of each vehicle owned or operated by the applicant;
    3. Proof of ownership or lessee's interest in each vehicle;
    4. A certificate of public liability insurance for each vehicle providing coverage for the term of the license applied for, in the minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for personal injury, including death, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for aggregate personal injuries in any one occurrence, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage;
    5. A schedule of rates and charges;
    6. The location of the taxicab stand applied for each vehicle, together with any other location from which each taxicab will be operated; and
    7. Such other information as the finance director or chief of police may require in order to effectively administer the provisions of this chapter.
D. Application - verification. The chief of police shall verify the contents of each application and report his findings to the city council.
E. Business license - issuance, expiration and renewal. A taxicab business license is subject to the approval of the city council upon determination that the public convenience and safety requires the operation of the vehicles covered in the license. The license shall identify the licensee, the vehicle covered by the license and the expiration date of the license. The finance director shall issue a license for each vehicle in the application approved by the city council, and the license holder shall conspicuously display each license issued in the proper vehicle. All taxicab business licenses shall expire on December 31st of the year in which issued.
F. Changes to application contents. Amendments to information provided on the license holder's application which would change the ownership of any vehicle or taxicab business, are not allowed without the payment of additional license fee. Any amendments made to an original or renewal application are subject to the review and approval of the chief of police.
G. Business license - denial, suspension or revocation - violation. The following acts shall be a violation of this section and grounds for the city council or chief of police to deny, suspend or revoke the offender's taxicab business license.
    1. Material misrepresentation in the license application or amendment thereto;
    2. Allowing a person who does not have a valid taxicab driver's permit issued under this chapter to drive a licensed vehicle;
    3. Failure to pay when due any fines or penalties levied for violating this chapter;
    4. Failure or refusal to allow the city to inspect a taxicab for compliance with this chapter;
    5. A record based on competent evidence that the applicant or licensee is not competent to perform the duties and fulfill the responsibilities of a licensee under this chapter.
H. Taximeter - required. It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or engage in the business of operating a taxicab unless the taxicab is equipped with a sealed taximeter which has been inspected and approved by the chief of police. The following rules and regulations shall apply to the operation of a taximeter:
    1. It is unlawful for any person to drive, operate or engage in the business of operating a taxicab unless there is posted within the taxicab a list of the rates that is being used in the operation of the taximeter. The taximeter shall be operating, and the rates charged by the meter shall correspond to the posted rates. The rates posted within the taxicab shall be filed with the city finance director.
    2. It shall be the duty of the owner, driver or any other person having possession and control of the taxicab to at all times keep the taximeter accurate and in good working condition. Prior to the installation of such taximeter, the same shall be approved for operation by the chief of police, or the chief of police may require the licensee to have such taximeter tested and inspected by another municipal agency or an independent testing laboratory. Upon such approval, a written notice shall be plainly posted and attached to the taximeter for the information of the public. Such taximeter shall be rechecked and inspected at least once a year in the same manner as the original inspection. Following such inspection, the chief of police shall affix a seal to the taximeter.
I. Vehicle inspections - fee. There shall be no charge for the first inspection of a vehicle in a year, but thereafter there shall be a charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each inspection. Whenever an appointment is made for the police department to inspect a taximeter or taxi equipment, and the taxi driver or company fails to appear for the appointment, an assessment of fifteen dollars ($15.00) must be paid. Failure to make the payments under this section may be grounds to suspend or revoke the taxi vehicle license or the taxi driver's permit.
J. Equipment requirements. 
    1. Every licensee must keep each taximeter installed in such a position that the face upon which the fare or charge is indicated is readable by passengers.
    2. Every licensee must display on each taxicab:
        a. The name of the business or company to which the vehicle is licensed plainly printed in letters at least two and one-half inches high on both sides;
        b. The schedule of rates of fares typewritten upon a contrasting background in at least eighteen (18) point type and conspicuously posted in the passenger compartment;
        c. The taxicab business license conspicuously posted with the schedule of fares.
    3. Every licensee shall ensure that each taxicab is equipped with proper and serviceable seat belts for each passenger;
    4. Every licensee shall ensure that each taxicab is kept clean and neat and is in good and safe working order.
K. Taxicab driver's photograph. Whenever operating a taxicab, each taxicab driver shall display a photograph and the name of the driver. The photograph shall be at least two inches by two inches and the photograph and name shall be conspicuously posted so that they are clearly viewable by passengers in the vehicle.
L. Rates and charges. The city does not regulate rates and charges for taxicabs except to require that they be uniform for all vehicles of the same color combination of a company, that measures be taken before rates are changed, and that the rate schedule contains certain items.
    1. At least fifteen (15) days before charging any new or different rates a licensee must file an updated schedule of fares with the director. If the new rates require adjustment of the taximeter, the licensee may not use the new rates until the adjustment has been made and the meter resealed. The licensee must withdraw any advertisement of the previous rates before using new rates. The licensee must post the new rate schedule in the vehicle.
    2. A licensee must include in the required rate schedule charges for:
        a. Waiting time, on an hourly basis;
        b. Initial drop on all trips including the first increment of a mile of travel;
        c. Distance based on uniform increments of a mile as posted;
        d. Each additional passenger;
        e. Additional baggage, per piece, not including baggage which can be carried on by the passenger;
        f. Any separate rates for service between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
    3. A licensee may by written contract establish a fare for specific transportation different than the fixed rate.
    4. No customer shall be charged an amount which exceeds the valid posted schedule of rates and charges.
M. Taxicab stands. 
    1. A taxicab stand is an area designated by the city engineer and approved by council for the parking or standing of one taxi. The city shall clearly mark each taxicab stand.
    2. Each taxicab business license shall designate the taxicab stand or stands for each vehicle. No licensee shall have more assigned taxicab stands than licensed taxicabs.
    3. The city engineer may designate taxicab stand other than those assigned to the vehicle except for the purpose of immediately picking up or discharging passengers.
    4. No taxicab may park or stand at a taxicab stand other than those assigned to the vehicle except for the purpose of immediately picking up or discharging passengers.
    5. The area of the city from which taxicab stands may be assigned is as follows: from and including the south side of Heron Street to and including the north side of Market Street from "E" Street to "L" Street.
N. Taxicab driver's permits – application - requirements generally. Applications for taxicab driver's permits shall be made to the chief of police, rather than to the director, on forms prescribed by the chief. Each applicant must:
    1. Submit a statement. 
        a. Of name, age, and address(s) for the last five years;
        b. Of current and last preceding place of employment;
        c. Whether he has been previously employed or licensed as a taxicab driver and, if so, the reason why not now so employed;
        d. That the applicant has been a licensed motor vehicle driver for at least two years;
        e. Of ability to read and speak the English language;
        f. That the applicant is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs;
        g. Listing all prior criminal convictions.
    2. Submit to fingerprinting by the police department.
    3. Provide:
        a. Two recent photographs of the applicant of a size designated by the chief of police and which may be easily attached to the permit. One of which shall be so attached when issued, and the other shall be filed with the application.
        b. Copy of current driver's license for inspection and record check.
    4. Each licensed driver shall, upon demand of an inspector, police officer or passenger, exhibit their permit and photograph for inspection.
O. Taxicab driver's permit – fees - duration. Applications for a taxicab driver's permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). Taxicab drivers' permits shall be issued by the chief of police and shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
P. Taxicab driver's permit – denial - suspension or revocation - violations. It is a violation and a taxicab driver's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked if the applicant or permittee:
    1. Does not have a current valid Washington State driver's license appropriate for driving a taxicab;
    2. Has not been a licensed driver for a minimum of two years;
    3. Is unable to speak or write the English language;
    4. Is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor or drugs;
    5. Makes a material misrepresentation on the taxicab driver's permit application;
    6. Is adjudged as having committed more than two traffic infractions in any twelve-month period while driving a taxicab; provided, that at least one of the infractions occurred within twelve (12) months of the action;
    7. Has been convicted of any felony offense in the past ten years or any misdemeanor involving immoral conduct, theft, assault or drugs in the past five years;
    8. Is convicted of, receives a deferred prosecution for, or fails to appear for trial on a charge of reckless driving or driving or being in physical control of any vehicle while under the influence of liquor or drugs in the preceding twenty-four-month period;
    9. Fails to deliver to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours any property of value left in a vehicle;
    10. Allows a person to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion or discharges a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge;
    11. Allows a passenger to consume intoxicating liquor or drugs in the vehicle;
    12. Transports a passenger to a destination by a route that is not the most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route;
    13. Picks up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger;
    14. Refuses to pick up as a passenger any person of proper deportment when the vehicle is available, or discriminates against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or mental or sensory handicap;
    15. Activates the meter when the vehicle is not engaged, or fails to activate the meter at the beginning of each trip, unless the trip is made under contract;
    16. Uses a taxi stand for any purpose other than to await for carriage of passengers for hire;
    17. Engages in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices;
    18. Fails or refuses to allow the city to inspect a taxicab as provided by this chapter;
    19. Demonstrates, by a record based on competent evidence, that he or she is not fit or competent to perform the duties and fulfill the responsibilities of a permittee under this chapter.
O. Suspension or revocation of license or permit - procedures. 
    1. If the chief of police determines that a taxicab business license or taxicab driver's permit should be revoked or suspended, the chief shall notify the licensee or permittee of his decision, together with the reasons therefor, by certified or registered mail. This notice shall also include the licensee or permittee's right to a hearing or an appeal under this section.
    2. Within fourteen (14) days after the mailing of the notice provided in subsection (17)(a) of this section, the licensee or permittee may request a hearing before the chief to show cause why such license or permit should not be revoked or suspended. If the licensee or permittee does not request a hearing before the chief within fourteen (14) days of the mailing of the notice, the license or permit will be revoked or suspended, as appropriate.
    3. If a hearing is requested, and, after such a hearing, the chief decides that the license or permit should be revoked or suspended, he shall so notify the licensee or permittee of his determination in writing. The licensee or permittee may appeal by filing written notice of appeal with the city council within twenty one (21) days of his notification by the chief. At his option, the chief of police may treat a request by a licensee or permittee for a hearing before the chief as an appeal to the city council by so notifying the city council, which shall then treat the matter as an appeal under the following section.
    4. Upon receipt of an appeal, or notification by the chief that he is electing to treat at request for a hearing as an appeal, the council shall schedule a hearing at the earliest opportunity and shall notify the licensee and the chief of the date of the hearing. At the appeal, the city council shall consider evidence presented by the chief of police, the applicant, and other interested persons and shall make a determination as to whether or not the license should be suspended or revoked. Following a hearing the council may affirm, modify, or revise the decision of the chief suspending or revoking a license. If the license is revoked or suspended on appeal by the city council, the council shall state its reasons for in a resolution. Action by the council shall be final and effective immediately unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 6373, Added, 12/08/2004)

Chapter 5.12 CIRCUS AND TENT SHOWS

Sections:
5.12.010     Permit required.
5.12.020     Application for permit—Requirements.
5.12.030     Check of application by fire chief.
5.12.040     Check of application by city health officer.
5.12.050     Issuance of permit.
5.12.060     Inspection of completed structure—Issuance of permit—Revocation of permit—Right to appeal.
5.12.070     Violations—Penalty.
5.12.080     Severability.

5.12.010 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, any temporary structure composed wholly or partly of canvas or similar material to be used as a place of amusement or for any religious, educational or recreational purposes or for any other public assemblages whatsoever within the limits of the city of Aberdeen without first having made application to and received permission to do so in accordance with the conditions and limitations as set out in this chapter.
(Prior code § 3.10.010)

5.12.020 Application for permit—Requirements.
The applicant for such permission shall file an application in writing with the city comptroller, which application shall be accompanied by a set of building plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, which shall indicate clearly:
A. 1. The type of construction;
    2. The seating arrangements;
    3. The aisles;
    4. The structural details and calculations of the seats and supports;
    5. The location of all electrical wiring;
    6. The location of all exits;
    7. The location of all fire equipment within the structure and the specifications of such equipment;
    8. The location, insofar as feasible, of adjacent structures and obstructions which might hinder the free egress of persons from the exits.
B. Such application shall further specify:
    1. Whether any open flame is intended to be used within the structure, and if so, what precautions are to be taken to render it safe;
    2. The name of the person, firm or corporation which will use the structure;
    3. The location of the principal place of business of such person, firm or corporation;
    4. The names and addresses of the officers of such firm or corporation;
    5. The length of time the structure is intended to be used for the purposes applied for;
    6. The hours of the day or night during which such structure is intended to be used as a place of assembly;
    7. The formula of the solution which is to be used to flame-proof the structure;
    8. What provisions have been made for sanitary facilities for persons using the premises on which such structure is to be erected or is maintained;
    9. Such other relevant information as the city comptroller may require.
C)(1. An applicant for circus structures shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in amounts of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for one person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident, shall be in force and effect at the time such structure is to be occupied as a place of assembly by the public.
    2. An applicant for a carnival or other exhibition covered by this chapter shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in amounts of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for one person and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for any one accident, shall be in force and effect at the time such structure is to be occupied as a place of assembly by the public.
D. The applicant shall deposit with the city treasurer a cash bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned upon saving harmless of the city of Aberdeen from any and all liabilities or causes of action, which might arise by virtue of the granting of a permit to the applicant; and conditioned further, that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be permitted to remain upon the streets or upon any private property by such applicant. Such cash bond shall be returned to the applicant upon certification by the chief of police that all conditions of this chapter have been complied with.
E. The applicant shall pay to the city comptroller all license fees according to the provisions of Chapter 5.20.
F. If the chief of the fire department determines that the attendance of fire equipment at the location of the structure during the use of such structure as a place of assembly is necessary for the safety of persons and property, the city comptroller shall require that the applicant deposit with the city treasurer of the city of Aberdeen a sum equal to the reasonable value of the use of said equipment and the furnishing of the necessary personnel for such time as will be required, in order to reimburse the city of Aberdeen for such expense.
G. Such application and plans shall be submitted to the chief of the fire department at least ten days prior to the date of the opening of any such structure, and he shall be notified at least forty-nine (49) hours prior to the erection of such structure, so that he may make an inspection during reasonable daylight hours.
(Prior code § 3.10.020)

5.12.030 Check of application by fire chief.
The chief of the fire department shall determine if the applicant has made provisions for:
A. Adequate aisles, seats, platforms and poles;
B. Sufficient exits, well marked and properly lighted;
C. Lighted and unobstructed passageways to areas leading away from the structure;
D. Removal, before the structure is to be used as a place of public assembly, of any pole, rope or other obstruction in any aisle or exit;
E. Inspection before the opening of each performance by a qualified electrician to ascertain if any defects exist in the wiring and provision made for immediate correction of any defects which may be found;
F. Sufficient first-aid fire appliances to be distributed throughout the structure with operating personnel familiar with the operation of such equipment available and assigned during the use of such structure as a place of assembly;
G. Sufficient "No Smoking" signs visible at all times;
H. An employee at each entrance to require the extinguishing of all cigarettes, cigars and other smoking materials;
I. Announcement at frequent intervals to the persons in the assembly of the fact that smoking within the structure is prohibited;
J. Proper safeguarding of any use of open flames or its use prohibited;
K. The clearing of straw, dry grass, sawdust and any combustible trash from the structure before it is opened to the public and arrangements made to keep the areas where debris may be expected to accumulate well serviced, especially under open seats;
L. Proper facilities for calling the city fire department;
M. Such special fire equipment of the city of Aberdeen to attend at such structure during its use as a place of public assembly as the chief of the fire department may decide is necessary for proper fire protection;
N. The attendance of such special police officers and firemen as the chief of the fire department may deem necessary for the control of persons in the assembly to prevent over-crowding obstruction of aisles and exits and such other control as may be necessary to render the occupation of such structure by the public safe;
O. The tent or canvas parts of the structure and all combustible decorative materials, including curtains, acoustic materials, streamers, cloth, cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss to be rendered fireproof.
(Prior code § 3.10.030)

5.12.040 Check of application by city health officer.
The city health officer shall make an inspection to determine if provision has been made for satisfactory sanitary facilities on or near the premises on which the structure is maintained or is to be maintained.
(Prior code § 3.10.040)

5.12.050 Issuance of permit.
If the chief of the fire department finds that the provisions of Sections 5.12.030 and 5.12.040 of this chapter are complied with, or will be complied with by the applicant, he shall so report to the city comptroller who shall issue a permit to erect or maintain such structure conditional upon such reasonable limitations and requirements as he may deem necessary for the safety of persons and property.
(Prior code § 3.10.050)

5.12.060 Inspection of completed structure—Issuance of permit—Revocation of permit—Right to appeal.
A. Upon completion of such structure, it shall not be used as a place of assembly until the chief of the fire department has inspected the entire premises upon which the structure is located.
B. If the chief of the fire department finds that all of the limitations and requirements of the permit and this chapter have been complied with and that the structure has been erected in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted with the application, the city comptroller shall grant a permit to occupy such premises.
C. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the occupancy of such structure as a place of assembly, without the issuance of such permit to occupy such structure as provided herein.
D. If the chief of the fire department finds that such structure, or the premises on which it is located, is being maintained in violation of any of the provisions of the permit to erect or maintain any of the provisions of this chapter, or in such a manner as to constitute a fire hazard, he may revoke the permit to occupy provided for herein.
E. Any person, firm or corporation whose permit to occupy has been revoked as aforesaid may, within ten days after receipt of a notice thereof, appeal to the city council for a hearing thereon, and the decision of the council in this regard shall be final. If no appeal is taken within ten days as provided herein the action of the chief of the fire department shall be final.
(Prior code § 3.10.060)

5.12.070 Violations—Penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 3.10.070)

5.12.080 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
(Prior code § 3.10.080)

Chapter 5.16 THEATERS

Sections:
5.16.010     Projection booth to be closed when operating moving picture machine.
5.16.020     Smoking prohibited in projection booth—Matches, paper prohibited in booth.
5.16.030     Aisles to be clear during public performance.
5.16.040     Foyer to be clear during public performance—Exception, employees.
5.16.050     Smoking prohibited behind scenes or screen.
5.16.060     Public performance—Defined.
5.16.070     Right to inspect.
5.16.080     Refusal to allow inspection.
5.16.090     Violations—Penalty.

5.16.010 Projection booth to be closed when operating moving picture machine.
A. No owner, manager or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment within the city of Aberdeen, where a moving picture machine is used shall permit or allow the booth in which such moving picture machine is used to be opened at any time excepting in cases of emergency, during the operation of such moving picture machine or at any time during any public performance in which it is being used.
B. The operator of any moving picture machine in any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, where a moving picture machine is used, shall keep the booth closed in which such moving picture machine is operated, excepting in cases of emergency, during the operation of said moving picture machine and at all times during any public performance in which it is being used.
(Prior code § 3.16.010)

5.16.020 Smoking prohibited in projection booth—Matches, paper prohibited in booth.
A. No owner, manager or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, where a moving picture machine is used, shall allow or permit any matches, papers or inflammable material of any kind, excepting picture films to be used in such public performance, in the booth in which such moving picture machine is used during any public performance, nor permit or allow any person to smoke in any such booth during any public performance.
B. No operator of any moving picture machine in any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen where a moving picture machine is used shall allow or permit any matches, papers or inflammable material of any kind, excepting picture films to be used in such public performance, in the booth in which any moving picture machine is used during any public performance nor permit or allow any person to smoke in any such booth during any public performance.
(Prior code § 3.16.020)

5.16.030 Aisles to be clear during public performance.
The owner, manager, or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, shall allow or permit any person, excepting employees, to stand in any aisle in any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment during any public performance.
(Prior code § 3.16.030)

5.16.040 Foyer to be clear during public performance—Exception, employees.
No manager, owner or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, where a moving picture machine is used, shall permit or allow any person, excepting employees, to stand in the foyer therein during any public performance.
(Prior code § 3.16.040)

5.16.050 Smoking prohibited behind scenes or screen.
A. No manager, owner or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, shall allow or permit any employee or other person to smoke back of the scenes or back of any curtain or screen upon which picture films are shown.
B. No person shall smoke in any booth in which any moving picture machine is used during any public performance in any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment, nor shall any person smoke back of the scenes or back of any curtain or screen upon which picture films are shown in any theater moving picture show or other show or other place of public entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 3.16.050)

5.16.060 Public performance—Defined.
For the purpose of this chapter a public performance shall include intermissions between acts and between shows where more than one show is held on the same afternoon or more than one show is held on the same evening.
(Prior code § 3.16.060)

5.16.070 Right to inspect.
A. The fire department of the city of Aberdeen shall have the right to make such inspections of theaters, moving picture shows and other places of public entertainment as the chief of the fire department of the city of Aberdeen shall deem proper for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city of Aberdeen for the protection of the public against fire therein.
B. Under the supervision of the chief of the fire department, such chief and members of the fire department of the city of Aberdeen shall have the right to enter all theaters, moving picture shows and places of entertainment, within the city of Aberdeen, to make such inspections thereof as may be deemed proper to enforce the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city of Aberdeen for the protection of the public against fire therein.
(Prior code § 3.16.070)

5.16.080 Refusal to allow inspection.
No owner, manager or person in charge of any theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment or operator of any moving picture machine within the city of Aberdeen, shall refuse to permit the chief or any member of the fire department of the city of Aberdeen to make any inspection of such theater, moving picture show or other place of public entertainment as authorized by this chapter.
(Prior code § 3.16.080)

5.16.090 Violations—Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof. shall be punished by a fine in any sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in the city jail of the city of Aberdeen for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 3.16.090)

Chapter 5.28 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATION

Sections:
5.28.010     Definitions.
5.28.020     Review of request for increase in basic cable rates.
5.28.030     Cable operator information.
5.28.040     Automatic rate adjustments.
5.28.050     Enforcement.

5.28.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
"Basic cable rates" means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment.
"Basic service tier" means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television signals other than superstations.
"Benchmark" means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
"Cable Act of 1992" means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992.
"Cable operator" means any person or group of persons:
    1. Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or
    2. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
"Channel" means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
"Cost of service showing" means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital.
FCC. means the Federal Communications Commission.
"Initial basic cable rates" means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates.
"Must-carry signal" means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations which is required to be carried on the basic service tier).
"Peg channel" means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
"Price cap" means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation.
"Reasonable rate standard" means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level.
"Superstation" means any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite.
(Prior code § 5.90.010)

5.28.020 Review of request for increase in basic cable rates.
A. Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least thirty (30) days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates.
B. Expedited Determination and Public Hearing. 
    1. If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall:
        a. Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views;
        b. Act to approve the rate increase within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city.
    2. If the city council takes no action within thirty (30) days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect.
C. Extended Review Period. 
    1. If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
        a. Ninety (90) days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and
        b. One hundred fifty (150) days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
    2. The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period.
    3. If the city council has not made a decision within the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) days period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the amounts are paid.
D. Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections.
E. Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city with objector's name and address.
F. Delayed Determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase.
G. Price Cap Analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings the basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
    1. If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates.
    2. If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
H. Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate.
I. Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city clerk to record the objection or may be submitted in writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
J. Refunds. 
    1. The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if:
        a. The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in subsection (C) of this section;
        b. The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and
        c. The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
    2. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution.
K. Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations.
(Prior code § 5.90.020)

5.28.030 Cable operator information.
A. City may require:
    1. In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section.
    2. In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard.
B. Request for Confidentiality. 
    1. A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
    2. If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall be identified.
    3. Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based.
    4. Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered.
C. City Council Action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (B) of this section will be acted upon by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions:
    1. If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires, will the information be made available for public inspection.
    2. If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available for public inspection.
D. Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending review.
(Prior code § 5.90.030)

5.28.040 Automatic rate adjustments.
A. Annual Inflation Adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final GNP-PI index.
B. Other External Costs. 
    1. The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
    2. For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 28, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6th.
C. Notification and Review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least thirty (30) days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
(Prior code § 5.90.040)

5.28.050 Enforcement.
A. Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances:
    1. A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
    2. The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city.
B. Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day the cable operator fails to comply.
(Prior code § 5.90.050)

Chapter 5.32 PAWNBROKERS

Sections:
5.32.010     Inspections.
5.32.020     Report of pawned items required.
5.32.030     Violations—Penalties.

5.32.010 Inspections.
The place of business of every pawnbroker shall be open at all hours to the inspection of police officers of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 6.02.010)

5.32.020 Report of pawned items required.
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report to the chief of police of the city of Aberdeen of all articles pawned and/or pledged with him on forms to be furnished by the chief of police.
(Prior code § 6.02.020)

5.32.030 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 6.02.030)

Chapter 5.34 CABARETS AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT

Sections:
5.34.005     Purpose and intent.
5.34.010     Definitions.
5.34.020     License required.
5.34.030     License prohibited to certain classes.
5.34.040     Application.
5.34.050     License fees.
5.34.060     Appeal.
5.34.070     Standards of conduct and operation of adult cabarets.
5.34.080     Panoram premises regulations.
5.34.090     License term -Assignment - Renewals.
5.34.100     License suspension and revocation - Hearing.
5.34.110     Liquor regulations.
5.34.130     Violation a misdemeanor.
5.34.140     Nuisance declared.
5.34.150     Additional enforcement.
5.34.160     Compliance.
5.34.170     Severability.

5.34.005 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult entertainment businesses and related activities to promote health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the establishment of adult entertainment businesses in locations within the city which would have a harmful effect ont he residents of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate undesirable social problems that accompany adult entertainment businesses and to enact content neutral regulations which address the secondary effects of adult entertainment businesses as well as health problems associated with such businesses, not to curtail the First Amendment expression, namely dancing or entertainment. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the State or Federal Constitutions, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimate the distribution of obscene materials.

5.34.010 Definitions.
A. "Adult cabaret" means any commercial premises, including any cabaret premises, to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live adult entertainment to any member of the public.
B. "Adult entertainment" means:
    1. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
    2. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in a premises where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction, description, simulation or relation to the following specified sexual activities:
        a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal,
        b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, or
        c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
    3. Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing.
C. "Applicant" means the individual or entity seeking a cabaret license in the city of Aberdeen.
D. "Applicant control persons" means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant's business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret business, based on responsibility for management of the adult cabaret business.
E. "Cabaret" means any room, place or space whatsoever in the city in which any music, singing, dancing, or other similar entertainment is permitted in connection with any hotel, restaurant, cafe, club, tavern, eating place, directly selling, serving, or providing the public, with or without charge, food or liquor. The words "music and entertainment" as used herein, shall not apply to radios or mechanical devices.
F. "Clerk" means such city employees or agents as the Mayor shall designate to administer this chapter, or any designee thereof.
G. "Employee" means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of any
cabaret.
H. "Entertainer" means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret as defined in this section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment.
I. "Liquor" means all beverages defined in RCW 66.04.200.
J. "Manager" means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret, and includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.
K. "Operator" means any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret.
L. "Panoram", "preview", "picture arcade", or "peep show", means any device which, for payment of a fee, membership fee, or other charge, is used to view, exhibit or display a film or videotape, or exposes live entertainment to the viewer while the viewer is in a booth or stall. All such devices are denominated in this chapter by the terms "panoram" or "panoram device". The terms panoram and panoram device as used in this chapter do not include games which employ pictures, view or video displays, or gambling devices regulated by the state.
M. "Panoram premises" means any premises or portion of any premises on which any panoram device is located and to which members of the public are admitted. The term panoram premises as used in this chapter does not include movie or motion picture theater auditoriums capable of seating more than five (5) people.
N. "Panoram station" means the portion of any panoram premises on which a panoram device is located and where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching the panoram device.
O. "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.
P. "Member of the public" means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or admitted to a cabaret.
Q. "Sexual conduct" means acts of:
    1. Sexual intercourse within its ordinary meaning, occurring upon any penetration, however slight; or
    2. Any penetration of the vagina or anus, however slight, by an object; or
    3. Any contact between person involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another; or
    4. Masturbation, manual or instrumental, of oneself or of one person by another; or
    5. Touching of the sex organs or anus, whether clothed or unclothed, of oneself or of one person by another.

5.34.020 License required.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate a cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this chapter.
C. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret.
D. It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so.
E. It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so.
F. It is unlawful to display, exhibit, expose or maintain upon any premises to which members of the public are admitted any panoram device without a valid and current license for such premises, to be designated a "panoram premises license."
G. A separate license is required for each panoram premises and the same shall at all times be conspicuously posted and maintained therein. Panoram premises which exhibit live adult entertainment shall also obtain an adult cabaret license in addition to the panoram premises license. The clerk shall prescribe the form of such license, number the same, and shall indicate thereon the number of panoram devices which may be operated thereunder, and the location of the licensed panoram premises.

5.34.030 License prohibited to certain classes.
No license shall be issued to:
A. A natural person who has not attained the age of twenty-one (2)1 years, except that licenses may be issued to persons who have attained the age of eighteen (18) years with respect to cabarets where no intoxicating liquors are served or provided.
B. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee, or in the case of a manager or an adult cabaret, the manager has obtained a manager's license.
C. A copartnership, unless all the members thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided in this chapter. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.
D. A corporation, unless all the officers and directors thereof are qualified to obtain a license as provided herein. Such license shall be issued to the manager or agent thereof.

5.34.040 Application.
A. Cabaret license. Any person desiring a cabaret license required under the provisions of this chapter shall file written application with the clerk on forms provided by the clerk for that purpose. All applications shall be signed by the applicant and notarized or certified as true under penalty of perjury. A failure to provide all information required on the form will constitute an incomplete application and will not be processed. The clerk upon presentation of a complete application and before acting upon the same shall refer such application to the police department for a full investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein, and as to any or all other matters which would aid the clerk in determining whether or not such application should be granted. After the police department has reported back to the clerk the result of such investigation, and within fourteen (14) days of the date of filing of the complete application, if the clerk is satisfied that the statements contained in such application are true and that the applicant meets all requirements of this chapter, the clerk shall issue the license applied for, provided however, that if the application does not meet the requirements of this code, then the clerk shall deny such license application.
B. Adult cabaret license. 
    1. All applications for an adult cabaret license shall be submitted to the clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult cabaret on the business premises and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city, which shall require the following information:
        a. For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide: Names, any aliases or previous names, driver's license number, if any, social security number if any, and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number.
        b. If a partnership, whether general or limited; and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in goodstanding under the laws of Washington, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process.
        c. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including motion picture theaters and panoramas, from the city or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business.
        d. A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
        e. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.
        f. For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application.
        g. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
        h. The location and doing-business-as-name of the proposed adult cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street address, an telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.
        i. Two two-inch by two-inch (2"x2")color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
        j. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person, by Aberdeen police department employees.
        k. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager's officer and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for an adult cabaret shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with AMC 5.34.070.
    2. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant's provision of all information requested above, including identification of "none" where that is the correct response, and the applicant's verification that the application is complete. The clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
    3. A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.
    4. Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true.
    5. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the city clerk, no later than twenty-one (21) days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult cabaret license application.
    6. The adult cabaret license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult cabaret. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.
    7. No person granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the adult cabaret business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license.
    8. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the clerk shall provide copies to the police, fire, and planning and economic development departments, and the Grays Harbor county health department, for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the clerk whether such application and premises comply with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as t premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.
    9. An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law. If the clerk fails to issue or deny the license within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other appliable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
C. Adult cabaret manager and entertainer licenses. 
    1. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer's or manager's license form the city. Each applicant for a manager's or entertainer's license shall complete an application on forms provided by the city containing the information identified below. a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars shall accompany the application. A coy of the application shall be provided to the police department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager's or entertainer's license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager's or entertainer's license application shall require the following information:
        a. The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Aberdeen police department employees, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining.
        b. The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work.
        c. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
            (i) A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth;
            (ii) A state issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth;
            (iii) An official passport issued by the United States of America;
            (iv) An immigration card issued by the United States of America; or
            (v) Any other identification that the city determines to be acceptable.
        d. A complete statement of all conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
        e. A description of the applicant's principal activities or services to be rendered.
        f. Two (2) two-inch by two-inch (2"x2") color photographs of applicant, taken within six (6) months of the date of application showing only the full face.
        g. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
        h. Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to his or her performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret.
    2. The clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
    3. An adult cabaret manager's or an adult entertainer's license shall be issued by the clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application and fee are received unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this chapter. If the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the clerk shall deny the application in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws. If the clerk has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager's license within fourteen (14) days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
    4. An applicant for an adult entertainer's license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the fourteenth (14th) day following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the clerk has failed to approve or deny the license application in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the clerk approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional twenty (20) days.
D. Panoram premises license. 
    1. Any person seeking a panoram premises license shall file a written application with the clerk on a form provided by the clerk for that purpose. The clerk, upon presentation of such application and before acting upon the same, shall refer such application to the police department which shall make a full investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein. The clerk shall also refer such application to the planning and economic development and fire departments, and the Grays Harbor County health department, which shall investigate and provide information to the clerk concerning compliance of the premises with this and other applicable city and state health zoning, building, fire and safety ordinances and laws enforced by the respective departments. The design and development, fire and health departments may conduct such physical inspection of the premises as is necessary to determine compliance with such ordinances and laws.
    2. The following information shall accompany each application for a panoram premises license:
        a. The name, address and telephone number of each person applying for the license;
        b. The name, address and telephone number of each person holding an ownership, leasehold or other interest in the panoram premises;
        c. The name, address and telephone number of the manager or other person responsible for the operation of the premises;
        d. The address of the premises;
        e. The number of panoram devices to be located on the premises;
        f. A sketch or drawing sufficient to show the payout of the premises including all information necessary to determine whether the premises comply with the provisions of this chapter.
    3. Applicants for any panoram premises license to be issued under this chapter shall allow the premises sought to be licensed to be inspected by authorized inspectors from the city fire, police and planning and economic development departments, and the Grays Harbor County health department, for the purpose of determining whether they comply with this chapter. Licensees operating premises licensed under this chapter shall hold those areas upon the premises which are accessible to the public and the devices therein open for routine regulatory inspections by the city during normal business hours.
    4. After an investigation, the clerk shall issue the applicable license or licenses authorized by this chapter if the clerk finds:
        a. That the business for which a license is required herein will be conducted in a building, structure and location which complies with the requirements and meets the standards of this chapter; and
        b. That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the clerk.
        c. The decision of the clerk regarding issuance of any license shall be rendered within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of the application.

5.34.050 License fees.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a cabaret license shall first pay a license fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year.
B. Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret license shall first pay a license fee of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per year.
C. Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret manager's license shall first pay a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
D. Any person desiring to obtain an adult cabaret entertainer's license shall first pay a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.
E. Any person desiring to obtain a panoram premises license shall first pay a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year.

5.34.060 Appeal.
A. Denial of license. Any person aggrieved by the action of the clerk in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the city council, or to such other hearing examiner or hearing body as may hereafter be established by the city council for the hearing of license appeals, by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk within ten (10) days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. The city council, hearing examiner or other hearing body shall set a date for hearing such appeal, to take place within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. At such hearing the appellant and other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to rules and regulations of the city council, hearing examiner or other hearing body. The city council, hearing examiner or other hearing body shall render its decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) days following the close of the appeal hearing.
B. Appeal to superior court. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council, hearing examiner or hearing body may appeal to the superior court for a writ of certiorari prohibition or mandamus within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the decision was personally served upon or was mailed to the person aggrieved, or is thereafter barred.

5.34.070 Standards of conduct and operation of adult cabarets.
A. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees of any adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are allowed to be present:
    1. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least eight (8) feet from the nearest member of the public.
    2. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subdivision 1 of this subsection, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same.
    3. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.
    4. No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer.
    5. No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct as defined in this chapter, or any act which constitutes a violation of Chapter 7.48A RCW, the Washington Moral Nuisances Statute, or Chapter 9.28 AMC.
    6. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret unless that dance, performance or exhibition is performed at a distance of no less than four (4) feet from any member of the public.
    7. No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to the entertainer by any member of the public. Any gratuity offered to any entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult cabaret or provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any performance, dance or exhibition in or about the nonstage area of the adult cabaret shall be placed into the hand of the adult entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.
B. At any adult cabaret, the following are required:
    1. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of eighteen (18) years or more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of an adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises.
    2. Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of adult cabaret.
    No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the nonpublic portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include but are not limited to: the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.
C. The responsibilities of the manager of an adult cabaret shall include but are not limited to:
    1. A licensed manager shall be on duty at an adult cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer's license.
    2. The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.
    3. The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this chapter shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the adult cabaret.
    4. The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.
D. Adult cabaret premises - specifications. 
    1. Performance area. The performance area of the adult cabaret where adult entertainment as described in AMC 5.34.070A1 is provided shall be a stage or platform at least eighteen (18) inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least eight (8) feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three (3) feet in height and located at least eight (8) feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager's station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
    2. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of thirty (30) lux horizontal, measured at thirty (30) inches from the floor and on ten (10) foot centers is hereby established for all areas of the adult cabaret where members of the public are admitted.
    3. Signs. A sign at least two (2) feet, with letters at least one (1) inch high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the premises stating the following:
    THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF ABERDEEN. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
        A. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT
        B. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE, EXCEPT ON STAGE
        C. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE
        D. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS WHILE PERFORMING UPON ANY STAGE AREA
    4. Recordkeeping requirements. 
        a. All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the clerk during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two (2) days' written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this chapter.
        b. Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and their employees, as an entertainer. This information shall be open to inspection by the clerk during hours of operation of the business upon twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the licensee.
    5. Inspections. In order to insure compliance with this chapter all areas of licensed adult cabarets which are open to members of the public shall be open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to insure compliance with this chapter.
E. It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
F. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
    1. Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene;
    2. Classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or
    3. Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene.
These exemptions shall not apply to the sexual conduct defined in AMC 5.34.010(Q), or the sexual conduct described in RCW 7.48A.010(A)(2)(c).
G. Whether or not activity is obscene shall be judged by consideration of the following factors:
    1. Whether the average person applying contemporary community standards, would find that the activity taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest in sex; and
    2. Whether the activity depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, as measured against community standards, sexual conduct as described in RCW 7.48A.010(2)(b); and
    3. Whether the activity taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic political or scientific value.

5.34.080 Panoram premises regulations.
The clerk shall not license any panoram premises which do not conform to the following requirements, and shall revoke or suspend the license of any panoram premises, and the license of any operator thereof which do not maintain conformity with the following requirements:
A. The interior of every panoram station shall be arranged in such a manner that the view from a continuous main aisle of any person viewing a panoram shall not be obstructed except by a door, curtain or other device the bottom of which is at least forty-two (42) inches from the floor.
B. The licensee shall not permit any doors to areas on the premises which are available for use by persons other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to be locked during business hours.
C. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of thirty (30) lux horizontal, measured at thirty (30) inches from the floor and on ten (10) foot centers is hereby established for all parts of the premises available for use by the public at all times when the premises are open or when any member of the public is permitted to enter and remain therein.

5.34.090 License term -Assignment - Renewals.
A. There shall be no prorating of the license fees set out in AMC 5.34.050, and such licenses shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December of each year, except that in the event that the original application is made subsequent to June 30th, then one-half (1/2) of the annual fee may be accepted for the remainder of said year. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be assignable.
B. Application for renewal of licenses issued hereunder shall be made to the clerk no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of adult cabaret licenses, and no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the expiration of cabaret licenses and adult cabaret manager and entertainer licenses. The renewal license shall be issued in the same manner and on payment of the same fees as for an original application under this chapter. There shall be assessed and collected by the clerk, an additional charge, computed as a percentage of the license fee, on applications not made on or before said date, as follows:
+---------------+------------------------+
| Days Past Due | Percent of License Fee |
+---------------+------------------------+
| 7 - 30        | 25%                    |
+---------------+------------------------+
| 31 - 60       | 50%                    |
+---------------+------------------------+
| 61 and over   | 75%                    |
+---------------+------------------------+
C. The clerk shall renew a license upon application unless the clerk is aware of facts that would disqualify the applicant from being issued the license for which he or she seeks renewal, and further provided that the application complies with all provisions of this chapter as now enacted or as the same may hereafter be amended.

5.34.100 License suspension and revocation - Hearing.
A. The clerk may, upon the recommendation of the chief of police or his designee and as provided in subsection B below, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter at any time where the same was procured by fraud or false representation of fact; or for the violation of, or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of Chapter 9l28 AMC or any other similar local or state law by the licensee or by any of his servants, agents or employees when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees; or for the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises, or the conviction of any of his servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances (as that term is defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW) committed on the premises in which his cabaret is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by his servants, agents or employees.
B. A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days upon the first such violation, ninety (90) days upon the second violation within a twenty-four (24) month period, and revoked for third and subsequent violations within a twenty-four (24) month period, not including periods of suspension.
C. The clerk shall provide at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the licensee of the decision to suspend or revoke the license. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to the city council, hearing examiner or other designed hearing body and shall state the effective date of such revocation or suspension and the grounds for revocation or suspension. Such appeals shall be processed under the same appeal provisions st forth in AMC 5.34.060A, above. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council, hearing examiner or other designated hearing body shall have the right to appeal the decision to the superior court by writ of certiorari or mandamus as provided in AMC 5.34.060B, above. The decision of the clerk shall be stayed during the pendency of any appeal except as provided in subsection D below.
D. Where the Aberdeen building official or fire marshal or their designees or the Grays Harbor County health department find that any condition exists upon the premises of a cabaret or adult cabaret which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter pending a hearing in accordance with subsection C above. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the hearing examiner or other designed hearing body under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection C above provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal.

5.34.110 Liquor regulations.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any rules or regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the applicable rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Liquor Control Board shall control.

5.34.130 Violation a misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

5.34.140 Nuisance declared.
A. Public nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted, or maintained in violation of this chapter or any law of the city or the state of Washington shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult cabaret contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Moral nuisance. Any adult cabaret operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of Chapter 7.48A RCW, Moral Nuisance, shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public and moral nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies set forth herein, commence an action or actions, to abate, remove and enjoin such public and moral nuisance, or impose a civil penalty, in the manner provided by Chapter 7.48A RCW.

5.34.150 Additional enforcement.
The remedies found in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city may seek any other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to enjoining any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any business license ordinance or other regulations herein adopted.

5.34.160 Compliance.
All persons regulated pursuant to this chapter shall comply with this chapter within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5.34.170 Severability.
If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any other portion thereof, and its application to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected.
(Ord. 6160, Added, 08/13/1997)

Chapter 5.36 ADVERTISING

Sections:
5.36.010     Purpose of chapter.
5.36.020     Definitions.
5.36.030     False or misleading representations unlawful.
5.36.040     Advertising former prices.
5.36.050     Use of words "values up to."
5.36.060     Fact person advertising is dealer in advertised goods to appear in advertisement.
5.36.070     Use of word "value."
5.36.080     Opinion as to value.
5.36.090     Violations—Penalty.
5.36.100     Accessory to violation punished as principal.
5.36.110     Publishers and printers of advertising exempt.
5.36.120     Severability.
5.36.130     Placing advertising matter upon parked vehicles unlawful.
5.36.140     Violations—Penalties.
5.36.150     Medical and dental advertising by public speaking or outcry unlawful.
5.36.160     Public practice of medicine or dentistry unlawful.
5.36.170     Separate offenses.
5.36.180     Violations—Penalties.

5.36.010 Purpose of chapter.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state of Washington and of the city of Aberdeen, for the protection of the public economic and social welfare, health, peace and morals, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose.
(Prior code § 6.04.010)

5.36.020 Definitions.
The term "person" as used in this chapter shall be held to mean and include natural persons of either sex, firms, co-partnerships and corporations, whether acting by themselves or by servant, agent or employee. The singular number shall include the plural and the masculine pronoun shall include the feminine. The term "advertise" as used in this chapter shall be held and construed to include the making, displaying, publishing, disseminating or circulating of any public announcement of an offer to sell anything whatever in any newspaper, periodical, magazine, pamphlet, bulletin, circular letter, or upon any placard, poster, sign, picture, or hand bill, or in or upon any other advertising medium whatsoever, whether like or unlike those hereinbefore enumerated.
(Prior code § 6.04.020)

5.36.030 False or misleading representations unlawful.
It is unlawful to advertise any goods, wares or merchandise, securities, service, real estate or any other thing offered by such person, directly or indirectly, to the public for sale or distribution by making or employing any assertion, representation, or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading.
(Prior code § 6.04.030)

5.36.040 Advertising former prices.
It is unlawful to advertise for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, securities, service or real estate by announcing the present price of the same, or any of them, together with a statement of any former price thereof, unless such former price be the lowest at which the same were offered for sale to the public prior to their being offered at the present advertised price.
(Prior code § 6.04.040)

5.36.050 Use of words "values up to."
It is unlawful to advertise for sale any lot of miscellaneous goods, wares or merchandise by using a statement "values up to" a certain price, or any other statement of like import, unless such person so advertising shall specifically state in such advertisement the name and number of such articles and the lowest price at which each of said articles was offered for sale to the public prior to said advertisement.
(Prior code § 6.04.050)

5.36.060 Fact person advertising is dealer in advertised goods to appear in advertisement.
It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise, securities, service or real estate to advertise the sale of the same unless it shall be stated in the advertisement of such sale clearly and unequivocally, that said person advertising such sale of goods, wares or merchandise, securities, service or real estate is a dealer in the same; provided, however, that the advertisement of the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise, securities, service or real estate, in such form as to make it plainly apparent therefrom that the person so advertising is actually engaged in the business of selling such goods, wares, or merchandise, securities, service or real estate as a business shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(Prior code § 6.04.060)

5.36.070 Use of word "value."
It is unlawful in advertising for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or securities or real estate, to use in connection with the word "value" or any synonymous term, any word or figure, as thus used, falsely or fraudulently conveying, or intended to convey, a meaning that the thing so advertised is intrinsically worth more than, or previously sold in Aberdeen for a higher price than the price so presently advertised.
(Prior code § 6.04.070)

5.36.080 Opinion as to value.
A. It shall be no defense to a prosecution under Section 6.04.070, that the advertisement upon which the prosecution is based represents the opinion of the accused as to value, unless it is clearly stated in such advertisement that the representation as to value therein contained is a matter of opinion and not a statement of fact.
B. The words "value" and "worth" as used in this and the foregoing section shall be held and construed to mean the prevailing market price at which a thing is regularly sold in Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 6.04.080)

5.36.090 Violations—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of the Sections 5.36.040 to 5.36.080 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 6.04.090)

5.36.100 Accessory to violation punished as principal.
Every person concerned in any act or omission in violation of this chapter, whether he directly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of this chapter, or aids or abets the same, whether present or absent, and every person who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces, or otherwise procures another to commit such violation is, and shall be, a principal under the terms of this chapter, and shall be proceeded against and prosecuted as such.
(Prior code § 6.04.100)

5.36.110 Publishers and printers of advertising exempt.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person engaged in the business of commercial printing, any person engaged in the business of publishing any newspaper or periodical, or any agent of such persons, who publish any such advertisement in good faith and without knowledge of the falsity thereof.
(Prior code § 6.04.110)

5.36.120 Severability.
If any section, subsection, subdivision sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or void, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 6.04.120)

5.36.130 Placing advertising matter upon parked vehicles unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, or cause to be placed, any card, circular, pamphlet or any other advertising matter upon the windshield of any motor vehicle parked upon the streets of the city of Aberdeen; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the owner of such vehicle from placing thereof such matter as is not otherwise prohibited by law.
(Prior code § 6.04.130)

5.36.140 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of Section 5.36.130 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by confinement in the city jail for not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 6.04.140)

5.36.150 Medical and dental advertising by public speaking or outcry unlawful.
No person, as principal, agent, employer, employee or assistant shall, within the city of Aberdeen, by public speaking or public outcry, or by the aid or use of any sound-producing instrument or device, advertise the practice of medicine, surgery or dentistry, or solicit patronage in the practice of medicine, surgery or dentistry, or designate or indicate the name of the place of business of any practitioner of medicine, surgery or dentistry, or the price charged for any medical, surgical or dental treatment or operation.
(Prior code § 6.04.150)

5.36.160 Public practice of medicine or dentistry unlawful.
No person, as principal, agent, employer, employee or assistant, shall, within the city of Aberdeen In any street, avenue, alley or public place, or any unenclosed place, or any tent or like temporary structure, engage in the practice of medicine, surgery or dentistry, or make any examination or diagnosis, or administer any treatment or perform any operation, in the practice of medicine, surgery or dentistry.
(Prior code § 6.04.160)

5.36.170 Separate offenses.
Every examination, every diagnosis, every treatment and every operation in violation of this chapter shall be a distinct offense; and where the violation hereof is of a continuing nature a distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day.
(Prior code § 6.04.170)

5.36.180 Violations—Penalties.
Every person who shall violate Sections 5.36.160 to 5.36.170 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than thirty (30) days.
(Prior code § 6.04.180)

Chapter 5.40 HOTELS

Sections:
5.40.010     Definitions.
5.40.020     Hotel register—Required—Content.
5.40.030     Hotel registration—True name to be used.
5.40.040     Violations—Penalties.

5.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the word "person" shall mean and include persons, corporations, co-partnerships and associations. and shall include persons of both sexes. The word "house" shall mean and include hotels, rooming and lodging houses.
(Prior code § 6.36.010)

5.40.020 Hotel register—Required—Content.
Every person to whom a license shall have been issued to conduct a hotel, rooming or lodging house shall at all times keep a standard hotel register, in which shall be inscribed the names of all guests or persons renting or occupying rooms in such house, which register shall be signed by the person renting a room or rooms, or by someone under their direction. Such registration must be made, and after the name or names so inscribed or registered, the manager of the house, or their agent, shall write the number of the room or rooms which such guest or person is to occupy such room or rooms. Such register shall be at all times open to inspection by any guest of the house wherein such register is kept and to any executive or peace officer of the city of Aberdeen or of the state of Washington.
(Prior code § 6.36.020)

5.40.030 Hotel registration—True name to be used.
It is unlawful for any person to write or cause to be written in any hotel register any other or different name than the true name of such person, or the name by which such person is generally known.
(Prior code § 6.36.030)

5.40.040 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 6.36.040)

Chapter 5.48 STREET MERCHANTS PROHIBITED

Sections:
5.48.010     Street merchants and street fakirs prohibited.

5.48.010 Street merchants and street fakirs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use, occupy, or obstruct any of the streets, alleys or public places within the corporate limits of the city of Aberdeen, for the purpose of the advertising, sale, or distribution of any goods, wares or merchandise; it being the intent of this chapter to prohibit what is commonly known as street merchants and street fakirs.
(Prior code § 9.24.010)

Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:
6.04         General Regulations
6.08         Horses on Streets
6.12         Animal Control Fund

Chapter 6.04 GENERAL REGULATIONS

Sections:
6.04.010     Definitions.
6.04.020     License required.
6.04.030     Affixing license tags.
6.04.040     Licenses—Violations.
6.04.050     Dangerous dogs—Violations—Penalties.
6.04.060     Permits.
6.04.070     License and permit—Denial and revocation.
6.04.080     Denial or revocation of license or permit—Appeal.
6.04.090     Animal care.
6.04.100     Safety and sanitation—Prohibited acts.
6.04.110     Animals declared public nuisances.
6.04.120     Public nuisance—Violation.
6.04.130     Prohibited acts—Misdemeanors—Penalty.
6.04.140     Rabies.
6.04.150     Impounding of animals.
6.04.160     Notice of impounding.
6.04.170     Redemption of impounded animals.
6.04.180     Disposition of unclaimed animals.
6.04.190     Immediate destruction of animals.
6.04.200     Wild or dangerous animals.
6.04.210     Violations—Penalties in general.
6.04.220     Disposition of fees, fines and charges.
6.04.230     Severability.

6.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
"Abandon" means the act of leaving an animal: (a) without food, water, or care for twenty-four (24) hours or more; or (b) in a situation where the condition presents an immediate, direct, and serious threat to the life, safety, or health of the animal.
"Animal" means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, whether spayed, neutered or whole.
"Animal control officer" means any person designated by the chief of police or the municipal government as a law enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcing ordinances, statutes or regulations relating to animals.
"Animal shelter" means any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal agency, or its authorized contractors or agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
"At heel" means for any animal to be positioned and controlled in such a manner so as to remain within a distance of two feet from its owner or other competent person having charge of such animal.
"At large" means off the premises of the owner or upon the public streets, alleys, public grounds, school grounds, or parks within the city. An animal is not "at large" if it is:
    1. Attached to a leash or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal, not more than eight feet in length, and held by a person competent to restrain and control the animal off the owner's premises; or
    2. Restrained within a motor vehicle; or
    3. Accompanied by and at heel beside the owner or a competent responsible person; or
    4. It is confined, tied or restrained so as to be unable to range beyond the owner's premises.
"Competent person" means any person who, by reason of age and physical ability, and/or training, is capable of maintaining control of the animal in the charge or custody of such person.
"Dangerous dog" means any dog that:
    1. Has inflicted severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or
    2. Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or
    3. Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
"Humane society" means any organization for the prevention of cruelty to animals incorporated under the laws of the state of Washington.
"Kennel" means an establishment wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats; or premises where four or more dogs and cats over six months of age are harbored.
"Owner" means any person who has legal title to an animal, any person who has possession or custody of an animal, any person who harbors an animal, and/or any person who permits or allows the animal to remain on his property. An animal shall be deemed harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.
"Person" includes any person, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or association or group of persons.
"Potentially dangerous dog" means any dog that without provocation:
    1. Inflicts bites on a human or a domestic animal, either on public or private property; or
    2. Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
    3. Causes injury or otherwise threatens the safety of humans or domestic animals.
"Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog" means a dangerous dog while on the owner's property shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children or their being able to place any portion of their anatomy so as to expose it to risk of attack by the dog and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.
"Severe injury" means any physical injury that results in broken bones or lacerations requiring sutures or cosmetic surgery.
"Stray animal" means animal found at large without any apparent owner or home.
"Veterinary hospital" means an establishment regularly maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
(Prior code § 6.06.010)

6.04.020 License required.
A. Except as provided in Section 6.04.060, it is a violation for any person to own, possess, keep, or harbor any dog or cat over six months of age within the city unless such animal is licensed and a license tag attached as provided in this chapter.
B. Licenses shall be issued by the city upon payment of the required city license fee:
    1. Annual licenses issued after the first day of November of each year shall be valid until the last day of December of the next following year.
    2. Lifetime licenses shall be valid for the life of the animal.
C. Before a license is issued for any dog or cat, the owner must certify under penalty of perjury that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies.
    1. For annual licenses, a certification of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian, and showing that the vaccination does not expire prior to the expiration date of the license, must be provided upon request.
    2. For lifetime licenses, a copy of a current, unexpired certification of vaccination signed by a licensed veterinarian must be provided to the city. The original certification must be provided upon request.
D. Before a license is issued for any dangerous dog the owner shall present sufficient evidence of:
    1. A proper enclosure to confine a dangerous dog and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous dog on the property. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous dog;
    2. A surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under RCW Chapter 48.28, in a form acceptable to the animal control authority in the sum of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog; or
    3. A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner's insurance, issued by an insurer qualified under RCW Title 48 in the amount of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), insuring the owner vs. any personal injuries inflicted upon another person by the dangerous dog.
E. The following license fees shall be paid upon application for a license:
    1. Unneutered or unspayed dogs, twenty-five dollars ($25.00);
    2. Neutered or spayed dog. 
        a. Annual license, five dollars ($5.00);
        b. Lifetime license, thirty dollars ($30.00);
    3. Unneutered or unspayed cats, fifteen dollars ($15.00).
    4. Neutered or spayed cats. 
        a. Annual license, three dollars ($3.00);
        b. Lifetime license, twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
    5. Seeing eye dogs or other dogs trained to assist disabled or handicapped persons, no fee for annual or lifetime license.
    6. Dangerous dog, five hundred dollars ($500.00), annual license only.
    7. Government police dogs, no fee.
F. The license and fee requirements of this section shall not apply to dogs owned by nonresidents temporarily within the city for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or to government police dogs.
G. The license applicant shall be required to furnish proof that a dog or cat has been neutered or spayed and may be required to present a certificate from a licensed veterinarian to that effect.
H. License tags shall not be transferable. No refund shall be made of any license fee for any reason.
I. In the event any license tag is lost, a duplicate shall be caused to be issued by the city upon presentation of the original license receipt and upon payment of three dollars ($3.00).
(Ord. 6313, Amended, 12/12/2001. Prior code § 6.06.020)

6.04.030 Affixing license tags.
The owner shall cause a valid license tag to be securely affixed to the collar of the animal so that the license is in such a position that it may be easily seen by animal control officers. The owner shall cause the tag to be worn by such animal at all times.
(Prior code § 6.06.030)

6.04.040 Licenses—Violations.
It is a violation to counterfeit or alter any licenses, license receipt, or license tag provided for in this chapter, or to take from any animal a license tag legally placed upon that animal with the intent to place it upon another animal, or to place upon an animal a license tag not validly issued for such animal.
(Prior code § 6.06.040)

6.04.050 Dangerous dogs—Violations—Penalties.
A. It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
B. Any dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer if:
    1. The dog is not validly licensed under Section 6.04.020(D) of this chapter;
    2. The owner fails to maintain the liability insurance coverage required under Section 6.04.020(D) of this chapter;
    3. The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure;
    4. The dog is outside of the proper enclosure and not under physical restraint as required by subsection (B)(1) of this section.
C. Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
D. The violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in Section 6.04.130 of this chapter.
(Prior code § 6.06.045)

6.04.060 Permits.
A. No person, partnership or corporation shall operate a commercial animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this section.
B. The city of Aberdeen shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws. The city of Aberdeen may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals.
C. Upon a showing by an applicant for a permit that he is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the city of Aberdeen, a permit shall be issued.
D. Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee:
    1. For each kennel authorized to house four or more but less than fifty (50) dogs or cats, sixty dollars ($60.00);
    2. For each kennel authorized to house fifty (50) or more dogs or cats, one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00);
    3. For each pet shop, ninety dollars ($90.00);
    4. For each riding stable, ninety dollars ($90.00);
    5. For each animal exhibition, circus acts excepted, sixty dollars ($60.00);
    6. For each animal grooming shop, sixty dollars ($60.00).
E. Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs which handle less than four animals may elect to license such animals individually.
F. No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter, or government-operated zoological park.
G. Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee shall be made.
(Ord. 6313, Amended, 12/12/2001. Prior code § 6.06.050)

6.04.070 License and permit—Denial and revocation.
A. The chief of police or his designee may deny or revoke any permit or license if the person requesting or holding the permit or license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the city of Aberdeen, or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals.
B. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that the city of Aberdeen shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner.
C)(1. If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the city of Aberdeen shall refuse to issue or may revoke a permit or license.
    2. Knowingly falsifying any information on a license application or veterinarian's certificate is an infraction punishable by a monetary penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
D. No person who has been convicted of an offense involving cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment for twenty-four (24) months after the date of the conviction.
E. Any person having been denied a license or permit may not reapply for a period of thirty (30) days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a ten dollar fee which shall be in addition to the fees required by Section 6.04.020.
F. Any person whose permit or license is revoked or denied shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored by such person and no part of any permit or license fee shall be refunded.
G. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor as provided in this chapter shall:
    1. Not be allowed to apply for a license or permit for two years after the date of conviction, and
    2. Have any current valid animal license or permit revoked by the city.
(Prior code § 6.06.060)

6.04.080 Denial or revocation of license or permit—Appeal.
A. If the chief of police determines pursuant to Section 6.04.070 that a license or permit should be denied or revoked, the chief shall notify the applicant, permittee, or licensee of his decision, in writing and with the reasons therefore, in person or by certified or registered mail. The notice shall also include the applicant's right to a hearing or an appeal under this section.
B. Within ten business days after posting of the notice as provided in subsection (A) of this section, the applicant may request a hearing before the chief to show cause why such license or permit should be granted or should not be revoked. If the applicant does not request a hearing before the chief within ten business days of the posting of the notice, the decision of the chief shall become final.
C. If a hearing is requested, and, after such hearing, the chief decides that the license or permit should not be issued or that a previously issued license or permit should be revoked, he shall so notify the applicant of his determination in writing. The applicant may appeal by filing written notice of appeal with the city council within ten business days of his notification by the chief. At his option, the chief of police may treat a request for a hearing as an appeal by so notifying the city council, which shall then treat the matter as an appeal under the following section.
D. Upon receipt of an appeal, or notification by the chief that he is electing to treat a request for a hearing as an appeal, the council shall schedule a hearing at the earliest opportunity and shall notify the applicant and the chief of the date of the hearing. Following a hearing the council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the chief. Action by the council shall be final and effective immediately unless otherwise specified.
(Prior code § 6.06.070)

6.04.090 Animal care.
A. Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined to the owner's property or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel so that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with other animals except for intentional breeding purposes.
B. Dogs or cats kept outdoors for more than six hours at one time must be provided with a moisture-proof and windproof shelter of a size which allows the animal to turn around freely and to easily sit, stand and lie in a normal position and to keep the animal clean, dry and comfortable.
C. Every owner shall provide his or her animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
D. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner, animal control officer, or police department.
(Ord. 6217, Repealed (part), 05/26/1999; Ord. 6217, Amended, 05/26/1999. Prior code § 6.06.080)

6.04.100 Safety and sanitation—Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for an owner to:
A. Allow the accumulation of cat or dog feces in any open area, run, cage or yard wherein dogs and/or cats are kept and fail to remove or dispose of feces at least once every seventy-two (72) hours;
B. Fail to remove the fecal matter deposited by his/her animal on public property or private property of another before the owner leaves the immediate area where the fecal matter was deposited;
C. Fail to have in his/her possession the equipment necessary to remove his/her animal's fecal matter when accompanied by said animal on public property or public easement.
(Prior code § 6.06.085)

6.04.110 Animals declared public nuisances.
In each of the following instances, the animal involved is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be impounded and held in accordance to the provisions of this chapter:
A. Any animal at large within the city;
B. Any animal which, by frequent or habitual howls, barks, or other loud noises, unreasonably annoys or disturbs another resident in the immediate neighborhood;
C. Any animal which snarls, growls or otherwise menaces, molests or comes in contact with any person or passing vehicle using any public street, alley, or sidewalk;
D. Any stray animal;
E. Any animal, the keeping, possession or ownership of which is in violation of any provision of this chapter;
F. Any animal which has not been licensed as provided by this chapter or which does not have a proper license tag attached to it;
G. Any animal which damages private or public property and/or spreads or spills garbage;
H. Any animal which is in imminent danger of harm or which is suffering from obvious neglect.
I. Any potentially dangerous dog.
(Prior code § 6.06.090)

6.04.120 Public nuisance—Violation.
It is a violation of this chapter for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance.
(Prior code § 6.06.100)

6.04.130 Prohibited acts—Misdemeanors—Penalty.
It is a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for any person to commit any of the following acts:
A. To intentionally beat, injure or kill any domestic animal in a cruel or inhumane manner, or to otherwise intentionally torture or torment any domestic animal in a cruel manner; provided, that any owner or person having possession or control of any domestic animal who permits any such cruel acts to be performed by another, and who aids, abets, or encourages any of such cruel acts to be performed, shall be guilty of violating this section;
B. To place any poisonous substance upon any public or private property with intent to kill or cause serious injury to any domestic animal;
C. To allow any quarantined animal to be outside or free of such confinement as may be ordered by the health, animal control, or other officer;
D. To prevent, obstruct, or interfere, or to attempt to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with any officer who is enforcing or attempting to enforce the provisions of this chapter;
E. To break open, or attempt to break open, any place, vehicle, building or enclosure where animals impounded under this chapter are kept; or except as authorized by the animal control officer, to take or let animals therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from the animal control officer any animal seized by him or her in compliance with this chapter.
F. Cruelty. 
    1. To confine, without adequate ventilation, any animal in any box, container or vehicle;
    2. To tease, tantalize or provoke any animal with the intent to cause fear or anger;
    3. To tether or confine any animal in such a manner or in such a place as to cause injury or pain or to endanger an animal; or to keep an animal in quarters that are injurious to the animal due to inadequate protection from the heat or cold, or that are of insufficient size to permit the animal to move about freely;
    4. To abandon any domestic animal within city limits;
    5. To keep an animal in an unsanitary condition or fail to provide sufficient food, water, shelter, or ventilation necessary for the good health of that animal.
(Ord. 6217, Amended, 05/26/1999. Prior code § 6.06.110)

6.04.140 Rabies.
A. In addition to and notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever any person has been bitten by any animal and there is no reason to suspect that the animal is rabid, at the discretion of the local health officer or an animal control officer, the animal involved may be restricted for ten days observation in such manner as to prevent contact with other animals or persons except for the caretaker. (WAC 248-100-450).
B. The department of health or police department may, if there is reason to believe the animal may be rabid, order the animal surrendered to an animal shelter or veterinary hospital to be confined at the owner's expense. The cost of confinement shall be the greater of four dollars ($4.00) per day or actual costs.
C. No person shall knowingly allow an animal confined under provisions of this chapter to escape; or sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of such animal before the expiration of the quarantine period.
(Prior code § 6.06.120)

6.04.150 Impounding of animals.
Any animal which is off the premises of the owner and not under the control of some person, or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter and subject to impound, may be impounded by the animal control officer. Except as provided in Sections 6.04.050(B) or 6.04.140, no licensed animal shall be impounded if it is on the owner's property.
(Prior code § 6.06.130)

6.04.160 Notice of impounding.
Upon seizing and impounding of any animal, if the identity of the owner is known to or can be readily determined by the animal control officer, the animal control officer shall give notice of such impounding in substantially the following manner: as soon as reasonably practicable after the animal is impounded, the animal control officer shall make reasonable attempts to notify the owner by note, telephone or mail that the animal has been impounded and, is subject to redemption, may be redeemed as herein provided.
(Prior code § 6.06.140)

6.04.170 Redemption of impounded animals.
A. Unless specific provisions of this chapter require impounding for a longer period of time, any impounded animal may be redeemed by the owner, or an authorized representative of the owner, from the animal control officer upon proof that the following conditions have been met:
    1. On the first impoundment of an animal an impounding fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid, and a boarding fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each calendar day or portion thereof that the animal has been confined; provided, that on subsequent impoundment of the same animal within a twelve-month period the impounding fee shall be increased to fifty dollars ($50.00);
    2. If the owner has no valid license tag for the animal and a license is required by the provisions of this chapter, the owner shall obtain a license tag or duplicate for the current year;
    3. If no license is required for the animal, proof of a current rabies vaccination must be produced.
B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, no animal impounded under this chapter as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be released or redeemed without a hearing first being held before the municipal court judge. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the owner pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.160 at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date and time of the hearing. If after such hearing the judge determines that the animal has or exhibits vicious or dangerous propensities and would, if released, constitute any threat to the welfare of the residents of the city, the judge is authorized to direct the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the animal to destroy or otherwise satisfactorily dispose of the animal.
(Ord. 6313, Amended, 12/12/2001. Prior code § 6.06.145)

6.04.180 Disposition of unclaimed animals.
A. Unless specific provisions of this chapter require impounding for a longer period of time, if an impounded animal is not claimed and redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding Sundays and holidays, it shall become the property of the city and it may be sold, relinquished for adoption, or humanely destroyed by the animal control officer; provided, that any person who wishes to adopt an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat shall first have the animal spayed or neutered.
B. Each person adopting an impounded animal from the city of Aberdeen shall pay a nonrefundable fi fteen dollar ($15.00) adoption fee.
(Ord. 6313, Amended, 12/12/2001. Prior code § 6.06.150)

6.04.190 Immediate destruction of animals.
An animal control officer or police officer may immediately destroy any animal when:
A. The health or safety of a person is at risk and impoundment would be impracticable; or
B. For humane considerations.
(Prior code § 6.06.160)

6.04.200 Wild or dangerous animals.
A. No person shall keep or maintain or have in his possession or under his control, within any area of the city zoned residential, any lion, tiger, bear, chimpanzee, gorilla, cougar, mountain lion, badger, wolf, coyote, fox, lynx, or poisonous reptile or serpent, or any other dangerous wild animal or reptile.
B. No person owning or having charge, custody, control, or possession of any animal specified in subsection (A) of this section shall permit or allow the same to run at large upon any highway, lane, alley, court, or any other way, public or private, or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger any person lawfully entering such premises.
C. Subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to any person keeping or maintaining or having in his possession or under his control any animal specified therein when such person is transporting such animal through the city; provided, he has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public, and has notified the animal control officer of his proposed route of transportation and of the time that such trip is to take place; nor shall subsection (A) of this section apply to a person who has custody of any such animals in connection with the operation of any zoo or circus or in connection with any program of medical or scientific research or humane education, provided such person has taken adequate measures to safeguard persons and property.
(Prior code § 6.06.170)

6.04.210 Violations—Penalties in general.
A. Except where otherwise provided in this chapter, the failure to perform any act required by this chapter, the performance of any act prohibited or declared unlawful by this chapter, or any violations of the terms of this chapter is designated as an infraction and shall not be classified as a criminal offense. Any person found to have committed an infraction under this chapter shall be assessed a monetary penalty as follows:
    1. For the first offense in one year not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
    2. For a second offense within one year, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).
B. A person found to have committed a third or subsequent offense as provided in this chapter, of any kind, including offenses which would otherwise be designated as an infraction, within one year, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by confinement in jail not to exceed ninety (90) days and by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Prior code § 6.06.180)

6.04.220 Disposition of fees, fines and charges.
All fines, fees or other charges imposed and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in the animal control fund unless otherwise required by state law.
(Prior code § 6.06.185)

6.04.230 Severability.
It is the intention of the city council that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions, and it is further the intention of the city council that if any provision of this chapter is declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
(Prior code § 6.06.190)

Chapter 6.08 HORSES ON STREETS

Sections:
6.08.010     Restrictions.

6.08.010 Restrictions.
A. It is unlawful to drive or ride horses upon the public streets, sidewalks or alleys in the city of Aberdeen except in areas zoned as residential agricultural districts, along state highways within the city of Aberdeen, or except by special permit granted by the chief of police in connection with parades or similar events.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in the city jail or both.
(Prior code § 6.07.010)

Chapter 6.12 ANIMAL CONTROL FUND

Sections:
6.12.010     Establishment.
6.12.040     Expenditures.

6.12.010 Establishment.
There is created a fund for animal control, and all charges collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and placed in said fund and shall be disbursed from said fund as directed by the city council of the city of Aberdeen from time to time.
(Prior code § 1.24.010)

6.12.040 Expenditures.
Expenditures from the Animal Control Fund shall be limited to expenses necessary for animal control, including contracts for services, construction, maintenance, and operation of an animal control facility, and other services or programs as may be authorized by the city council.
(Ord. 6428, Amended, 12/13/2006)

Title 7 RESERVED

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.02         Use and Possession of Tobacco Products
8.04         Fireworks
8.08         Nuisances
8.10         Chronic Nuisance

Chapter 8.02 USE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS

Sections:
8.02.010     Washington Clean Indoor Air Act adoped by reference.
8.02.020     Tobacco - Access to Minors.
8.02.030     Amendment to state statutes - adoption by reference.
8.02.040     Adoption of sections of the Revised Code of the state of Washington not specifically set forth in Title 9 AMC - assumption of jurisdiction.

8.02.010 Washington Clean Indoor Air Act adoped by reference.
Chapter 70.160 of the Revised Code of Washington is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 6403, Added, 04/26/2006)

8.02.020 Tobacco - Access to Minors.
The following sections of the Revised Code of Washington are hereby adopted by reference:
+------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| 70.155.05  | Findings;                                          |
+------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| 70.155.010 | Definitions;                                       |
+------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| 70.155.080 | Purchasing, possessing by persons under eighteen - |
|            | civil infraction - Jurisdiction.                   |
+------------+----------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6403, Added, 04/26/2006)

8.02.030 Amendment to state statutes - adoption by reference.
The amendment of any state statute adopted by reference in this chapter shall be deemed to amend the corresponding section of this chapter and it shall not be necessary for the city council to take any action with respect to such amendment
(Ord. 6403, Added, 04/26/2006)

8.02.040 Adoption of sections of the Revised Code of the state of Washington not specifically set forth in Title 9 AMC - assumption of jurisdiction.
The city has assumed jurisdiction over the enforcement and prosecution of civil violations of the Revised Code of Washington sections adopted by this chapter. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this chapter refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this chapter, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this chapter. When issuing a notice of infraction for the violation of any section of the RCW adopted by this chapter, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to cite to and refer to the RCW section number.
(Ord. 6403, Added, 04/26/2006)

Chapter 8.04 FIREWORKS

Sections:
8.04.010     State codes adopted by reference.
8.04.020     Acts prohibited without permit.
8.04.030     Application for permit.
8.04.040     Investigation, report on permit application.
8.04.050     City council may grant or deny permit—Conditions.
8.04.060     License required prior to issuance of permit.
8.04.070     Place of sales restricted.
8.04.120     Expiration and renewal of permits.
8.04.150     Mandatory revocation of permit.
8.04.160     Classification and registration.
8.04.170     Labeling of fireworks.
8.04.180     Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.
8.04.200     Authorized sales of toy pistols, canes, guns, etc.
8.04.230     Storage permit required.
8.04.240     Approved storage facilities required.
8.04.250     Sale of stock after revocation of permit.
8.04.280     Unlawful acts.
8.04.300     Signal purposes, forest protection, exempt.
8.04.310     Penalty.
8.04.320     Violation a separate, continuing offense.

8.04.010 State codes adopted by reference.
A. The State Fireworks Law, Chapter 70.77 RCW, as presently existing or subsequently amended, is hereby adopted, incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. A copy of Chapter 70.77 RCW, including all future amendments, shall be maintained for use and examination by the public in the office of the finance director.
B. The rules of the state director of fire protection relating to fireworks, chapter 212-17 WAC, as presently existing or subsequently amended, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. A copy of Chapter 212-17 WAC, including all future amendments adopted pursuant to the Washington Administrative Procedure Act, chapter 34.04 RCW, shall be maintained for use and examination by the public in the office of the finance director.
C. In any instance where the express terms of this chapter conflict with the provisions of the state codes adopted by reference, the terms of this chapter shall govern, it being the intent of this section that local fireworks regulation by the city shall follow the provisions and procedures for state licenses as closely as practical while recognizing the exercise of local options regarding the sale and discharge of fireworks.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.010)

8.04.020 Acts prohibited without permit.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person, without securing a permit, to do any of the following within this city:
A. Manufacture, possess, or sell any fireworks at wholesale or retail for any use, including agricultural purposes or wildlife control;
B. Discharge fireworks other than Consumer Fireworks on July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight;
C. Make a public display of fireworks; or
D. Transport fireworks, except as a public carrier delivering to a licensee.
(Ord. 6562, Amended, 10/22/2014; Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.020)

8.04.030 Application for permit.
Any adult person or other group desiring to do any act mentioned in the preceding section shall first make written application for a permit to the chief of the fire department of the city. The form of the application and the criteria for issuance, denial, or issuance with conditions shall be the same as used by the state of Washington in processing applications for the corresponding state license. Applications for permits for public display of fireworks shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the proposed display.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.030)

8.04.040 Investigation, report on permit application.
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make an investigation and submit a report of his findings and his recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit, together with his reasons therefor, to the city council of the city.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.040)

8.04.050 City council may grant or deny permit—Conditions.
The city council shall grant an application for a permit under RCW 70.77.260 if the application meets the standards under Chapter 70.77 RCW and this chapter.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.050)

8.04.060 License required prior to issuance of permit.
No permit shall be granted or issued under this chapter unless the person applying for the permit has first obtained a valid license from the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection, as provided by the laws of this state, to do the particular act or acts described in the permit.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.060)

8.04.070 Place of sales restricted.
No retail sales of fireworks shall be permitted from any location other than a temporary stand complying with the requirements of Chapter 70.77 RCW, Chapter 212-17 WAC, and this chapter.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.065)

8.04.120 Expiration and renewal of permits.
Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period of time stated thereon only; provided, that no permit shall be valid beyond the calendar year in which the same is issued. Permits shall be renewed in the same manner as for the application for an original permit.
(Prior code § 6.25.110)

8.04.150 Mandatory revocation of permit.
The chief of the fire department, upon reasonable opportunity to be heard and subject to review of such action by the city council, shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the chief finds that:
A. The permittee has violated any provisions of this chapter or of state law for any rule or regulation made by the chief of the fire department or by the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection;
B. The permittee has created or caused a fire nuisance;
C. Any permittee has had his state license revoked or canceled for any reason; or
D. Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed at the time of the original application for such permit, reasonably would have warranted the fire chief in refusing originally to issue such permit.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.140)

8.04.160 Classification and registration.
No fireworks shall be sold, offered for sale, discharged, transported or stored within the city without first having been classified and registered by the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.150)

8.04.170 Labeling of fireworks.
No fireworks shall be sold, offered for sale, discharged, transported or stored within the city unless the same shall have been labeled and stamped as required by state law and shall bear the classification label and license number of the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.160)

8.04.180 Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.
A. No consumer fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale at retail within the city except from 9:00 o'clock a.m. to 11:00 o'clock p.m. on each day from the first of July through the 4th of July of each year.
B. No consumer fireworks shall be discharged without a permit within the city except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 o'clock midnight on the 4th of July.
(Ord. 6562, Amended, 10/22/2014; Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.170)

8.04.200 Authorized sales of toy pistols, canes, guns, etc.
Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other similar devices in which paper caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths grain of explosive compound for each cap are used may be sold at all times.
(Prior code § 6.25.190)

8.04.230 Storage permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to store fireworks of any class without first having made a written application for and received a permit for such storage to the chief of the fire department at least ten days prior to the date of the proposed storage. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make an investigation as to whether such storage, as proposed, will be of such a nature and character and will be so located as to constitute a hazard to property or to be dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as he may prescribe.
(Prior code § 6.25.220)

8.04.240 Approved storage facilities required.
It is unlawful for any person to store unsold stocks of consumer fireworks remaining unsold after the lawful period of sale, as provided in his permit, except in such cases of storage as the chief of the fire department shall approve. Unsold stocks of consumer fireworks remaining after the authorized retail sales period shall be returned on or before July 31st of the same year to the approved storage facilities of a licensed fireworks wholesaler, to a magazine or storage place approved by the chief of the fire department, or to a place approved by the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection.
(Ord. 6562, Amended, 10/22/2014; Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.230)

8.04.250 Sale of stock after revocation of permit.
Following the revocation of any permit issued by the city, if the permittee remains in possession of a lawfully acquired stock of fireworks, such fireworks may be sold only under the supervision of the chief of the fire department and of the chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the director of fire protection, and only to such persons who are authorized to buy, possess, sell or otherwise use such fireworks.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.240)

8.04.280 Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful to commit any of the following acts within the city:
A. Sell, transport, possess, or discharge any fireworks which have not been classified or registered as required by state law;
B. Transfer ownership or possession of dangerous fireworks, whether by wholesale or retail sales, by gift or other means of conveyance of title, or other delivery, to any person who does not possess and present to the transferor for inspection at the time of transfer a valid license and permit;
C. Sell or discharge any fireworks in any public garage or public oil station or on any premises where gasoline or other Class I flammable liquids are stored or dispensed or where more than four motor vehicles are stored;
D. Sell any consumer fireworks to a consumer or user thereof other than at a fixed place of business of a retailer for which a license and permit have been issued;
E. Allow any rubbish to accumulate in any premises where any fireworks are stored or sold, or permit a fire nuisance to exist;
F. Set off or ignite any form of fireworks as defined in this chapter in any forest, fallows, grass or brush-covered land on private property between April 15th and December 1st of any year, unless it is done under a written permit from the supervisor of forestry of the state of Washington and from the fire chief, and in strict accordance with the terms of the permits and other applicable law;
G. Set off, ignite, or aid in setting off or igniting any form of fireworks as defined in this chapter in a public place. "Public place" shall include but is not limited to parks, sidewalks, streets and other pedestrian and automobile byways, garages or gasoline stations, and any other form of property open to the public within the city;
H. Possess, discharge, transport, import, manufacture, or use any class or kind of fireworks in violation of the provisions of Chapter 70.77 RCW, Chapter 212-17 WAC, or this chapter.
(Ord. 6562, Amended, 10/22/2014; Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.270)

8.04.300 Signal purposes, forest protection, exempt.
This chapter does not prohibit the use or torpedoes, flares, or fuses by motor vehicles, railroads, or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination or for use in forest protection activities.
(Prior code § 6.25.290)

8.04.310 Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or Chapter 70.77 RCW, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter the state statutes and regulations adopted herein, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6166, Amended, 11/12/1997. Prior code § 6.25.300)

8.04.320 Violation a separate, continuing offense.
A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which he commits, continues or permits a violation of any provision of, or any order, rule or regulation made pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior code § 6.25.310)

Chapter 8.08 NUISANCES

Sections:
8.08.010     Definitions.
8.08.020     Public nuisance defined.
8.08.030     Certain nuisances designated.
8.08.040     Signage of shopping carts.
8.08.050     Exemptions.
8.08.060     Right of entry.
8.08.070     Administrative search warrants.
8.08.080     Administrative search warrant return.
8.08.090     Prohibited conduct.
8.08.100     Enforcement – Notice and order – Service.
8.08.110     Contents of notice and order—Form.
8.08.120     Request for hearing—Show cause procedure.
8.08.130     Abatement by owner or other responsible person.
8.08.140     Abatement by the city.
8.08.150     Right to appeal.
8.08.160     Immediate danger—Summary abatement.
8.08.170     Penalties.
8.08.180     Injunction as alternative relief.
8.08.190     Severance.

8.08.010 Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall have the following meanings:
“Abandoned shopping cart” means any cart that has been removed, without written consent of the owner, from the owner’s business premises and is located on either public or private property.
“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
“Building materials” means and includes, but is not limited to, lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint and similar materials.
“Director” means the community development director for the city of Aberdeen, or such other director or officer designated by the mayor to administer this chapter.
“Enforcement officer” means the public works director, the chief of police, the fire chief, the city planner, the code enforcement officer, or the applicable designee.
“Fire hazard” means any thing or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or any thing or act which may obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.
“Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, picture, graphics, or design that is sprayed, painted, posted, pasted, drawn, or otherwise affixed to or upon any surface of public or private property.
“Owner” means one (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or any part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, including any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such premises; which in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, leases, possesses or makes a shopping cart available to customers or the public. For purposes of this chapter, “owner” shall also include the owner’s designated agent.
“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. “Premises” can also mean the entire area owned, occupied and/or utilized by an owner which provides shopping carts for use by customers or other persons, including any parking lot or other property provided by or on behalf of the owner for customer parking or use.
“Property” means any object of value that a person may lawfully acquire and hold.
“Responsible person” means any agent, lessee, owner, or other persons occupying or having charge or control of any premises.
“Shopping cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in retail or commercial establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind.
(Ord. 6636 § 1, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6558, Amended, 06/11/2014. Prior code § 6.38.010)

8.08.020 Public nuisance defined.
Every act unlawfully done and every omission to perform a duty, which act or omission:
A. Annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the citizens of the city;
B. Unlawfully interferes with, distracts, or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage, a public park, street, alley, highway or other public area; or
C. In any way renders any citizens of the city insecure in life or use of property shall constitute a public nuisance.
D. Shopping carts that have been removed from the premises of a business and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public.
E. Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all owners of any business establishments or other commercial services within the city of Aberdeen that provide shopping carts for customer use or the public.
(Ord. 6636 § 2, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.020)

8.08.030 Certain nuisances designated.
The following conditions unless otherwise permitted by law are declared to constitute public nuisances; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prevent any other act or condition from being declared a nuisance pursuant to the standards set forth in this chapter:
A. The existence of trees, shrubs or foliage which destroy, impair, interfere, restrict, or limit the visibility of, access to, or free use of any streets, sidewalks, sewers, utilities or other public improvements;
B. The existence of obstructions to or encroachments upon a public highway, private way, street, alley, commons, landing place, crossing or sidewalk, which is made without lawful permission, or which, having been made by lawful permission, is kept and maintained after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or for an unreasonable length of time;
C. The depositing or allowing of irrigation, stormwater drainage, or other water to run by any street, alley, or other public place, in such manner as to cause settling or damage to the street, alley, or other public place, or to cause annoyance, damage, or hazard to any user of the street, alley or other public place;
D. The existence of abandoned wells, ice boxes or refrigerators with doors and latches, shafts, basements or other excavations, abandoned or inoperative vehicles or other equipment, structurally unsound fences or other fixtures, lumber, fencing, vegetation or other debris, whether in or on a building, a building premises or an unoccupied lot and whether realty, fixture or chattel, which might reasonably be expected to attract children and constitute a danger to them;
E. The existence of accumulations of materials, objects or vegetation in a location or in a manner which constitutes a fire hazard;
F. The existence of grasses or weeds which exceed eighteen (18) inches in height in a nonagricultural use;
G. All vacant, unused or unoccupied buildings and structures within the city which are allowed to become or remain open to entrance by unauthorized persons or the general public, because of broken, missing or open doors, windows or other openings, or which are unsecured in a manner detrimental to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
H. The use of any building, or other place, for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning obnoxious exhalations, offensive smells, or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or of the public;
I. Throwing, depositing, exposing, or causing to be disposed of, in any street or other public place within the city, any garbage, waste, refuse, litter, debris, or other offensive material, unless the disposal of such items in such place is specifically authorized by law;
J. Causing or allowing garbage, waste, refuse, litter, debris, or other offensive materials to be collected or deposited, or to remain in any place in the city, to the annoyance of any person, unless otherwise permitted by law;
K. Any violation of the Aberdeen Municipal Code;
L. Any unlicensed (missing vehicle plates or expired tabs) or otherwise inoperable car, truck, van, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile or other vehicle typically powered by an engine, excepting watercraft, including vehicles that do not meet the definition of “junk vehicle” under RCW 46.55.010(5), unless the inoperable vehicle is stored in the manner authorized by Section 17.56.080(A);
M. The existence of graffiti on public property or on private property where the graffiti is visible from any vantage point located on public property, a railway, or any property open for business to the public;
N. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any shopping cart to be removed from any premises or abandoned upon any sidewalk, street or other public area, other than the premises of the owner of such shopping cart.
(Ord. 6636 § 3, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6558, Amended, 06/11/2014; Ord. 6446, Amended, 09/12/2007)

8.08.040 Signage of shopping carts.
A. Every shopping cart owned or provided by any owner must have a sign permanently affixed to the shopping cart that contains all of the following information:
    1. Identity of owner, business establishment, or both.
    2. Notification to the public that the removal of the shopping cart from the premises is a violation of state law, and notification to the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises.
    3. The address or phone number of the owner of the business establishment for shopping cart return.
B. Any shopping cart found abandoned on public property that does not have the identification and information required by subsection (A) of this section, or does not have other ownership information or identification that is sufficient, in the city’s determination, to allow the city to mail to the owner an invoice/notice of impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, may be removed from such public property and disposed of by the city in accordance with state law for disposition of abandoned property. The determination of whether there is sufficient information of ownership, where the identification requirements of subsection (A) of this section are not met, shall be in the sole discretion of the director.
(Ord. 6636 § 4, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.08.050 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to shopping carts that are removed for repair or maintenance authorized by the owner or owner’s agent.
(Ord. 6636 § 5, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.08.060 Right of entry.
The enforcement officer may in the performance of official duties, upon presentation of proper credentials, have the right to enter, at reasonable times, any structure, dwelling unit, building, or property in the city of Aberdeen, to perform any duty imposed upon him by the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Ord. 6636 § 6, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.040. Formerly 8.08.040)

8.08.070 Administrative search warrants.
In the event the enforcement officer has been denied access to any structure, dwelling unit, building, or property, and the enforcement officer having reason to examine the structure, dwelling unit, building, or property pursuant to existing city ordinances, may at the time of denial of access apply to the Aberdeen Municipal Court for a search warrant for the structure, dwelling unit, building, or property. Before an administrative search warrant is issued by the municipal court judge, the enforcement officer must set forth by affidavit under oath the ordinance or ordinances upon which he is proceeding, and state the circumstances upon which he is seeking the search warrant. If the municipal court judge finds that the enforcement officer is proceeding under a city ordinance, he shall issue an administrative search warrant for the search of the structure, dwelling unit, building, or property.
(Ord. 6636 § 7, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.050. Formerly 8.08.050)

8.08.080 Administrative search warrant return.
If an administrative search warrant is issued pursuant to Section 8.08.050, the enforcement officer shall make a return to the municipal court of the city of Aberdeen. The enforcement officer’s return shall consist of an affidavit stating the time of issuance, the time the structure, dwelling unit, building, or property was searched, and the mode of service, either by serving a copy of the warrant upon the owner of the premises, occupant or other person having charge of said premises, or upon posting notice of the administrative search warrant upon the property.
(Ord. 6636 § 8, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.060. Formerly 8.08.060)

8.08.090 Prohibited conduct.
It is unlawful for any responsible person or owner to create, permit, maintain, suffer, carry on or allow upon any premises, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 6636 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.070. Formerly 8.08.070)

8.08.100 Enforcement – Notice and order – Service.
The enforcement officer having knowledge of any public nuisance shall cause any property owner or other responsible person(s) to be notified in writing of the existence of a public nuisance on the premises and shall order the owner(s) or other responsible person(s) to abate the condition within a reasonable period of time. The notice shall be served either personally or by first class and certified mail with return receipt requested.
Abandoned and off-premises shopping carts are declared to be a public nuisance. The city’s enforcement rights for abandoned shopping carts are nonexclusive, and include the enforcement methods provided in this chapter and in this title, as well as any other methods for abatement of nuisances, and any other enforcement methods available under the law or in equity, including the following:
A. Civil Enforcement. Any owner who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation in accordance with Chapter 1.12.
B. Impoundment, Retrieval and Notification. 
    1. As an alternative to civil enforcement or other methods of enforcement, the director may impound any abandoned shopping carts left on any public property owned by or under the control of the city, or left on any public right-of-way within the city. The director may hold impounded shopping carts at the city’s maintenance and operations yard until retrieved by the owner or disposed of by the city as herein provided.
    2. Whenever the director has impounded any abandoned shopping carts bearing the identification of ownership as required by Section 8.08.040(A), or such other ownership information or identification that is sufficient, the city shall contact the owner to pick up the cart. Should the owner fail to pick up the cart within ten (10) days, the city shall prepare and mail to the owner an invoice/notice of impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the shopping cart’s identification label, or such address as is determined by the director to be appropriate to give reasonable notice to the owner where the identification requirements of Section 8.08.040(A) are not met. Such invoice/notice shall advise that the impounded shopping cart(s) may be redeemed at the city’s maintenance and operations yard during the normal work day (between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays) upon payment of the administrative impoundment fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per shopping cart. The invoice/notice shall also advise the owner that if the impounded abandoned shopping carts are not retrieved within fourteen (14) days of the date of the invoice/notice, the abandoned shopping carts shall be subject to disposal by the city, and in addition to the thirty dollars ($30.00) administrative impoundment fee the owner shall also be obligated to pay an additional seventy dollars ($70.00) disposal fee, per shopping cart.
    3. If an abandoned shopping cart is impounded that does not have the ownership identification information permanently affixed to it as required by Section 8.08.040(A), or does not have other ownership information or identification that is sufficient, in the city’s determination, to allow the city to mail to the owner an invoice/notice of impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, the director shall be authorized to dispose of it immediately, without any notice requirements.
(Ord. 6636 § 10, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.080. Formerly 8.08.080)

8.08.110 Contents of notice and order—Form.
The notice and order to abate shall contain a description of what constitutes the nuisance, the location of the nuisance, a statement of the acts necessary to abate the nuisance, a reasonable time within which to complete the abatement, a statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time or if the responsible person fails to appear at a hearing as set by the enforcement officer, the city will abate it and assess costs against the property owner or other responsible person. The notice and order shall be substantially in the following form:NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE UNSAFE OR UNLAWFUL CONDITION
(Aberdeen Municipal Code 8.08.080)
[Name and Address of person notified] __________
As owner agent, lessee, or other person occupying or having charge or control of the building, lot or premises at [Parcel No.] _____________________
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED that the undersigned, pursuant to Chapter 8.08, Aberdeen Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon or adjoining said premises the following condition(s) contrary to the provisions of Aberdeen Municipal Code Section _____________________:
____________________________________________________________
YOU ARE HEREBY ORDERED to correct said condition to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Aberdeen within ____ days of the date of this notice or to appear at the Code Enforcement Office, Room 250 on the second floor of Aberdeen City Hall, on ________, 19____ at _________ o'clock ___m., and show cause, if you have any, why said conditions should not be corrected by the City, and the expenses thereof charged to you as a personal obligation. Corrective action is to be accomplished in the following manner: ______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
FAILURE TO CORRECT OR APPEAR FOR HEARING within the times set forth above will result in abatement of the condition at your expense under Aberdeen Municipal Code 8.08.140.
Dated: ___________________ By: _________________________
(Ord. 6636 § 11, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.090. Formerly 8.08.090)

8.08.120 Request for hearing—Show cause procedure.
A. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the enforcement officer ordering the abatement to determine whether a nuisance does exist. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the enforcement officer ordering the abatement within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists that must be abated as ordered. The enforcement officer may state the time and place of the hearing in a demand to show cause in the notice and order to abate nuisance.
B. At the conclusion of the hearing, the enforcement officer shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If the enforcement officer finds that a nuisance exists, the enforcement officer must order it abated within an additional time which must be reasonable under the circumstances. The written decision shall include notice that appeal from the enforcement officer’s decision may be had to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the enforcement officer within ten (10) days as provided by Section 8.08.150.
(Ord. 6636 § 12, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.100. Formerly 8.08.100)

8.08.130 Abatement by owner or other responsible person.
If and when an owner or other responsible person shall undertake to abate any condition described in this chapter, whether by order of the enforcement officer or otherwise, all needful and legal conditions pertinent to the abatement may be imposed by the enforcement officer. It is unlawful for the owner or other responsible person to fail to comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to do any work incidental to the abatement.
(Ord. 6636 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.110. Formerly 8.08.110)

8.08.140 Abatement by the city.
In all cases where the enforcement officer has determined to proceed with abatement, no less than seven (7) days after giving notice the city shall acquire the jurisdiction to abate the condition at the responsible person’s expense as herein provided. The enforcement officer shall, if need be, have the authority to enter the premises or property of the violator in order to abate the nuisance. Upon the abatement of the condition or any portion thereof by the city, all the expenses thereof shall constitute a lien upon the property as well as a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by such of the persons who have been given notice as herein provided. The debts shall be collectable in the same manner as any other civil debt owing to the city. The lien shall be foreclosed in the same manner as are liens for labor and materials for the improvement of real property.
(Ord. 6636 § 14, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.120. Formerly 8.08.120)

8.08.150 Right to appeal.
Any person determined to be responsible for the existence of a public nuisance following a hearing before the enforcement officer shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the enforcement officer a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal within ten (10) calendar days after the enforcement officer’s decision. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant at this last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. Further action on the abatement as specified in the original notice shall be stayed pending the decision of the council on the appeal. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the council may petition the Superior Court of Grays Harbor County within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the date of the decision for such relief as they may be entitled.
(Ord. 6636 § 15, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6367, Amended, 09/22/2004. Formerly 8.08.130)

8.08.160 Immediate danger—Summary abatement.
The enforcement officer shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate any nuisance which either:
A. Causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public; or
B. Is within a public way or easement, or of such a character and so situated that it can be abated without the invasion or destruction of property or the prejudice of any right.
The expenses of such abatement shall become a civil debt against the responsible party and be collected as provided in Section 8.08.140.
(Ord. 6636 § 16, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.140. Formerly 8.08.140)

8.08.170 Penalties.
A. Any responsible person who maintains a nuisance in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, in addition to any costs of abatement. Each separate day the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition to, or as an alternative to any other penalty or billable cost of abatement as provided by this chapter or by law, any responsible person who maintains a nuisance in violation of this chapter may be assessed a civil penalty under Chapter 1.12 or the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Ord. 6636 § 17, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.150. Formerly 8.08.150)

8.08.180 Injunction as alternative relief.
As an alternative, or in addition to abatement and criminal proceedings, the city may, at its option, institute civil proceedings as appropriate to enjoin the nuisance.
(Ord. 6636 § 18, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.160. Formerly 8.08.160)

8.08.190 Severance.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, and they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
(Ord. 6636 § 19, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 6.38.170. Formerly 8.08.170)

Chapter 8.10 CHRONIC NUISANCE

Sections:
8.10.010     Nuisance properties—Purpose.
8.10.020     Definitions.
8.10.030     Violation.
8.10.040     Declaration of chronic nuisance property and procedure.
8.10.050     Owner cooperation.
8.10.060     Correction agreement.
8.10.070     Penalties.
8.10.080     Commencement of action—Enforcement.
8.10.090     Burden of proof.
8.10.100     Remedies.
8.10.110     Additional remedies.
8.10.120     Suspension or revocation of business license.
8.10.130     Severance.

8.10.010 Nuisance properties—Purpose.
The city of Aberdeen is committed to protecting its citizens from the dangers of properties that are abandoned, where unsafe conditions exist or where crime repeatedly occurs. Such properties are known as “nuisance properties” because of their adverse impact on the quality of life of Aberdeen’s citizens. Additionally, when owners, financial institutions and persons in charge fail to take responsible action to secure and care for these properties, they deteriorate and become “chronic nuisance” properties. Chronic nuisance properties create a substantial financial burden, pose a significant strain on city services, interfere with other’s use and enjoyment of their lands, and are a prohibited public nuisance. Persons in charge of such properties have a duty to take all reasonable measures to prevent and abate nuisance activity. The intent of the Aberdeen city council in enacting this chapter is to exercise specific powers granted by the state of Washington in first class cities to prevent and abate nuisances, declare what shall be a nuisance, abate the same and to hold legally and financially accountable the owners and persons in charge of nuisance and chronic nuisance properties and to provide for the restoration and abatement of such properties. It is also the purpose of this chapter to provide for the closure of abandoned properties that are not subject to the building official process under Chapter 15.50.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning prescribed below:
A. “Abandoned property,” for purposes of defining a chronic nuisance, means a property over which the person in charge no longer asserts control due to death, incarceration, or any other reason, and which is either unsecured or subject to occupation by unauthorized individuals.
B. “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, return to productive use, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department director or designee determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. “Abatement agreement” means a contract between the city and the person in charge of the chronic nuisance property in which such person agrees to promptly take all lawful and reasonable actions, which shall be set forth in the agreement, to abate the nuisance within a specified time and according to specified conditions.
D. “Chronic nuisance property” means:
    1. A property on which three (3) or more nuisance activities as described in subsection (H) of this section exist or have occurred during any sixty (60) day period or seven (7) or more nuisance activities have occurred during any twelve (12) month period; or
    2. A property which, upon a request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court two (2) or more times within a twelve (12) month period that probable cause exists that illegal possession, manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW has occurred on the property; or
    3. Any abandoned property where nuisance activity exists.
E. “Control” means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property or conduct that occurs on a property.
F. “Drug-related activity” means any unlawful activity at a property which consists of the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, use, or giving away of any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substances as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW. Possession of marijuana that is legal under state law shall not result in enforcement action under this chapter.
G. “Landlord” means the owner, lessor or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the property of which it is a part, and in addition means any person designated as a representative of the landlord.
H. “Nuisance activity” means and includes:
    1. Any civil code violation as defined by state law or local ordinance occurring around or near the property, including, but not limited to, the following activities, conditions or behaviors:
        a. Litter and rubbish.
        b. Fire hazard from vegetation and debris.
        c. Any dangerous animal violations.
        d. Fire code violations.
        e. Alcohol beverage control violations, as defined in Chapter 66.44 RCW.
        f. General Nuisance. 
            (1) Any act or omission, as provided in Chapter 7.48 or 9.66 RCW or which unreasonably:
                AInterferes with the comfort, solitude, health or safety of others; or
                BOffends common sensibilities and senses by way of extreme noise, light or odor; or
                CObstructs or renders hazardous for public passage any public way or place; or
                DPollutes or renders less usable any watercourse or water body.
            (2) Maintaining or permitting upon any land:
                ARefrigerator, freezer or other insulated container within which a child could suffocate;
                BA pit, excavation, swimming pool, well or other uncovered hole into which a person could fall;
                CLumber, metal, plastic, paper, cardboard, or other scrap material deposited in such place and manner as to constitute a hazardous attraction to children;
                DUnused or junk vehicle or machinery or parts unless enclosed and secured as required by law for wrecking yards or junk yards;
                EAn abandoned or vacant building, structure or part thereof not securely closed to entry;
                FToxic, radioactive, caustic, explosive, malodorous or septic substances, such as putrescent animal, fish or fowl parts, animal or vegetable waste matter, excrement and any material likely to attract or breed flies or rats, unless kept in proper receptacles as provided by the health and refuse laws; or
                GStructure, collection of wood, cloth, paper, plastic or glass material, vegetation or flammable substances kept in such manner as to create a substantial risk of combustion or spread of fire.
    2. Any criminal conduct, including the attempt and/or conspiracy to commit any criminal conduct, as defined by state or local ordinance occurring on, around, near or having a nexus to a property, including but not limited to:
        a. Stalking.
        b. Harassment.
        c. Failure to disperse.
        d. Disorderly conduct.
        e. Assault.
        f. Reckless endangerment.
        g. Prostitution.
        h. Patronizing a prostitute.
        i. Disorderly house.
        j. Indecent exposure.
        k. Lewd conduct.
        l. Any firearms or dangerous weapons violations.
        m. Noise.
        n. Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related activity.
        o. Drug-related activity.
        p. Gang-related activity, as defined in: RCW 59.118.030.
        q. Any crimes of domestic violence.
        r. Any violation of any protection order authorized under Chapter 7.92 RCW, RCW 7.90.090, 9A.46.080, 10.14.080, 10.99.040, 10.99.045, 26.09.050, 26.09.060, 26.10.040, 26.10.115, 26.26.130, 26.50.060, 26.50.070, or 26.26.590.
        s. Warrant arrests, or any instance in which a DOC offender is located at a property while in violation of DOC supervision.
        t. Reckless driving, driving under the influence, vehicular homicide and assault: RCW 46.61.500 through 46.61.540.
        u. Possession of stolen property: Chapter 9A.56 RCW.
        v. Trafficking in stolen property and/or criminal profiteering: Chapter 9A.82 RCW.
        w. Theft, trafficking, or unlawful possession of commercial metal property: Chapter 19.290 RCW.
        x. Identity theft: RCW 9.35.020.
        y. Rendering criminal assistance: Chapter 9A.76 RCW.
        z. Possession of stolen vehicle: RCW 9A.56.068.
I. “Owner” means any person having any interest in the real estate in question as indicated in the records of the Grays Harbor County Assessor, or who establishes under this chapter their ownership interest therein.
J. “Person” means natural person, financial institution, bank, joint venture, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization or the manager, lessee, agent, officer or employee of any of them.
K. “Person associated with a property” means any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit, a property or a person present on property, including, without limitation, any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or any independent contractor of a property, or a person in charge of or owner of a property.
L. “Person in charge” of a property means any person in actual or constructive possession or control of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant, agent or property manager of a property under his control, and any bank or financial institution in actual or constructive possession or which possesses any sort of lien or interest in the property. There may be at any one (1) time multiple persons in charge of a property all of which may be jointly and severally liable under this chapter.
M. “Premises and property” may be used by this chapter interchangeably and means any building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate or land or portion thereof including property used as residential or commercial property.
N. “Rental unit” means any structure or that part of a structure including, but not limited to, single-family home, room or apartment, which is rented to another and used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one (1) or more persons.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.030 Violation.
A. Any property within the city of Aberdeen which is a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies;
B. Owners and other persons in charge who permit property to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies; and
C. An owner who fails to comply with Section 8.10.050 is in violation of this chapter and is subject to penalties pursuant to Section 8.10.070.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.040 Declaration of chronic nuisance property and procedure.
A. The code enforcement officer may declare that a property is a chronic nuisance property, as defined in this chapter, when there are specific facts and circumstances documenting (1) the occurrence of three (3) or more nuisance activities on a property within sixty (60) days or seven (7) or more nuisance activities within a twelve (12) month period, or (2) activity on a property as described in Section 8.10.020(H). The code enforcement officer shall provide written notice of this declaration to the persons in charge of the property. The notice shall be sent by first class mail or personally served, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail. The notice shall contain:
    1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property;
    2. A declaration that the code enforcement officer has determined the property has become a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities that exist or that have occurred;
    3. A notice that the owner and other persons in charge of the property are subject to monetary penalties as set forth in Section 8.10.070;
    4. A demand that the owner and other persons in charge respond to the code enforcement officer within seven (7) days of service of the notice to discuss a course of action to correct the nuisance;
    5. A notice that, if the person in charge does not respond to the code enforcement officer as required in this section, or if the matter is not voluntarily corrected to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer, the city may file an action to abate the property as a chronic nuisance property pursuant to Section 8.10.080 and/or take other action against the property or person in charge.
B. When a notice is issued pursuant to this section to a person in charge, other than an owner or an owner’s agent, who has permitted a property to become a chronic nuisance property, a copy of such notice shall also be sent by first class mail or personally served on the owner of the property, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail.
C. If the owner or person in charge responds as required by the notice issued pursuant to subsection (A) of this section and agrees to a course of action to abate the nuisance activities, a written correction agreement conforming to the requirements of Section 8.10.060 shall be executed.
D. If (1) the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of nuisance activities to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer within thirty (30) days of issuance of the notice pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, or within such longer period as permitted by the code enforcement officer in writing or (2) the person in charge fails to respond as required by the notice, the code enforcement officer may refer the matter to the city attorney for initiation of proceedings pursuant to Section 8.10.080.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.050 Owner cooperation.
An owner who receives a copy of a notice pursuant to Section 8.10.040(B) describing a chronic nuisance property permitted by a person in charge other than the owner or the owner’s agent shall promptly take all reasonable steps requested in writing by the code enforcement officer to assist in abatement of the nuisance property. Such reasonable steps may include the owner taking all acts and pursuing all remedies, including pursuing eviction of the person in charge, that are (1) available to the owner pursuant to any lease or other agreement, and (2) consistent with state and local laws.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.060 Correction agreement.
A. A correction agreement is a contract between the city and the person in charge of the chronic nuisance property in which such person agrees to promptly take all lawful and reasonable actions, which shall be set forth in the agreement, to abate the nuisance activities within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The agreement shall be signed by the person in charge and, if different, the owner. The agreement shall include the following:
    1. The names and addresses of the persons in charge of the property;
    2. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the property, building, structure, or land upon or within which the nuisance is occurring;
    3. A description of the nuisance activities;
    4. The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by which correction must be completed;
    5. An agreement by the person in charge that the city may inspect the property as may be necessary to determine compliance with the correction agreement;
    6. An agreement by the person in charge that the city may abate the nuisance and recover its costs and expenses and monetary penalties pursuant to this chapter from the person in charge for the nuisance if the terms of the correction agreement are not met; and
    7. When a person in charge, other than an owner or an owner’s agent, has permitted a property to be a chronic nuisance property, an agreement by the owner to promptly take all acts and pursue all remedies requested by the code enforcement officer pursuant to Section 8.10.050.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.070 Penalties.
A. Except as provided in this section, in addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure that may be available, the person in charge is subject to a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day from the date of the notice issued pursuant to Section 8.10.040(A) until the code enforcement officer confirms that the property is no longer a chronic nuisance property.
B. If the agreed course of action results in the abatement of nuisance activities to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer within thirty (30) days of the notice issued pursuant to Section 8.10.040(A), or such longer period allowed by the code enforcement officer pursuant to Section 8.10.040(D), the matter shall not be referred to the city attorney and the person in charge shall not be subject to any penalty pursuant to this chapter.
C. An owner who fails to comply with Section 8.10.050 is subject to a civil penalty of up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.080 Commencement of action—Enforcement.
Upon referral pursuant to Section 8.10.040, the city attorney may initiate an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate a chronic nuisance property, to impose penalties pursuant to this chapter, to seek alternative remedies under city or state laws and seek any other relief authorized by law.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.090 Burden of proof.
In an action against a person in charge to abate a chronic nuisance property or to recover penalties authorized by this chapter, the city shall have the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter. In an action against an owner to recover penalties authorized by Section 8.10.070, the city shall have the additional burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner failed to comply with Section 8.10.050. Copies of police incident reports and reports of other city departments documenting nuisance activities shall be admissible in such actions. Additionally, evidence of a property’s general reputation and the reputation of persons residing in or frequenting the property shall be admissible in such actions.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.100 Remedies.
A. If the court determines a property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter the court may order any of the following: (1) order the person in charge to immediately abate nuisance activity from occurring on the property, (2) order that the code enforcement officer shall have the right to inspect the property to determine if the court’s orders have been complied with, (3) impose a penalty of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day against the person in charge for each day from the date the notice pursuant to Section 8.10.040(A) was issued until the code enforcement officer confirms that the property is no longer a chronic nuisance property, (4) make any other order that will reasonably abate nuisance activities from occurring on the property, including authorizing the city to take action to abate nuisance activities from occurring upon the property if other court orders are not complied with or do not abate nuisance activity on the property, and providing that the costs of such city action are to be paid for by the person in charge of the property.
B. If the court finds that an owner failed to take all reasonable steps requested in writing pursuant to Section 8.10.050, the court may impose a civil penalty up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.110 Additional remedies.
In addition to the remedies authorized by Section 8.10.100, if, as part of its order abating a chronic nuisance property, the court orders a person in charge to cease renting or leasing a property, the court may order the person in charge to pay relocation assistance not to exceed three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300.00) to any tenant (1) who must relocate because of the order of abatement, and (2) the court finds not to have caused or participated in nuisance activities at the property.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.120 Suspension or revocation of business license.
In addition to any other remedy that is authorized by this chapter or other laws, upon the finding by a court that a property is a chronic nuisance property pursuant to this chapter, the person in charge is subject to the suspension or revocation of a business license or other license at such property issued pursuant to Title 5.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

8.10.130 Severance.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, and they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
(Ord. 6638 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:
9.01         State Criminal Code
9.02         Miscellaneous Local Offenses

Chapter 9.01 STATE CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:
9.01.010     Aberdeen Criminal Code - adoption of the Revised Code of the state of Washington - assumption of jurisdiction - exceptions.
9.01.020     Penalty.

9.01.010 Aberdeen Criminal Code - adoption of the Revised Code of the state of Washington - assumption of jurisdiction - exceptions.
A. This title shall be known and may be cited as the "Aberdeen Criminal Code."
B. The city has assumed jurisdiction over, and become the jurisdictional authority for the enforcement and prosecution of, all misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor crimes committed within the city limits whether the offense is created by ordinance or state statute. With the exception of the Revised Code of Washington sections set forth in subsection C of this section, all RCW sections that constitute misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors and the RCW sections necessary for the investigation, arrest, prosecution, sentencing, confinement, and enforcement of misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted or as hereafter amended or recodified from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. Whenever the word “state” shall appear in any statute adopted by reference in this title, the word “city” shall be substituted therefor; provided, however, the term “city” shall not be substituted for the term “state” in those circumstances which set forth administrative or licensing duties of the state and its subdivisions. The Finance Director shall keep one copy of the Revised Code of Washington on file and available for public review.
C. All class C felony crimes set forth in the RCW are hereby adopted by reference for the purposes of charging a gross misdemeanor for a violation of any of the crimes set forth in Chapter 9A.28 RCW. The adoption of class C felonies shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section and AMC 9.01.010.
D. The following RCW sections are not adopted by the city of Aberdeen:
    Chapter 9.66 RCW – Public nuisance;
    RCW 9A.16.110 – Defending against violent crime – reimbursement;
    RCW 9A.84.030 – Disorderly conduct;
    RCW 9A.88.010 – Indecent exposure.
E. Whenever a state statute specifically adopted in this title refers to another state statute not specifically adopted in this title, the statute referred to shall be given the force and effect necessary to enforce the statute specifically adopted in this title.
F. When issuing a citation, information, or complaint for the violation of any section of the RCW adopted by this title, it shall be sufficient for a commissioned officer or prosecutor to cite to and refer to the RCW section number.
G. In the event of a conflict between an RCW section adopted by reference in subsection B, above, and an ordinance, the ordinance shall control.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.01.020 Penalty.
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

Chapter 9.02 MISCELLANEOUS LOCAL OFFENSES

Sections:
9.02.010     Discharge of firearms prohibited.
9.02.020     Dangerous weapons prohibited.
9.02.030     Unlawful use of air guns - Penalty.
9.02.040     Disorderly Conduct.
9.02.050     Restriction of solicitation as to place, and against coercive methods.
9.02.060     Placing a person in fear or apprehension by threat.
9.02.070     Injury or destruction of property.
9.02.080     Voyeurism.
9.02.090     Lewd act.
9.02.100     Prostitution loitering.
9.02.110     Urinating in public.
9.02.120     Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited.

9.02.010 Discharge of firearms prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the city of Aberdeen where there is reasonable likelihood of injury to humans, domestic animals or property except upon a rifle or pistol firing range which has been issued a business license by the city for such purpose, provided that this prohibition does not apply to the discharge of firearms by law enforcement officers engaged in the performance of their official powers or duties.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.020 Dangerous weapons prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for anyone to:
    1. Carry any knife, sword, dagger or other cutting or stabbing instrument, with a blade of a length of three inches or more, or any razor with an unguarded blade, whether said weapon or instrument is concealed or not;
    2. Carry any instrument or weapon of the kind usually known as a slingshot, taser, throwing star, bow, sand club, blackjack, metal knuckles, or any stick, chain, metal pipe, bar, club or combination thereof including a device known as num-chuk sticks, or any like device having the same or similar components or parts, whether or not connected by a rope, chain or other device, or any explosive or any poison or injurious gas, or any other instrument or weapon apparently capable of producing bodily harm, whether said instrument or weapon is concealed or not.
B. Exceptions. The above shall not apply to or affect the following:
    1. A person engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments, while engaged in official duties;
    2. Law enforcement personnel;
    3. Security personnel while engaged in official duties.
C. Warning Signs Required. The perimeter of the premises of any specific location covered by RCW 9.41.300(1) shall be posted at reasonable intervals to alert the public as to the restrictions on possession of firearms and dangerous weapons. Reasonable intervals shall include conspicuously posted signs at all internal and external entrances to any area in or on liquor sale premises wherein the carrying of said weapons or instruments are prohibited under this ordinance or RCW 9.41.300 as adopted by reference under AMC 9.01.010. Said signs shall be provided by the city to all affected places of business, and shall bear the following inscription:WARNING – WEAPONS PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a commissioned law enforcement officer, or federal or state military personnel engaged in official duties, or security personnel engaged in official duties, to enter onto this premises while carrying any of the following weapons or instruments, whether a license or permit to carry said weapon is possessed or not, and whether said weapon or instrument is concealed or not: Rifle, shotgun, pistol, knife, sword, dagger or any other cutting or stabbing instrument, having a blade longer than three inches (3"); or any razor with an unguarded blade; or any explosive; or any poison or injurious gas; or any sling shot, taser, throwing star, bow, sand club, blackjack, metal knuckles, stick, chain, metal pipe, bar, club or combination thereof, including a device known as “num-chuk” sticks, or any like device having the same or similar components or parts; or any weapon or instrument apparently capable of producing bodily harm.
D. Upon conviction said weapon or instrument involved may be confiscated by order of the presiding judge, and shall thereafter be disposed of in accordance with statutes or ordinances governing the disposal of confiscated or found property.
(Ord. 6477, Amended, 02/25/2009; Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.030 Unlawful use of air guns - Penalty.
A. It is unlawful for any person to point or shoot an air gun at any person or property of another, or to aim or discharge such weapon in the direction of the person or residence of another, while within such range as to cause or inflict injury to the person or damage the property of another.
B. As used in this section, the words “air gun” mean and include the following: air gun, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun, paint ball gun, and toy or other guns of any kind or nature when so designed, contrived, modified and used to propel, by compressed air or spring-loaded plunger, any pellet, dart, hard-tipped arrow, bean, pea, BB, rock, paint ball, or other hard substance a distance of more than 25 feet with sufficient force to break windows, or cause other property damage to vehicles or structures, including damage caused by paint balls, or inflict injury upon persons or animals.
C. Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any other punishment imposed by the court, the court shall direct that the weapon so used in violation of the provisions hereof be confiscated.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.040 Disorderly Conduct.
A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if he:
A. Uses abusive language, signs or gestures, to willfully provoke or attempt to provoke another person to commit an assault or breach of the peace and thereby intentionally creates a risk of assault; or
B. Intentionally disrupts any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without authority; or
C. Intentionally obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic without lawful authority; or
D. Intentionally and without lawful authority makes noise which unreasonably disturbs another; or
E. Intentionally engages in any conduct which tends to or does disturb the public peace, provoke disorder, or endanger the safety of others; or
F. Is found to be engaged in any fight or brawl in a public place; or
G. Without license or permit jumps off public bridges, viewing platforms, or other public structures abutting streets, highways, or navigable rivers; or
H. Suffers or permits, in any house or place of business kept by the person, any loud boisterous noises, any riotous or disorderly conduct, or fighting which may unreasonably disturb another.
(Ord. 6414, Amended, 09/27/2006; Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.050 Restriction of solicitation as to place, and against coercive methods.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide safe and appropriate venues for constitutionally protected activity, while at the same time protecting citizens from fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation, promoting business and tourism, and to preserve the quality of life.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
    1. “Automated teller machine” is a machine, other than a telephone:
        a. That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution; and
        b. By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution to request withdrawal, deposit, transfer funds, make payment, or otherwise conduct financial business for the customer or for another person directly from the customer’s account or from the customer’s account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the customer; and
        c. The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution.
    2. “Coercion” means:
        a. To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with either imminent bodily injury or the commission of a criminal act upon that person or another person or upon property in the person’s immediate possession;
        b. To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response;
        c. To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person;
        d. To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a solicited person to accede to demands;
        e. To use violent or threatening gestures toward a person;
        f. Willfully providing or delivering, or attempting to provide or deliver, unrequested or unsolicited services or products with a demand or exertion of pressure for payment in return; or
        g. To use profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction.
    3. “Exterior public pay phone” means any coin or credit card reader telephone that is:
        a. Installed or located anywhere on a premises except exclusively in the interior of a building located on the premises; and
        b. Accessible and available for use by members of the general public.
    4. “Public transportation facility” means a facility or designated location that is owned, operated, or maintained by a city, transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, regional transit authority, or metropolitan municipal corporation within the state.
    5. “Public transportation stop” means an area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, a rail or light rail vehicle, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers paying fares on an individual basis.
    6. “Public transportation vehicle” has the meaning given that term in RCW 46.04.355, as currently adopted or as may be amended in the future.
    7. “Self-service car wash” means a structure:
        a. At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment that is activated by the deposit of money in a coin-operated machine or use of credit-card reader; and
        b. That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public.
    8. “Self-service fuel pump” means a fuel pump:
        a. From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner or operator, with or without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located; and
        b. That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public.
    9. “Solicit,” and all its derivative forms, means to ask, beg, solicit, or plead whether orally or in written or printed manner, for the purpose of immediately receiving contributions, alms, charity, or gifts or items of value for oneself or another.
C. Place of Solicitation. It is unlawful for any person to solicit another person under any of the following circumstances:
    1. While a person is approaching to use, or is using, or has just finished using, an automated teller machine which shall include within twenty (20) feet of said machine;
    2. At the entrance of a building, unless the solicitor has permission from the owner or occupant;
    3. While a person is approaching to use, or is using, or has just finished using, a public pay telephone;
    4. While a person is approaching to use, or using, or has just finished using a self-service car wash;
    5. While a person is approaching to use, or is using, or has just finished using, a self-service fuel pump;
    6. While a person is at a public transportation stop, or shortly after such person disembarks from a public transportation vehicle;
    7. Any parked vehicle as occupants of such vehicles enter or exit such vehicle;
    8. At ingress or egress between private and public property, unless the solicitor has permission from the owner or occupant;
    9. In any public transportation facility or public transportation vehicle; or
    10. After sunset or before sunrise.
D. Solicitation by Coercion. It is unlawful for a person to solicit by coercion.
E. Evidence. Evidence to support a conviction for a violation of this chapter may include, but is not limited to, testimony of witness, analog or electronic video recordings, and all other admissible evidence.
F. Penalties. A violation of subsection (C) of this section shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person is subject to a penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), jail for up to ninety (90) days, or both a fine and penalty. Violation of subsection (D) of this section shall be a gross misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, a person is subject to a penalty of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), jailed for up to one (1) year, or both a fine and a penalty.
G. Should any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section or its application to any other person or situation.
(Ord. 6627, Added, 05/23/2018)

9.02.060 Placing a person in fear or apprehension by threat.
A. Every person who shall intentionally place or attempt to place another person in reasonable fear or apprehension of bodily harm by means of a threat shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. For purposes of this section, “threat” means to communicate, directly or indirectly, by act, word or deed, whether written, spoken or otherwise communicated, the intent to imminently:
    1. Cause bodily injury to the person threatened or any other person; or
    2. Cause physical damage to the property of a person other than the person making the threat; or
    3. Subject the person threatened or any other person to physical confinement or restraint.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.070 Injury or destruction of property.
It is unlawful for any person to wantonly destroy, cut, alter, remove, deface, mark or write upon, or in any manner injure any window, fence, gate, bridge, dwelling, house, engine house, building, awning, railing, retaining wall, or any other property, public or private, not his own.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.080 Voyeurism.
A. Definitions. 
    1. “Building” shall have the same meaning as in RCW 9A.04.110(5) as now or hereafter amended. Each room shall constitute a separate building. Restrooms, locker rooms, and bedrooms are specifically included in this definition.
    2. “Fully clothed” means having a person’s genitals, underclothing or a woman’s breasts covered. A person using a toilet or a urinal or wrapped in a towel is not fully clothed.
    3. “Family or household member” means spouses, blood relatives, or persons residing together.
    4. “Curtilage” shall be within 10 feet from the exterior of the wall of any building, regardless of whether the premises are enclosed.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the curtilage of a building or premises of another for the purposes of observing, photographing, video taping or filming another person, other than a family or household member, under circumstances where the other person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and may not be fully clothed.
C. Violation of this section shall be a gross misdemeanor punishable by up to 365 days in jail and/or a fine of $5,000.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.090 Lewd act.
A. Definitions. 
    1. "Lewd act" means public:
        a. Exposure of any portion of the human anus or genitals, including display of the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
        b. Exposure of the female breast lower than the upper edge of the areola; or
        c. Touching, caressing or fondling of the male or female genitals or female breast, whether clothed or naked; or
        d. Sexual conduct; or
        e. Simulated acts of human sex, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or masturbation of oneself or of one person by another.
    2. "Public" or "public display" means easily visible from a public thoroughfare or from property of others, or in a public place in a manner so obtrusive as to make it difficult for an unwilling person to avoid exposure.
B. Every person who intentionally performs any lewd act in a public place knowing that such conduct is likely to cause reasonable affront and alarm is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.100 Prostitution loitering.
A. Definitions. "Known prostitute or panderer" means a person who, within one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of an offense involving prostitution.
B. Every person who remains in a public place and intentionally solicits, induces, entices or procures another to commit prostitution is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intends such prohibited conduct are that he:
    1. Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passersby in conversation; or
    2. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waiving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or
    3. Is a known prostitute or panderer.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.110 Urinating in public.
A person is guilty of urinating in public if he or she intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet pool, under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public.
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

9.02.120 Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited.
No person shall possess any drug paraphernalia as defined in RCW 69.50.102 with the intent to use or employ the same for manufacturing and/or consuming controlled substances; provided, it is lawful for any person over the age of eighteen to possess sterile hypodermic syringes and needles for the purpose of reducing bloodborne diseases
(Ord. 6414, Added, 09/27/2006)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        Traffic Code
10.14        Bicycle Safety and Helmets
10.15        Motorized Foot Scooters
10.18        Wheeled All-Terrain Vehicles
10.20        Parking
10.28        Property Leasing for Off-Street Parking
10.32        Parking Strips
10.36        Pile Drivers
10.40        Road Surface—Restricted Traffic
10.44        Speed Limits
10.52        Weight and Load Restrictions
10.58        Impoundment of Vehicles
10.60        Truck Routes
10.64        Port Industrial Area Regulations

Chapter 10.04 TRAFFIC CODE

Sections:
10.04.010    Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.
10.04.020    MTO sections deleted.
10.04.030    Traffic engineer - additional authority.
10.04.040    Parking and traffic restrictions - designation of arterial streets - adoption by resolution.
10.04.050    Engine compression brakes.
10.04.060    Railroad trains not to block streets.
10.04.070    Violations - penality.
10.04.080    Pedestrians—Right-of-way.
10.04.090    Automated traffic safety cameras authorized - definitions - signage - limits on compensation.
10.04.100    Traffic infractions detected by automated traffic safety camera - notice of infraction - response - penalties.

10.04.010 Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by reference.
The "Washington Model Traffic Ordinance," (hereafter "MTO"), chapter 308-330 WAC, is adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the City of Aberdeen as if set forth in full in this chapter except as provided in AMC 10.04.020. The WAC provisions and statutes adopted by reference through the MTO shall be supplemental to the existing ordinances of this city; provided, that to the extent that an existing city ordinance conflicts with a WAC provision or statute herein adopted, the city ordinance shall be deemed amended. If any provision of this chapter, or any WAC provision or any statute adopted hereunder by reference is held to be invalid, the remainder of the chapter or any WAC provision or statute herein, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.020 MTO sections deleted.
The following sections or portions of sections of the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted: WAC 308-330-142, 308-330-145, 308-330-148, 308-330-172, 308-330-225, 308-330-250, 308-330-255, 308-330-400, 308-330-469, 308-330-472, 308-330-500, 308-330-505, 308-330-510, 308-330-515, 308-330-520, 308-330-525, 308-330-530, 308-330-535, 308-330-540, 308-330-560, 308-330-600, 308-330-610, 308-330-620, 308-330-630, 308-330-640, 308-330-650, 308-330-660, 308-330-710.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.030 Traffic engineer - additional authority.
A. The Public Works Director, or his/her designee, is authorized to exercise the powers and duties of traffic engineer under the MTO. The Director shall maintain a map or index identifying the placement of stop signs, yield signs, and other official traffic control devises erected under the authority of the MTO.
B. In addition to the powers and duties of traffic engineer under the MTO, the Public Works Director, or his/her designee, may from time to time designate portions of streets of the city and property of the city as prohibited parking areas, or restricted parking zones. Such designation shall be shown by signage or other appropriate indicators. The same procedure may be followed in altering or abandoning a designation relating to parking. The Director shall maintain a map or index identifying the parking restrictions adopted under the authority of this section.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.040 Parking and traffic restrictions - designation of arterial streets - adoption by resolution.
The city council may by resolution prohibit, regulate, or limit, stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway at all times or during such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control devices, determine and declare one-way streets, arterial or through streets, and adopt such other restrictions to regulate traffic as it determines to be necessary. A copy of such restrictions adopted by the city council shall be authenticated and filed in the office of the Finance Director. In addition, copies thereof shall be available for use and examination by the public during regular business hours. In the event that a restriction adopted by resolution conflicts with a designation made by the Public Works Director under the Model Traffic Ordinance the resolution shall prevail.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.050 Engine compression brakes.
It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle equipped with a Jacobs Engine Brake or other similar engine compression brake to apply and use the same within the city limits of the city of Aberdeen, except in case of an emergency caused by the failure of the ordinary braking system of the vehicle, when the use of the brake is necessary in order to avoid accidents.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.060 Railroad trains not to block streets.
It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002)

10.04.070 Violations - penality.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by ordinance, the statutes adopted by reference in the MTO, or by Chapters 46.20, 46.61, or 46.63 RCW, any person who is convicted of violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of AMC Title 10 is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6331, Repealed & Replaced, 08/28/2002; Ord. 6246, Amended, 04/05/2000)

10.04.080 Pedestrians—Right-of-way.

10.04.090 Automated traffic safety cameras authorized - definitions - signage - limits on compensation.
The use of automated traffic safety cameras, subject to the restrictions specified in state law (RCW 46.63.170), is authorized to detect the following violations of the Model Traffic Ordinance (AMC 10.04.010): [1] Failure to stop for red traffic control signal at intersections where two arterial roadways intersect as required by RCW 46.61.055(3); [2] Failure to obey maximum speed limit in school zones as required by RCW 46.61.440.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, "automated traffic safety camera" means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system, a railroad grade crossing control system, or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or exceeds a speed limit in a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device.
B. Signage. All locations where an automated traffic safety camera is used shall be clearly marked by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera.
C. Compensation of vendors. The compensation paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the automated traffic safety camera equipment used shall be based only upon the value of the equipment and services provided or rendered in support of the system, and shall not be based upon a portion of the fine or civil penalty imposed or the revenue generated by the equipment.
(Ord. 6426, Repealed & Replaced, 12/13/2006)

10.04.100 Traffic infractions detected by automated traffic safety camera - notice of infraction - response - penalties.
A. A peace officer has the authority to issue a notice of traffic infraction when the infraction is detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera.
B. A notice of infraction based on evidence detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera must be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within fourteen (14) days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within fourteen (14) days of establishing the renter's name and address under subsection D(1) of this section. The peace officer issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation of RCW 46.61.055(3) or RCW 46.61.440. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the infraction.
C. A person receiving such a notice of infraction may respond to the notice by mail. The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for such an infraction unless the registered owner overcomes the presumption in subsection E of this section, or, in the case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under subsection D of this section. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under subsection D(1) of this section is responsible for such an infraction.
D. If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the peace officer shall, before such a notice of infraction is issued, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within eighteen (18) days of receiving the written notice, provide to the peace officer by return mail:
    1. A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or
    2. A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred; or
    3. In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty.
    Timely mailing of this statement to the peace officer relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter for the notice of infraction.
E. In a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of RCW 46.61.055(3) or RCW 46.61.440, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court, that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner (see, RCW 46.63.170 and RCW 46.63.075).
F. A traffic infraction for violation of RCW 46.61.055(3) or RCW 46.61.440 detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall be processed in the same manner as a parking infraction, with the same monetary penalty as a notice of infraction issued for the traffic violation; provided, the amount of the fine issued for an infraction generated through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall not exceed the maximum fine imposed by ordinance for parking infractions.
(Ord. 6426, Repealed & Replaced, 12/13/2006)

Chapter 10.14 BICYCLE SAFETY AND HELMETS

Sections:
10.14.010    Purpose.
10.14.020    Definitions.
10.14.030    Bicycle helmet required.
10.14.040    Bicycle races and events - Bicycle helmet required.
10.14.050    Bicycle rental, lease or loan - Bicycle helmet required.
10.14.060    Helmet sales.
10.14.070    Penalties - Infraction.
10.14.080    Enforcement.
10.14.090    Implementation programs.

10.14.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The provisions contained herein shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.
B. It is the express purpose of this chapter to provide for and to promote the health and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.
C. It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon any person falling within this scope, and no provision of, nor term used in, this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city of Aberdeen or any of its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.
D. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, nor shall be construed to create or to form the basis for, a liability on the part of the city of Aberdeen, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of any person subject to this chapter to comply with this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the city of Aberdeen by its officers, employees or agents.
E. The city council finds that the Harborview Injury Prevention Study has shown that bicycle helmets reduce by eighty-five percent (85%) the risk of head injuries suffered while operating or driving a bicycle not powered by motor and reduce brain injury by eighty-eight percent (88%).

10.14.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms have the following means. All words used in the present tense include the future and past tense, all words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
"Bicycle or cycle not powered by motor" means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two or more wheels which are twelve (12) inches or more in diameter, and within this chapter shall include any attached trailers, sidecars, and/or device being towed by a bicycle.
"Guardian" means a parent, legal guardian, adult with custody, or temporary guardian, who maintains responsibility, whether voluntary or otherwise, for the safety and welfare of a person under the age of sixteen (16) years.
"Helmet" means a head covering designed for safety that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by standard Z-90.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequently nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the city council may adopt.
"Public area" means public roadways, bicycle paths, parks, or any right-of-way, publicly-owned facility, or publicly- owned property within the city of Aberdeen.

10.14.030 Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person operating or riding on a bicycle or cycle not powered by motor in a public area shall wear a protective helmet designed for bicycle safety. The helmet must be equipped with either a neck or chin strap that shall be fastened securely while the bicycle or cycle not powered by motor is in motion.
B. The guardian of a person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall not knowingly allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent, that person from operating or riding on a bicycle or cycle not powered by motor in a public area unless that person is wearing a bicycle helmet, the neck or chin strap of which is fastened securely while the person is on the bicycle or cycle not powered by motor.
C. No person shall transport another person on or tow another person on a bicycle or a cycle not powered by motor in any public area, unless that person is wearing a helmet.

10.14.040 Bicycle races and events - Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person or organization managing a bicycle race, an organized event involving bicycling, or a bicycle tour, which will take place in whole or in part in any public area, shall notify participants of the requirement to wear a helmet during the event, race, or tour, and such persons and organizations may reject participants who fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The person or organization managing any such event, race, or tour shall include the helmet requirement in any promotional brochures and on registration materials.

10.14.050 Bicycle rental, lease or loan - Bicycle helmet required.
A. Any person engaging in the business of renting, leasing, or loaning (e.g., "test ride") any bicycle or cycle not powered by motor for use in any public area shall offer to the person(s) renting, leasing, or using such bicycle(s) or cycle(s) not powered by motor with the rental, lease, or use of the bicycle(s), or cycle(s) not powered by motor, a helmet, and further shall notify such persons of the requirements under this chapter to wear a helmet. Such persons or organizations engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or loaning bicycles or cycles not powered by motor shall not be required to assess whether or not a helmet provided by the person renting, leasing, or using the bicycle or cycle not powered by motor, meets the standards set pursuant to this chapter.
B. The rental, lease, or loan documents (contract, agreement, brochure, or receipt) of any person engaging in the business of renting, leasing, or loaning any bicycle or cycle not powered by motor in the city of Aberdeen must advise the person renting, leasing, or using the bicycle or cycle not powered by motor of the helmet requirement of this chapter.
C. It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section for a person wearing an unapproved helmet that the helmet was furnished in conjunction with his or her rental, lease, or use of a bicycle or cycle not powered by motor by a person or organization engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or loaning bicycles, and that the helmet was fastened securely while bicycling.

10.14.060 Helmet sales.
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale a bicycle helmet that does not meet or exceed the safety standards set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard Z-90-4, or the Snell Foundation, or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the city may adopt.
B. It is a defense that the sale or offer for sale was an isolated sale of use merchandise made by an individual who was not engaged in the business of selling or repairing recreational equipment, such as a seller at a garage or rummage sale.

10.14.070 Penalties - Infraction.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall have committed an infraction which shall be processed as set forth in chapter 7.80 RCW and the Washington Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction, with a base monetary penalty not to exceed twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. Infractions for failure to wear a bicycle helmet under AMC 10.14.030 shall be processed in the same manner as parking infractions, including for the purposes of RCW 3.50.100, RCW 3.62.090 and RCW 46.63.110.
B. The court may waive, reduce, or suspend the penalty and clear the notice of violation as a warning for an individual who has not received a notice of violation of this chapter within one year, and provides proof that he or she has acquired an approved bicycle helmet at the time of appearance in court.
C. Each child under sixteen (16) not meeting the requirements of section 10.14.030 shall represent a separate violation.
D. Each rental and each event under sections 10.14.040 or 10.14.050 shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 6512, Amended, 12/08/2010; Ord. 6305, Amended, 10/17/2001)

10.14.080 Enforcement.
A. The law enforcement agency of the city shall be responsible to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, law enforcement officers may at their discretion:
    1. Enter, during business hours, the premises of a business selling, repairing, or renting bicycles or selling sporting or recreation equipment, to determine compliance with this chapter.
    2. Post notice outside the premises of a business that offers for sale, rent, or other public use, bicycle helmets that do not meet the safety standards of this chapter, so that the public is informed, and
    3. Stop a bicycle race, an organized event involving bicycling, or a bicycle tour that takes place in a public area, when there is conspicuous disregard for the requirements of this chapter, involving multiple infractions.

10.14.090 Implementation programs.
A. Information about the need for bicycle helmets, safe helmet use, safe bicycle operation, and existing bicycle safety programs shall be made available for members of the public at City Hall without charge. The police chief is authorized and directed to develop a program of helmet awareness, together with other public and private agencies as appropriate, designed to promote use of helmets by all ages and to subsidize use of helmets by low-income families. Such programs shall be in effect by March 1st, 2000; provided, that the existence or effectiveness of such programs shall not be a defense to a civil infraction notice issued under this chapter.
B. In order to educate the public concerning the provisions of this chapter, during the period from January 1st, 2000 through January 1st, 2001, a person violating section 10.14.030 will not be subject to a civil infraction monetary penalty, though a written warning of the violation may be issued. After January 1st, 2001, a violator may be issued a regular notice of civil infraction.
(Ord. 6230, Added, 11/03/1999)

Chapter 10.15 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS

Sections:
10.15.010    Definitions.
10.15.020    "Motorized foot scooters" subject to this chapter.
10.15.030    Unsafe use prohibited.
10.15.040    Prohibited areas of operation.
10.15.050    Requirements for operating motorized foot scooters - parental responsibility.
10.15.060    Violation - Penality.

10.15.010 Definitions.
A. “Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two ten-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood upon but may have a seat, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. A motor-driven cycle, mini motor cycle, moped, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a motorized foot scooter.
B. “To operate in a negligent manner,” means the operation of a motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, including the operator. For the purposes of this section, "negligent" means the failure to exercise ordinary care, and is the doing of some
A. “Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two ten-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood upon but may have a seat, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. A motor-driven cycle, mini motor cycle, moped, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a motorized foot scooter.
B. “To operate in a negligent manner,” means the operation of a motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, including the operator. For the purposes of this section, "negligent" means the failure to exercise ordinary care, and is the doing of some act that a reasonably careful person would not do under the same or similar circumstances or the failure to do something that a reasonably careful person would do under the same or similar circumstances. Examples of operating in a negligent manner include, but are not limited to, failure to obey all traffic control devices, failure to yield-of-way to pedestrians or vehicles, or failure to obey any other rule of the road for vehicles in chapter 46.61 RCW as adopted in the Model Traffic Ordinance (chapter 10.04 AMC).
C. “Helmet” means a protective covering for the head consisting of a hard outer shell, padding adjacent to and inside the outer shell, and a neck or chin strap type retention system, with a label as required by the Federal Consumer Products Safety Commission and as adopted by the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) at 16 C.F.R. 1203, or such subsequently nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the city council may adopt.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

10.15.020 "Motorized foot scooters" subject to this chapter.
Each motorized foot scooter operated within the city limits shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter and chapter 10.04 (Model Traffic Ordinance) applicable to pedestrians and bicycles, including but not limited to obeying the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other traffic control devices, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

10.15.030 Unsafe use prohibited.
No motorized foot scooter shall be operated in a negligent manner.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

10.15.040 Prohibited areas of operation.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorized foot scooter in any City park, upon any sidewalk, pathway, publicly owned parking lot, privately owned parking lot without the permission of the owner.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

10.15.050 Requirements for operating motorized foot scooters - parental responsibility.
No person shall operate a motorized foot scooter within the City limits unless the following requirements are met. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter:
A. Minimum age. No motorized foot scooter shall be operated on any street or other public area not otherwise prohibited by this chapter unless the operator is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
B. Helmet required. Any person operating a motorized foot scooter upon any public area shall wear an approved helmet.
C. Passengers. No person shall transport or tow another person on, in or with a motorized foot scooter upon any public area.
D. Lighting Required. Every motorized foot scooter operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before dawn shall be equipped with a lamp on the front, which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front.
E. Reflector Required. Every motorized foot scooter operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before dawn shall be equipped with a red reflector on the rear of the scooter in the manner and of a type approved by the Washington State Patrol. The reflector shall be visible from all distances up to six hundred feet to the rear.
F. Every motorized foot scooter shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
G. Every gas motorized foot scooter shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The use of a cutout, bypass, or similar muffler elimination device, is prohibited on any gas motorized foot scooter.
H. Every motorized foot scooter shall be equipped so that the drive motor is engaged through a switch lever or other mechanism that when released will cause the drive motor to disengage or cease to function.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

10.15.060 Violation - Penality.
Violations of this chapter are a Class 3 civil infraction with a maximum penalty of fifty dollars plus statutory assessments. However, violations which constitute criminal traffic offenses may be charged as such and are subject to the maximum penalties allowed for such offenses.
(Ord. 6368, Added, 10/27/2004)

Chapter 10.18 WHEELED ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES

Sections:
10.18.010    Definitions.
10.18.020    WATV Operation on City Streets.
10.18.030    Penalties for violations.

10.18.010 Definitions.
"Wheeled All-Terrain Vehicle (WATV)" means a four wheeled vehicle where operator and passenger sit side by side in the vehicle, manufactured primarily for recreational non-highway all-terrain use, as further defined by the state Model Traffic Ordinance adopted by the city of Aberdeen (Chpt. 10.04 AMC).
(Ord. 6579, Added, 07/22/2015)

10.18.020 WATV Operation on City Streets.
Any person operating a WATV on city streets or alleys must comply with the following requirements, in addition to all state requirements for registration, operation, WATV use permits, and equipment laws:
A. WATV operators must be at least 18 years of age and must possess a current valid driver's license; no parent or legal guardian of a person under 18 shall knowingly allow the underage person to operate a WATV in violation of this ordinance;
B. The maximum speed limit for operation of a WATV is 35 mph or the posted limit, whichever is lower;
C. WATV's must be operated in a single-file with enough space between each WATV for a full-sized vehicle to pass each WATV safely;
D. WATV's must be operated with all four wheels of the WATV on the roadway; no shoulder driving is permitted, except for slowing to allow vehicle traffic to pass.
(Ord. 6579, Added, 07/22/2015)

10.18.030 Penalties for violations.
Failure to perform any act required, or the performance of any act prohibited in this chapter shall be a traffic infraction enforce as provided in Chapter 1.20 AMC, unless otherwise provided under state law or ordinance.
(Ord. 6579, Added, 07/22/2015)

Chapter 10.20 PARKING

Sections:
10.20.010    Definitions.
10.20.020    Generally.
10.20.030    Obstructing traffic—Double parking—Alleys.
10.20.040    Bus zones or taxi zones.
10.20.050    Basic limit.
10.20.060    Certain purposes unlawful.
10.20.070    Trucks in residential zones.
10.20.080    Loading zones.
10.20.090    Handicapped.
10.20.100    Camping prohibited.
10.20.110    Designation of spaces—Parking within spaces.
10.20.120    Tampering with enforcement process.
10.20.130    Meters—Deposit of coins and time limits.
10.20.140    Meters—Hours of operation.
10.20.150    Meters—Misdemeanors.
10.20.160    Meters—Maintenance and collections.
10.20.170    Off-Street metered parking area.
10.20.180    Off-street—City-owned property.
10.20.190    Downtown two-hour area.
10.20.210    No parking and limited parking designated.
10.20.215    Fire lanes designated - Penalties.
10.20.220    Expired vehicle licenses or tabs—Parking prohibited.
10.20.230    Service vehicle permits.
10.20.240    Enforcement of chapter—Parking patrol officer.
10.20.250    Parking fund—Created—Use.
10.20.260    Registered owner responsible for unlawful parking.
10.20.270    Violations—Misdemeanors.
10.20.280    Infractions.

10.20.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, in addition to their common meanings, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
"Holidays" means those days specified in RCW 46.90.127.
"Parking meter" means any mechanical device or meter not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected for the regulation of parking by authority of this chapter, and which shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by the city and, when operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking time and at the expiration of such period shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
"Parking meter space" means any parking space within a parking meter zone or area and adjacent to a parking meter.
"Parking meter zone" and "parking meter area" mean any restricted street or city-controlled public parking area upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
"Parking space" means any space on a public street or within a public parking area, which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the street or parking area.
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
"Street block" shall mean the entire street specified from one street intersection to the next.
(Prior code § 9.09.010)

10.20.020 Generally.
A. Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, it is unlawful to stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches of the edge of the roadway, except as provided in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection:
    1. Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs.
    2. In places where, and at hours when, stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads, when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him such special privilege; and provided further, that such permit shall be either in the possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such special permit.
B. The city council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted, after an engineering study to determine feasibility, and shall cause the same to be marked or signed.
C. The police department is authorized to issue, to any owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials, a special permit, renewable annually, and to state therein the terms and conditions thereof, allowing the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading and unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if in the opinion of the police department such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of the owner's business and will not seriously interfere with traffic.
(Prior code § 9.09.020)

10.20.030 Obstructing traffic—Double parking—Alleys.
A. It is unlawful to stand or park any vehicle upon any street or alley in such a manner or under such circumstances as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the street or alley for free movement of vehicular traffic, except where such stops are necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals; or in obedience to the direction of a police officer.
B. It is unlawful to double park any vehicle on any street or alley within the city of Aberdeen.
C. It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle in an alley in the commercial or industrial zones of the city of Aberdeen except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle at which time the vehicle must be attended by the operator of the same.
(Prior code § 9.09.030)

10.20.040 Bus zones or taxi zones.
It is unlawful to stand or park any vehicle, other than a bus in an officially designated bus zone, or to stand or park any vehicle other than a taxicab in an officially designated taxicab zone; except, that the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers, at such a time and in such a manner that does not interfere with the usage of a zone by busses or taxis.
(Prior code § 9.09.040)

10.20.050 Basic limit.
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance it is unlawful to park any vehicle for a time longer than twenty-four (24) hours on any street in the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 9.09.040)

10.20.060 Certain purposes unlawful.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying advertising;
B. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
C. Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except when authorized.
(Prior code § 9.09.060)

10.20.070 Trucks in residential zones.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle larger than a one-ton pickup truck in any street in any residential zone of the city, except for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries.
(Prior code § 9.09.070)

10.20.080 Loading zones.
A. It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park in the following described areas for any other purpose except for delivering merchandise to business establishments:
    1. A loading zone on the east side of Broadway commencing on the north line of the alley north of Heron Street and continuing for thirty (30) feet in a northerly direction.
    2. In the loading zone of the east side of "I" Street, between Wishkah and Market Streets, commencing five feet south of the alley and extending southerly thirty-seven (37) feet.
    3. A fifteen-minute loading zone on the east side of "H" Street between Third and Fourth Streets commencing at the south line of the alley and extending southerly twenty-five (25) feet.
B. The city engineer shall have the power to designate, modify or remove such other loading zones, their hours of operation, and time limits for their use as he or she shall deem necessary.
(Prior code § 9.09.080)

10.20.090 Handicapped.
The city engineer is empowered to designate parking places and drop-off zones for handicapped persons. Such a zone shall be effective upon the construction of the signing for handicapped parking prescribed the state of Washington. It shall be a parking infraction for a vehicle to be parked in a parking area designated for the handicapped, unless the vehicle bears a properly issued license plate, card, or decal for disabled persons issued under the authority of RCW 46.16.380.
(Prior code § 9.09.090)

10.20.100 Camping prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or trailer on a public street for the purpose of sleeping therein or maintaining the same as a temporary or permanent residence.
B. It shall be a defense to a charge under this section that the offense was necessitated by a temporary emergency situation and that no reasonable alternative was available to the defendant under the circumstances.
C. The first two charges under this section for any individual within a twelve (12) month period shall be infractions. Thereafter all charges within twelve (12) months of a previous charge shall be misdemeanors.
(Prior code § 9.09.100)

10.20.110 Designation of spaces—Parking within spaces.
The city engineer, in cooperation with the street department and the police department, is authorized to mark off such individual parking spaces as needed in the opinion of the city engineer on public streets and other parking areas under the control of the city, the parking spaces to be suitably designated by lines or other markers. At each space so designated or marked off, it is an infraction to park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated and marked off.
(Prior code § 9.09.110)

10.20.120 Tampering with enforcement process.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to erase chalk marks placed on tires by enforcement officers of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter or to tamper with any other enforcement process implemented by the officials, with the intent of circumventing that enforcement process or the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 9.09.120)

10.20.130 Meters—Deposit of coins and time limits.
A. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any parking meter space next to which a parking meter has been installed during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone or area in which the meter is located unless a United States coin or coins of the appropriate denomination as indicated on the parking meter shall have been deposited therein, or shall have previously been deposited therein for an unexpired interval of time, and said meter has been placed in operation.
B. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any parking meter space during the restricted and regulated time applicable to the parking meter zone or area in which the meter is located while the parking meter for such space indicates by a signal that the lawful parking time in such space has expired. This provision shall not apply to the act of parking or the necessary time which is required to deposit immediately thereafter a coin or coins in such meter.
C. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any parking meter space for a consecutive period of time longer than two hours, or such other time as may be established by ordinance, irrespective of the number or amounts of the coins deposited in such meter.
D. The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted by this chapter.
(Prior code § 9.09.130)

10.20.140 Meters—Hours of operation.
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance for a particular parking area or zone, parking meters shall be operated every day between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays.
(Prior code § 9.09.130)

10.20.150 Meters—Misdemeanors.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to:
A. Deposit or attempt to deposit in any parking meter any bent coin, slug, button, or any device or substance as substitutes for United States coins;
B. Deface, injure, tamper with, open, or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
(Prior code § 9.09.150)

10.20.160 Meters—Maintenance and collections.
It is the duty of the finance director to maintain parking meters and to make regular collections of the money deposited in meters, to remove from the parking meters all coins deposited therein and to deposit them in the parking fund, as provided in Section 10.20.240.
(Prior code § 9.09.160)

10.20.170 Off-Street metered parking area.
A. There is established a public off-street parking area on the southeast corner of "H" and Heron Streets and on the northeast corner of "H" and Heron Streets in the City of Aberdeen, being upon Lot 6, Block 45, and Lot 7, Block 42, Benn's Plat of Aberdeen, and all comprehensive plans and specifications developed by the city engineer for the facilities are approved and confirmed in all respects.
B. The public off-street parking area shall be operated through the use of parking meters which shall be installed, managed and enforced in the same manner as other parking meters within the city and as provided in this chapter, except as follows:
    1. The parking meters in the area shall be in operation and shall require payment during the hours between 8:00 a.m., and 8:00 p.m.;
    2. The parking meters in the area shall be of such type as will permit the use of five, ten and twenty-five cent ($0.25) coins and it shall be permissible to accumulate parking time by the deposit of additional coins.
(Prior code § 9.09.170)

10.20.180 Off-street—City-owned property.
A. There is established a public off-street parking area on Lots 1 and 2, the South forty (40) feet of Lots 5 and 6, the north twenty-six (26) feet of Lots 7 and 8, the east thirty (30) feet of Lot 11, and Lot 12, Block 10, Weatherwax and Benn's Addition to the city of Aberdeen.
B. There is established an off-street parking area at the rear of the public library building at the southwest corner of Market and "I" Streets, being upon Lots 1 and 2 of Block 39, Benn's Plat of Aberdeen. The librarian may designate portions of this area for exclusive use of Library staff or library visitors, and may provide for public parking in the area.
C. The chief of police may designate portions of Lots 11 and 12 as described in subsection (A) to be reserved for city vehicles or persons on city business at the police station and may provide for employee parking in the area.
D. The public works director may designate portions of Lots 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 as described in subsection (A) to be reserved for city vehicles or persons on city business at City Hall and may provide for employee parking in the area.
E. The chief of police is authorized to issue permits to city employees allowing employees to park in the designated areas.
F. It is an infraction for anyone to park a motor vehicle on the real property described in this section without having a valid permit displayed in the window of the vehicle, except when such parking is done in conformance with subsections (B), (C) or (D). The public works director or his designee may cause any vehicle violating this section to be impounded.
G. The public works director shall cause signs to be posted in all described areas notifying violators that they are subject to an infraction or having their vehicle impounded.
(Prior code § 9.09.190)

10.20.190 Downtown two-hour area.
A. Except where otherwise provided or further limited by ordinance, it is unlawful to park a vehicle for more than t wo hours in any day, except Sundays and Holidays, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m, in any street block in the following downtown two-hour parking zone:
    1. Heron Street from "F" Street to "L" Street;
    2. Wishkah Street from "F" Street to "M" Street;
    3. Market Street from "F" Street to "L" Street;
    4. "K" Street from First Street to State Street;
    5. "I" Street from Market Street to State Street;
    6. "H" Street from Market Street to State Street;
    7. "G" Street from First Street to the alley between Heron and State Street;
    8. "F" Street from First Street to Heron Street;
    9. "L" Street from Market Street to Heron Street;
    10. Broadway from First Street to State Street;
    11. The north side of State Street from "H" Street to "I" Street;
    12. The north side of State Street from "I" Street to Broadway;
    13. The south side of First Street from "I" Street to "K" Street;
    14. The east side of "H" Street from First Street to Market Street;
    15. The east side of "I" street from First Street to Market Street.
It shall be no defense that a vehicle has been moved from one parking space to another within the street block.
B. Owners of businesses within the two-hour parking zone providing specific service procedures to customers that require longer than two hours to complete may apply to the chief of police for parking-exempt permits for customer use only. If in the opinion of the chief, use of such permits is necessary in the daily conduct of the owner's business, the permits will be issued. Original issuance of permits is at no charge, but replacement cost for lost, stolen or damaged permits is fifty dollars ($50.00) each.
    1. All other matters concerning permits issued pursuant to this subsection, including but not limited to, number of permits to be issued, displaying of permits, and application procedures are left to the discretion of the chief of police.
    2. Any use of such permits other than for the purpose for which it was issued shall be an infraction and subject the permittee to a fine and forfeiture of the permit.
C. The expense of enforcing parking restrictions within the Downtown Parking and Business Improvement District (Chapter 3.100 AMC) shall be paid for by special assessments and by fines and forfeitures from parking offenses in the area.
(Ord. 6274, Amended, 12/06/2000. Prior code § 9.09.200)

10.20.210 No parking and limited parking designated.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle in any of the streets, alleys, parkways, or city property as designated by the traffic engineer or by city council resolution.
(Ord. 6331, Amended, 08/28/2002; Ord. 6297, Amended, 09/05/2001; Ord. 6296, Amended, 08/01/2001; Ord. 6283, Amended, 03/14/2001; Ord. 6274, Amended, 12/06/2000; Ord. 6256, Amended, 09/06/2000; Ord. 6251, Amended, 05/24/2000; Ord. 6214, Amended, 04/28/1999; Ord. 6213, Amended, 04/14/1999; Ord. 6184, Amended, 04/22/1998; Ord. 6163, Amended, 09/03/1997; Ord. 6155, Amended, 04/30/1997; Ord. 6142, Added, 11/06/1996; Ord. 6137, Amended, 10/02/1996; Ord. 6132, Amended, 08/07/1996)

10.20.215 Fire lanes designated - Penalties.
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any fire lane.
B. “Fire lane” as used in this section, means an area on public or private property reserved for providing fire department access to structures, firefighting fixtures, or equipment. Fire lanes within the city are designated as follows: The alleys in Block 2, Stewart’s Park Addition, lying between Holmes, Stewart, and Willard Streets.
C. Each violation of this section shall be an infraction with a mandatory minimum monetary penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and a maximum penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
(Ord. 6142, Added, 11/06/1996)

10.20.220 Expired vehicle licenses or tabs—Parking prohibited.
It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle which does not display current and valid vehicle license number plates or tabs on any street in the City of Aberdeen. The monetary penalty for this infraction shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Prior code § 9.09.225)

10.20.230 Service vehicle permits.
A. Subject to the further conditions set forth in this section, when a permit is properly displayed on a service vehicle, the vehicle shall be permitted to park in the downtown two-hour parking area or the patrolled parking area in a parking space for an unlimited period of time as long as the operator thereof is actually providing services, repair, or construction work in connection with the trade or business for which the permit was issued.
B. For the purpose of this section, a service vehicle is a commercial vehicle owned by a person, firm, or corporation engaged in the plumbing, electrical, construction, refrigeration, or repair business or trade and other persons engaged in similar trades or businesses which is primarily used in connection with the business or trade for the purpose of transporting workers and materials to a worksite other than a worksite owned or operated by the vehicle owner. Unless a written waiver is first obtained by the finance director, all service vehicles shall have a decal or lettering of a permanent nature identifying the person, firm, or corporation using said vehicle permanently affixed to the exterior of the vehicle.
C. The finance director shall prepare application forms for service vehicle permits which shall contain the following information:
    1. The make, model, year and license number of the vehicle;
    2. The name and address of the owner of the vehicle;
    3. The type of service for which the parking permit is sought;
    4. Any other information deemed appropriate for the purpose of the finance director.
Before a permit is issued, it must be approved by the finance director and the applicant must have paid the fee as set forth in this section.
D. The fee for a service vehicle permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first vehicle and ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional service vehicle owned by the applicant. Service vehicle permits shall expire on December 31st of the year in which they are issued. Each permit shall be displayed in the lower left-hand corner of the windshield of the vehicle for which the permit has been issued so that it is visible from the outside of the vehicle. Permits may be transferred to another vehicle only with the written consent of the finance director and with the payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00).
E. The finance director has the authority to suspend or revoke permits for violation of the provisions of this section or for failure to cooperate with investigation of violations of this section. Prior to suspending or revoking a permit, the finance director shall notify the permittee of the finance director's intention to revoke or modify. Such notice may be given personally or by mail addressed to the permittee at the address shown on the application, The notice shall state the action contemplated by the finance director and the reasons for that action and shall notify the applicant that he or she may request an informal hearing with the finance director on the matter. No portion of the application fee shall be refunded upon the suspension or revocation of a permit.
(Prior code § 9.09.230)

10.20.240 Enforcement of chapter—Parking patrol officer.
It is the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the finance director is authorized and directed to employ a parking patrol officer or officers for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and the patrolled parking area, the metered parking zones and areas, and such other areas as may be directed by the finance director. The parking patrol officer shall have the authority to issue tickets for violation of this chapter on forms furnished by the police department and so authorized by special commission of the chief of police. Parking patrol officers shall have no further police powers and shall be employees of the finance director and not members of the police department.
(Prior code § 9.09.240)

10.20.250 Parking fund—Created—Use.
There is created a special fund to be known and designated as the "parking fund" into which shall be deposited all receipts from special assessments related to parking, receipts derived from the operation of parking meters and parking areas under the city's control, and fines and forfeitures for parking offenses. This fund shall be used only for the payment and the expenses of the city in enforcing its ordinances relating to parking, including the costs of signing and marking, all employee costs, overhead, costs of prosecution, court costs, and every other cost incidental to the proper maintenance and enforcement of this ordinance by the city. Funds derived from areas from special parking assessments shall be used only for costs associated with the area benefitted by the special assessment.
(Prior code § 9.09.250)

10.20.260 Registered owner responsible for unlawful parking.
Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall be responsible for any infraction of this chapter caused by the parking of said vehicle in violation hereof. It shall be no defense that the vehicle was illegally parked by another, unless proof is presented that said vehicle had been stolen and had not been returned to the registered owner by the date of the violation.
(Prior code § 9.09.260)

10.20.270 Violations—Misdemeanors.
Any violation which is made a misdemeanor by this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 9.09.270)

10.20.280 Infractions.
Every violation of this chapter and state parking statutes adopted by reference, except for violations which are specifically stated to be misdemeanors, shall be infractions, and infractions occurring on public rights-of-way shall be traffic infractions. The monetary penalty to be assessed for infractions under this section and other parking restrictions adopted by the city are as follows:
A. 
    1. Overtime parking in the patrolled parking area (10.20.190(A)):
        Seven dollars ($7.00) for the first two hours per day;
        Fourteen dollars ($14.00) for the second two hours per day;
        Twenty-one dollars ($21.00) for each citation thereafter in a day.
    2. Permit violations (10.20.190(B)):
        Fifty dollars ($50.00) for first violation;
        Fifty dollars ($50.00) plus forfeiture of permit for subsequent violations within any twelve (12) month period.
B. Other overtime parking - ten dollars ($10.00) per time limit.
C. Parking trucks in residential zone (10.20.070):
    First two citations in twelve-month period - one hundred dollars ($100.00),
    Each citation thereafter - two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
D. Parking in "No Parking" zones and limited parking zones (10.20.210) - fifteen dollars ($15.00).
E. Handicapped parking violation (10.20.090) - fifty dollars ($50.00).
F. Parking on sidewalk (Model Traffic Code 46.61.570(1)(a)(ii)) - fifty dollars ($50.00).
G. The court may provide for the monetary penalty to be assessed for other infractions, and where no other penalty has been set by the court or ordinance, the penalty shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
H. There shall be a penalty for failure to respond to a notice of traffic infraction involving parking under this chapter or any other ordinance of the city if the person receiving an infraction fails to respond and fails to pay the infraction within thirty (30) days of the date of issue, a penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed. An additional fifteen dollar ($15.00) penalty shall be imposed if the infraction is not paid within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the citation.
(Prior code § 9.09.280)

Chapter 10.28 PROPERTY LEASING FOR OFF-STREET PARKING

Sections:
10.28.010    Legislative procedure adopted.
10.28.020    Finance committee guidelines.

10.28.010 Legislative procedure adopted.
There is adopted the following legislative procedure to be used in considering any lease property for the purpose of off-street parking. This legislative procedure shall be followed when a proposed area is to be considered by the city council for off-street parking.
A. A proposed area should first be referred to the traffic committee. The traffic committee shall analyze the proposed area in regard to the concepts and guidelines as adopted by the city council.
B. The traffic committee shall complete a report which shall be made to the city council and the city council shall examine such a report determining the feasibility for proceeding with the consideration of the parking area.
C. The city council, if it concludes that the proposal is feasible, shall refer the proposed area to the finance committee.
D. The finance committee shall enter into negotiations with the owner of the lease property and shall make a determination as to the financial feasibility of the project. Upon the completion of preliminary negotiations with the owner of the parking area, they shall submit a report to the city council setting forth the proposed agreement.
E. Upon receipt of the report from the finance committee, the city council shall by resolution either disapprove or approve the proposed lease agreement. The resolution shall be considered at a public hearing.
(Prior code § 9.11.010)

10.28.020 Finance committee guidelines.
The following criteria shall be used as a general guideline by the finance committee for determining the financial feasibility of a proposed lease area:
A. The finance committee shall consider the capital costs and the amortization of that cost over the period of the lease.
B. The finance committee shall determine the term of the lease guaranteeing the repayment of the capital costs and the interest thereon.
C. There shall be created a new account and funds shall be used for the expenditure of the capital costs. The finance committee shall consider the available funds in this account to cover the necessary capital costs. The revenue received pursuant to these leases will go to the parking meter fund.
D. In determining the lease, the finance committee shall have the owner of the leased area protect the city from any and all taxes that may accrue pursuant to the lease agreement.
(Prior code § 9.11.020)

Chapter 10.32 PARKING STRIPS

Sections:
10.32.010    Parking strips within jurisdiction of park board.
10.32.020    Permit required.
10.32.030    Planting of trees and shrubbery.
10.32.040    Violations—Penalties.
10.32.050    Removal of trees and shrubbery already existing and those planted in violation of chapter.
10.32.060    Piling wood on parking strips prohibited.
10.32.070    Violation of Section 10.32.060—Penalty.
10.32.080    Cutting and removing wood, trees, or timber prohibited.

10.32.010 Parking strips within jurisdiction of park board.
All parking strips within the city north of the Chehalis River and west of Wishkah River and east of Division Street are placed under the jurisdiction and supervision of the park board of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 9.14.010)

10.32.020 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to plant any trees or shrubbery in any parking strip within the city of Aberdeen without having first secured a permit to do so from such park board.
(Prior code § 9.14.020)

10.32.030 Planting of trees and shrubbery.
The park board is authorized to make uniform provisions for the planting of trees and shrubbery on parking strips within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 9.14.030)

10.32.040 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 9.14.040)

10.32.050 Removal of trees and shrubbery already existing and those planted in violation of chapter.
Any trees or shrubbery planted in violation of the provisions of this chapter on any parking strip shall be deemed a nuisance, and liable to destruction or removal under the authority of the park board; provided, however, that trees now planted and in a growing condition shall not be removed except by the mutual consent of the owner and the park board, or as hereinafter provided. Whenever the park board shall find that any tree or shrub growing on any street or parkway within the city of Aberdeen has, by reason of its growth, decay or otherwise, become dangerous to public travel upon said street, or is causing damage to the pavement, sidewalk, sewer or other improvement located on or under said street, the park board may order the trimming or removal of said tree or shrub without the consent of the owner.
Unless the owner consents to such removal, the park board shall, at least ten days before ordering such removal or trimming, give notice in writing to the abutting owner of its intention to remove or trim said tree or shrub, during which time the owner may protest in writing to the park board the removal or trimming of such tree or shrub, such protest to be filed with the city comptroller. If such written protest is filed, the park board shall give the owner an opportunity to be heard, after which hearing the park board may enter its order in accordance with its findings. All such orders shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting of the park board.
(Prior code § 9.14.050)

10.32.060 Piling wood on parking strips prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to dump or pile, or permit, or cause to be dumped or piled, any wood on any parking strip or parking upon any street or highway within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 9.14.060)

10.32.070 Violation of Section 10.32.060—Penalty.
Any person violating Section 10.32.060 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by thirty (30) days imprisonment in the city jail or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 9.14.070)

10.32.080 Cutting and removing wood, trees, or timber prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut or remove any wood, timber or trees, whether standing or down, upon or from any dedicated public street or alley within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 9.14.080)

Chapter 10.36 PILE DRIVERS

Sections:
10.36.010    Construction of pile drivers.

10.36.010 Construction of pile drivers.
All pile-driving machinery used in the city of Aberdeen shall be so constructed that it can be moved upon any of the streets and alleys of said city without injuring, or causing to be cut, any telephone, telegraph, electric light or trolley wires.
(Prior code § 9.18.010)

Chapter 10.40 ROAD SURFACE—RESTRICTED TRAFFIC

Sections:
10.40.010    Road restrictions.
10.40.020    Notice of restrictions.

10.40.010 Road restrictions.
Whenever the condition of any city street, by reason of rain, snow, climatic or other condition, is such that it will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the operation of vehicles thereon is prohibited or restricted or it would be dangerous to permit traffic thereon, the city council may impose limits as to weight or speed of vehicles thereof, or any other restriction that may be deemed necessary, or may close such street to all vehicles or any class of vehicles for any period of time the city council may determine by resolution. Such resolution shall be published in one issue of the official newspaper prior to the effective date of such restriction or closure; provided, however, that in cases of emergency, the street superintendent shall have the authority to make restrictions effective immediately, in which event he shall make a report thereof to the city council at its next regular meeting; provided, further, that no such restriction, placed upon streets forming a part of the route of any state highway is effective until first approved in writing by the director of highways of the state of Washington.
(Prior code § 9.20.010)

10.40.020 Notice of restrictions.
No such restrictions shall be effective until proper signs, giving notice thereof, are erected upon the closed or restricted streets or parts thereon.
(Prior code § 9.20.020)

Chapter 10.44 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:
10.44.010    State Route 101.
10.44.020    State Route 105.
10.44.030    East Sargent Boulevard.
10.44.040    Wishkah Road and "B" Street.
10.44.060    State Route 12.
10.44.070    Industrial Roadway to Port of Grays Harbor.
10.44.080    Third Street.
10.44.090    West First Street—Gross weight over 5,000 pounds.
10.44.100    Trains.
10.44.110    Signs.

10.44.010 State Route 101.
The speed limit on State Route 101 from the south city limits to the west city limits shall be thirty (30) miles per hour.
(Prior code § 9.22.010)

10.44.020 State Route 105.
Speed limits on the following roads shall be:
A. Thirty (30) miles per hour on the Boone-Scott Street extension from Boone Street to SR 101.
B. Thirty (30) miles per hour on Boone Street from Curtis Street to Lindstrom Street.
C. Thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Boone Street from Lindstrom Street to the south city limits.
(Prior code § 9.22.011)

10.44.030 East Sargent Boulevard.
It is unlawful for any vehicle traveling upon East Sargent Boulevard to exceed the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Prior code § 9.22.012)

10.44.040 Wishkah Road and "B" Street.
The maximum speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour on Wishkah Road from the North city limits to "B" Street and on "B" Street from the Wishkah Road to Third Avenue.
(Prior code § 9.22.013)

10.44.060 State Route 12.
Speed limits on the following roads shall be:
A. Forty-five (45) miles per hour on Wishkah Boulevard from the east city limits to a point one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet east of Fleet Street.
B. Thirty (30) miles per hour on Wishkah Boulevard and Wishkah Street from a point one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet east of Fleet Street to "G" Street.
C. Thirty (30) miles per hour on Heron Street from "G" Street to "F" Street; Heron Street from Kansas Street to Hornsby Way; and Hornsby Way from Heron Street to Wishkah Street.
D. Twenty (20) miles per hour on Heron Street from "F" Street to Kansas Street.
(Prior code § 9.22.015)

10.44.070 Industrial Roadway to Port of Grays Harbor.
Speed limits on the following roads shall be:
A. Thirty (30) miles per hour on Wishkah Street from Alder Street to the Port of Grays Harbor east property line.
B. Thirty (30) miles per hour on Heron Street from Park Street to Garfield Street and Garfield Street from Heron Street to Wishkah Street.
(Prior code § 9.22.016)

10.44.080 Third Street.
It is unlawful for any vehicle traveling on Third Street between "H" and "I" Streets to exceed the speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Ord. 6256, Added, 09/06/2000)

10.44.090 West First Street—Gross weight over 5,000 pounds.
In addition to the limitation with reference to speed otherwise provided by ordinance, it is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles having a gross weight in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds, over and along West First Street from Division Street to the west city limits at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Prior code § 9.22.030)

10.44.100 Trains.
It is unlawful for any person in authority, having control of the running or drawing of any car or cars by means of a steam engine, or the control or running of any steam engine alone, within the city limits of the city of Aberdeen, to allow or permit the same to go or move at a greater rate of speed than ten miles per hour over the street crossings which are used by the public, or at a greater rate of speed than twenty (20) miles per hour where there are no street crossings within the city limits of the city of Aberdeen. Provided, however, that the speed provided for at the crossing on Boone Street in the city of Aberdeen shall be reduced to five miles per hour until such time as traffic signals are installed at the crossings.
(Prior code § 9.22.050)

10.44.110 Signs.
The street department is authorized and directed to erect proper signs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to inform the public traveling on the streets.
(Prior code § 9.22.020)

Chapter 10.52 WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS

Sections:
10.52.010    Load restrictions on Evans and Baldwin Streets.
10.52.020    Weight restriction on West First Street.
10.52.030    Weight restriction on Evans Street.

10.52.010 Load restrictions on Evans and Baldwin Streets.
A. Load Limit. It is unlawful to operate any vehicle upon Evans Street from Griffith Street to Fordney Street or upon Baldwin Street with a load of dirt, gravel, fill material or like material in excess of three cubic yards.
B. Speed Restricted. It is unlawful to operate any motor truck customarily used for the hauling of dirt, gravel, fill material or like material, upon said streets at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
C. Purpose. The restrictions upon speed and loads as provided for by this section are necessary by reason of the width and construction of said streets to avoid said streets being seriously damaged or destroyed.
D. Penalty for Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 9.28.010)

10.52.020 Weight restriction on West First Street.
A. Load Limit. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on West First Street from Division Street to Haight Street with a maximum gross weight, including weight of vehicle, in excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds.
B. Penalty for Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned in the city jail for not more than sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Posting of Signs. The police department and the street department are authorized and directed to erect proper signs on the said street for the information of the public in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Prior code § 9.28.020)

10.52.030 Weight restriction on Evans Street.
A. Load Limit. It is unlawful for any truck exceeding ten thousand pounds gross weight to be operated at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour on Evans Street between Curtis and Cedar Streets.
B. Posting of Signs. The street department, under the direction and supervision of the city engineer, shall establish all necessary signs, signals and other traffic markings necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
C. Penalty for Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 9.28.030)

Chapter 10.58 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES

Sections:
10.58.010    Purpose.
10.58.015    Impoundment of vehicles on public property.
10.58.020    Impoundment of vehicles driven by criminal traffic offenders.
10.58.025    Notice of impoundment.
10.58.030    Holding vehicles impounded for criminal offenses.
10.58.040    Redemption of impounded vehicles.
10.58.050    Contesting impoundment or towing and storage charges.
10.58.060    Public nuisance.
10.58.070    Junk vehicles on private property.
10.58.080    Costs.
10.58.090    Penalty.
10.58.100    Creation of tow truck operator rotation list.

10.58.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth procedures to be followed in the impoundment of vehicles.

10.58.015 Impoundment of vehicles on public property.
All vehicles left within the limits of any highway, street or alley for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or longer shall be subject to impoundment.
It shall be a defense to impoundment if the owner or operator of the vehicle is unable to move said vehicle from the place where it is located and has so notified law enforcement officials and requested assistance.
(Ord. 6241, Added, 03/01/2000)

10.58.020 Impoundment of vehicles driven by criminal traffic offenders.
A. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 46.55.113, when a driver of a vehicle is arrested for violation of RCW 46.20.342 (Driving while license suspended or revoked (DWLS/DWLR), 46.20.420 (Operation of vehicle under other license or permit prohibited while license suspended or revoked), the vehicle is subject to summary impoundment at the business location of a registered tow truck operator at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The officer directing the impound must consider reasonable alternatives to impoundment.
B. When a driver of a vehicle is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.61.502 (Driving under the influence) or 46.61.504 (Physical control of a vehicle while under the influence), the vehicle shall be summarily impounded at the direction of a law enforcement officer and held at the business location of a registered tow truck operator for the mandatory time period as provided by SB 5000, Laws 2011, Chpt. 167, Section 3. The impoundment is mandatory, except for a commercial vehicle or farm transport vehicle, and the mandatory impound holding period and the procedures for notice, redemption, storage, auction, and sale shall be as provided by Laws 2011, Chpt. 167.
(Ord. 6517, Amended, 09/28/2011; Ord. 6241, Amended, 03/01/2000)

10.58.025 Notice of impoundment.
Officers shall issue a notice of impoundment to the driver of the vehicle. The notice shall state the grounds for the impoundment and the method of contesting the impoundment.
(Ord. 6241, Added, 03/01/2000)

10.58.030 Holding vehicles impounded for criminal offenses.
A. DWLS/DWLR first degree or second degree. When a vehicle is impounded because the operator is in violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) (DWLS/DWLR first or second degree), the vehicle will be held, at the written direction of a law enforcement officer, in impound before it may be redeemed for:
    1. Seventy-two (72) hours when the Department of Licensing's records show that the operator has no prior conviction of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) within the past five (5) years;
    2. Ten (10) days when the Department of Licensing's records show that the operator has been convicted once of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) within the past five (5) years; and
    3. Thirty (30) days when the Department of Licensing's records show that the operator has been convicted two or more times of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) or (b) within the past five (5) years.
B. DWLS/DWLR third degree. When a vehicle is impounded because the operator is in violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) (DWLS/DWLR third degree) or 46.20.420 (Operation of vehicle under other license or permit prohibited while license suspended or revoked), the vehicle will be held, at the written direction of a representative of the Police Department, in impound before it may be redeemed, as follows:
    1. The Police Department shall issue an immediate written order of release of the vehicle from impound upon compliance with the provisions of section 10.58.040A and B when the Department of Licensing's records show that the operator has no prior convictions of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a), (b), or (c) or 46.20.420 within the past five (5) years; and
    2. Seventy-two (72) hours when the Department of Licensing's records show that the operator has one or more convictions of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a), (b) or (c) or 46.20.420 within the past five (5) years.
C. Early release. The police chief or his duly appointed representative shall issue a written order to release the vehicle from impound before the expiration of the impound period only on the basis of the following: (1) economic or personal hardship to the spouse of the operator, taking into consideration public safety factors, including the operator’s criminal history and driving record; or (2) the owner of the vehicle was not the driver, the owner did not know that the driver’s license was suspended or revoked, and the owner has not received a prior release under this subsection or RCW 46.55.113(3).
(Ord. 6613 § 1, Amended, 09/27/2017; Ord. 6241, Amended, 03/01/2000)

10.58.040 Redemption of impounded vehicles.
Vehicles impounded pursuant to this chapter may be redeemed upon the following conditions:
A. For impounds pursuant to 10.58.015:
    1. The person redeeming the vehicle is an eligible person to redeem the vehicle under RCW 46.55.120(1)(a) and pays all towing, removal, and storage fees in commercially reasonable tender as provided in RCW 46.55.120.
B. For impounds pursuant to 10.58.020:
    1. When the operator of the vehicle at the time of impound is the registered owner, such registered owner establishes with the police department that all penalties, fines, or forfeitures owned by him or her for traffic violations have been paid in full; and
    2. Issuance of a written order from the police chief or his duly appointed representative directing release of the impounded vehicle; and
    3. The person redeeming the vehicle is an eligible person to redeem the vehicle under RCW 46.55.120(1)(a) and pays all towing, removal, and storage fees in commercially reasonable tender as provided in RCW 46.55.120.
(Ord. 6241, Amended, 03/01/2000)

10.58.050 Contesting impoundment or towing and storage charges.
A. Any person seeking to redeem a vehicle impounded under this chapter has a right pursuant to the provisions of RCW 46.55.120(2)(b) to a hearing in the Grays Harbor County District Court, Department Two to contest the validity of the impoundment or the amount of the towing and storage charges.
B. The police chief or his designated impoundment authorizing officer shall appear and represent the police department at the impoundment validity hearing in the district court.
(Prior code § 10.56.020)

10.58.060 Public nuisance.
Junk vehicles and parts thereof are declared to be public nuisances and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or keep a junk vehicle, or part thereof, upon any public or private property within the city of Aberdeen, or as owner, occupier or party in control of any real property to allow such vehicle to be placed or kept upon said property.
(Prior code § 10.56.020)

10.58.070 Junk vehicles on private property.
A. Before abatement and removal of any junk vehicle or part thereof from private property, the police chief, or his designee, shall give notice to the last registered owner of record of said vehicle and the owner of record of the property upon which the vehicle is located that a public hearing may be requested before the city council and that if no such hearing is requested within fifteen (15) days of the date of such notice, the junk vehicle will be removed. If a request for hearing is received, a notice giving the time, location and date of such hearing on the question of the abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five (5) day return requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such a condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
B. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land, with his reasons for such denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was place on the land without the consent of the owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in the presence, then the city council shall not assess costs of administration and removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle was located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner.
C. this section shall not apply to:
    1. A vehicle or part thereof that is completely enclosed within a building;
    2. A vehicle or part thereof that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with a business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to RCW 46.80.130:
    3. A vehicle stored in the manner authorized by AMC 17.56.080A.
D. After notice has been given of the intent of the city to dispose of the vehicle and after a hearing, if requested, has been held, the vehicle or parts thereof shall be removed at the request of a law enforcement officer and disposed of to a licensed auto wrecker with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Department of Motor Vehicles that it has been wrecked.
E. "Junk vehicle" means a vehicle certified under RCW 46.55.230 as meeting at least three of the following requirements: (a) three years old or older; (b) extensively damaged, such damage including but not limited to any of the following: a broken window or windshield, or missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission; (c) apparently inoperable; (d) has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.
(Ord. 6446, Amended, 09/12/2007. Prior code § 10.56.030)

10.58.080 Costs.
Except as provided in sections 10.58.060 and 10.58.070, the last owner of record of a junk vehicle, or part thereof, and the owner of the property upon which said vehicle, or part thereof, may be located, shall be liable for any costs incurred in removing, storing, and disposing of such vehicle or parts thereof.
(Prior code § 10.56.070)

10.58.090 Penalty.
A. Any responsible person who maintains a nuisance in violation of section 10.58.060 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, in addition to any costs of removal.
B. In addition to, or as an alternative to any other penalty or billable cost of removal as provided by section 10.58.080 or by law, any responsible person who maintains a nuisance in violation of section 10.58.060 may be assessed a civil penalty under chapter 1.12 of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 10.56.090)

10.58.100 Creation of tow truck operator rotation list.
It is the duty of the chief of police to maintain a rotation list of tow truck operators. Placement on the list shall be contingent upon the tow truck operator being registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles for the state of Washington, and on proof that the operator has posted with the state of Washington a bond in the amount of three thousand dollars $3,000.00). Any tow truck operator under contract to the city shall comply with such administrative regulations relative to the handling and disposing of vehicles as may be promulgated by the finance director or chief of police.
(Ord. 6212, Added, 04/07/1999. Prior code § 10.56.050)

Chapter 10.60 TRUCK ROUTES

Sections:
10.60.010    Streets designated.
10.60.020    Trucks larger than one ton restricted.

10.60.010 Streets designated.
The following streets and parts of streets in the city are designated as truck routes: Wishkah Boulevard, Wishkah Street, Heron Street, Garfield Street from Heron Street to Wishkah Street, "H" Street from Market Street south, "G" Street from Market Street south, "F" Street from Market Street to Heron Street, Market Street from "H" Street east, "B" Street, Wishkah Road, Young Street, Myrtle Street, Curtis Street, West Boulevard, Roger Street from Curtis Street north, Boone Street, Marion Street from Boone Street west, Front Street from Curtis Street to Chehalis River Bridge, Front Street from Marion Street to MacFarlane Street, Huntley Street from Lewis Street to Boone Street, Lewis Street from Huntley Street to Griffith Street, Griffith Street from Lewis Street to Evans Street, Evans Street from Griffith Street south, Hornsby Way between Wishkah and Heron Streets, Chehalis Street between Wishkah and Heron Streets, Cherry Street from Myrtle Street to Oak Street, Port Industrial Road, First Street from Port Industrial Road to railroad tracks, Evans Street from Curtis Street to the Chehalis River, Chehalis River Bridge, SR 105 from Boone Street to Chehalis River Bridge, State Street from the Chehalis River Bridge to Park Street, Alder Street from State Street to Sumner Street, Sumner Street from Alder Street to Myrtle Street, Park Street from State Street to Simpson Avenue, Simpson Avenue from Park Street to Myrtle Street, Monroe Street from Wishkah Street to State Street, Lincoln Street from Wishkah Street to State Street, all other streets from State Street south to Chehalis River.
(Prior code § 9.34.010)

10.60.020 Trucks larger than one ton restricted.
It is unlawful for any person to drive and operate a motor vehicle larger than a one-ton pickup truck on any street in the city, except on streets designated in Section 10.60.010; provided, however, vehicles of larger capacity may be operated from said truck route on other streets when it is necessary to do so for the purpose of making deliveries or for the purpose of picking up merchandise or articles to be transported in such vehicles; provided that, in making such deliveries or pickups, they shall be made from the shortest possible route from the above-named streets; and provided, further, that, upon application of the owner or operator, the city engineer may issue a special permit for the operation of a larger vehicle on other streets where it is necessary to do so, which permit shall specify the street or streets over which such vehicle is to be operated,
the time such permit shall be valid and the gross weight limit.
(Prior code § 9.34.020)

Chapter 10.64 PORT INDUSTRIAL AREA REGULATIONS

Sections:
10.64.010    Port Commission resolution adopted.
10.64.020    Regulations supplementary.

10.64.010 Port Commission resolution adopted.
The following regulations governing the use and operation of motor vehicles on property owned by the Port of Grays Harbor and located within the confines of the city are adopted as part of the traffic ordinances of the city.
RESOLUTION NO.
WHEREAS the PORT COMMISSION of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR deems it to be in the best interests of the public and of its lessees of property owned by it in the Port industrial Area in Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, that the streets, alleys, parking areas and other public areas owned by the Port in the Port Industrial Area in Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, should be subject to motor vehicle and other police regulations of and by the City of Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, and
WHEREAS the statutes of the State of Washington, specifically RCW 53.08.220, contemplate that such objective may be achieved by the Port formulating such regulations, and adopting the same after a public hearing on ten days published notice, and further, that thereupon the Port may request the City of Aberdeen to adopt such regulations as part of the Ordinances of the City of Aberdeen, and
WHEREAS such proposed regulations have heretofore been formulated and filed with the PORT COMMISSION, and
WHEREAS a public hearing has been held, of which there has been more than ten days notice published, as appears in the affidavit of the publisher on file with the PORT COMMISSION,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE PORT COMMISSION OF THE PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR that the Port does herewith adopt the following sections of the City Code of the City of Aberdeen, with any changes as noted, as being regulations of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR applicable to the industrial Area of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR located in Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, as set forth on Schedule A, attached hereto, and incorporated by this reference;
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR does herewith adopt the following regulations as being regulations of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR applicable to the Industrial Area of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR located in Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, as set forth on Schedule B, attached hereto, and incorporated by this reference;
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR does hereby adopt the following portions of the statutes of the State of Washington as being regulations of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR applicable to the Industrial Area of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR located in Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, as set forth on Schedule C, attached hereto, and incorporated by this reference;
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that to the extent that Schedule A conflicts with Schedule C, Schedule C shall control; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that to the extent that Schedule A conflicts with Schedule B, Schedule B shall control; and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that to the extent that Schedule B conflicts with Schedule C, Schedule B shall control.
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Port of Grays Harbor does herewith request the mayor and City Council of the City of Aberdeen to adopt the above and foregoing regulations as a part of the Ordinances of the City of Aberdeen.
SCHEDULE A
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.010  | Definitions                                                |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.020  | Enforcement of Code by Police Department                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.030  | Enforcement of Code by City Council                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.040  | Obedience to Police                                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.050  | Government Vehicles                                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.060  | Emergency Vehicles - Exemption from Code                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.070  | Bicycles - Animal Drawn Vehicles - Subject to Code         |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.090  | Traffic Signs and Signals - Generally                      |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.100  | Obedience to Official Traffic Control Signs and Signals    |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.110  | Traffic Control Signals - Colors - Indications             |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.120  | Imitating Official Signs or Signals or the Hiding          |
|           | Thereof Unlawful                                           |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.130  | Defacing Official Traffic Signs or Signals Unlawful        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.140  | Crosswalks - Establishment                                 |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.150  | Safety Zones - Establishment - Marking Lanes for           |
|           | Traffic                                                    |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.180  | Pedestrians - Right-of-Way                                 |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.190  | Right-of-Way - Intersections                               |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.200  | Pedestrians - Crossing With Signals                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.210  | Pedestrians to Move Upon Right Half of Crosswalks          |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.220  | Safety Zones - Driving Over or Through Unlawful            |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.230  | Moving Vehicles - Boarding or Alighting From Unlawful      |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.260  | Stopping, Standing and Parking in Designated Areas         |
|           | Unlawful                                                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.270  | Loading and Passenger Zones - Location                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.280  | Bus Stops to be Established                                |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.290  | Standing or Parking in Bus Zones or Taxi Zones             |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.300  | Taxis and Bus to Stand or Park Only in Designated          |
|           | Areas                                                      |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.340  | One-Hour Parking Limit                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.350  | Parking - Generally                                        |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.360  | Parking Vehicles Displayed for Sale on any Street          |
|           | Prohibited                                                 |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.370  | Parking for the Purpose of Displaying Advertising          |
|           | Prohibited                                                 |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.380  | Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles - Repossession     |
|           | by Owner                                                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.390  | Keeping to the Right                                       |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.400  | Turning Movements                                          |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.410  | Turning to as to Proceed in Opposite Direction Unlawful    |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.420  | Emerging From Alley, Private property Onto a Sidewalk      |
|           | Area                                                       |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.430  | Driving Within Sidewalk Area Prohibited                    |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.440  | Duty on Approach of Emergency Vehicle                      |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.450  | Driving or Parking in Proximity to Fire Vehicles           |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.460  | Through Streets Duty to Stop At - Placing of Signs         |
|           | Required                                                   |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.470  | Manner of Parking                                          |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.480  | Reckless or Negligent Driving                              |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.490  | Roller Skates, Coasters, Etc. on Roadways Prohibited       |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.500  | Hitching Ride on Moving Vehicles Unlawful                  |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.510  | Funeral or Other Authorized Processions                    |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.520  | Backing Vehicles                                           |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.530  | Interference With Operator's View or Control - Overloading |
|           | of Front Seat                                              |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.540  | Driving Over Fire Hose                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.550  | Bicycles and Motorcycles - Extra Passengers                |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.560  | Operator's License Required                                |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.570  | Vehicle Seized as Evidence                                 |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.02.580  | Violations - Penalties                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.08.020  | Arterials - Full Stop Required                             |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.08.090  | Placing Signs                                              |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.08.100  | Penalty for Violations                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.010  | Discharging Sand, Gravel, Paper, Garbage, Etc. Upon        |
|           | Streets Unlawful                                           |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.020  | Vehicles to be Closed in Tight to Retain Materials         |
|           | Being Transported                                          |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.030  | Tampering With any Barricades or Signals Unlawful          |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.040  | Littering Streets, Sidewalks, Etc. Unlawful                |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.050  | Violations - Penalties                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.10.060  | Additional Penalties                                       |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.16.010  | Unlawful for Passenger in Any Motor Vehicle to Be          |
|           | Intoxicated, if Operator Thereof is Intoxicated            |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| 9.16.020  | Violations - Penalties                                     |
+-----------+------------------------------------------------------------+
SCHEDULE B
9.02.170 SPEED LIMIT
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to operate the same on the Port Industrial Road within the City of Aberdeen, Washington, at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour and it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to operate the same on any other street or alley within the Port Industrial Area at a speed in excess of 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise designated or ordered by the Aberdeen City Council.
9.08.010 ARTERIAL OR THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED
The following named streets and portions of streets in the City of Aberdeen are hereby designated as "arterial or through streets":
(A) Port Industrial Road from Myrtle Street to the connection with the extension of West Wishkah Street.
(B) West First Street from the Aberdeen city limits East to the West side of the Port Industrial Road.
(C) West First Street from the East side of the Port Industrial Road easterly to the Northern Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
(D) Wooding Street from the Port Industrial Road to West First Street.
9.08.050 INTERSECTIONS - STOP DESIGNATED
It shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle into any of the following intersections without first coming to a complete stop:
(A) Vehicles traveling West on Fry Street shall stop at the intersection of Myrtle Street and Fry Street.
(B) Vehicles traveling South on Myrtle Street shall stop at the intersection of the Port Industrial Road on Myrtle Street.
(C) Vehicles traveling Southeast on Port Dock Road shall stop at the intersection of West First Street and Frontage Road.
(D) Vehicles traveling Northwest on Port Dock Road shall stop at the intersection of West First Street and Frontage Road.
(E) Vehicles traveling Southwest on West First Street shall stop at the intersection of the Port Industrial Road and West First Street.
(F) Vehicles traveling South on Maple Street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Maple Street.
(G) Vehicles traveling South on Wooding Street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Wooding Street.
(H) Vehicles traveling South on Commerce Street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Commerce Street.
(I) Vehicles traveling South on Industrial Court shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Industrial Court.
(J) Vehicles traveling Northwest on West First Street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and West First Street.
(K) Vehicles traveling North on Maple Street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Maple Street.
(L) Vehicles traveling North on Wooding street shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Wooding Street.
(M) Vehicles traveling Northwest on Pier 2 Way shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and Pier 2 Way.
(N) Vehicles traveling North on West Terminal Way shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and West Terminal Way.
(O) Vehicles traveling North on East Terminal Way shall stop at the intersection of Port Industrial Road and East Terminal Way.
(P) Vehicles traveling North on Maple Street shall stop at the intersection of West First Street and Maple Street.
(Q) Vehicles traveling North on Wooding Street shall stop at the intersection of West First and Wooding Street.
(R) Vehicles traveling South on Maple Street shall stop at the intersection of West First Street and Maple Street.
(S) Vehicles traveling West on Commerce Street shall stop at the intersection of Wooding Street and Commerce Street.
9.08.080 NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNED
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in any of the following street or alley areas:
(A) Both sides of Port Industrial Road from Myrtle Street to the Westerly extension of Wishkah Street.
(B) Both sides of West First Street from Port industrial Road to the Railroad right-of-way.
(C) Both sides of Pier 2 Way, for the entire length thereof.
(D) Both sides of Maple Street, for the entire length thereof.
(E) Both sides of Wooding Street, for the entire length thereof.
(F) Both sides of Commerce Street, for the entire length thereof.
(G) Both sides of Industrial Port Road, for the entire length thereof.
9.08.081 PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALK DESIGNATED
In addition to intersectional crosswalks established by State laws, the Aberdeen City Council or the Aberdeen Police Department shall have the right to designate additional pedestrian crosswalks within the Industrial area of the PORT OF GRAYS HARBOR on the West side of Aberdeen, and all vehicles shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians using same.
SCHEDULE C
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 16.24.065 | Stock at Large in Areas - Unlawful                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 26.24.070 | Stock at Large on Highway Right-of-Way-Unlawful-Impounding |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.010 | Scope and Construction of Terms                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.020 | Alley                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.030 | Arterial Highway                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.040 | Authorized Emergency Vehicle                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.050 | Auto Stage                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.060 | Axle                                                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.080 | Business District                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.090 | Cancel                                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.100 | Center Line                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.110 | Center of Intersection                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.120 | City Street                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.130 | Combination of Vehicles                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.140 | Commercial Vehicle                                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.150 | County Road                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.160 | Crosswalk                                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.170 | Explosives                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.180 | Farm Tractor                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.190 | For-Hire Vehicle                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.200 | Hours of Darkness                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.210 | Flammable Liquid                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.220 | Intersection Area                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.230 | Intersection Center Marker                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.240 | Intersection Control Area                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.250 | Intersection Entrance Marker                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.260 | Laned Highway                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.270 | Legal Owner                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.280 | Local Authorities                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.290 | Marked Crosswalk                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.300 | Metal Tire                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.310 | Motor Truck                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.320 | Motor Vehicle                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.330 | Motorcycle                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.340 | Muffler                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.350 | Multiple-Lane Highway                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.360 | Non-Resident                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.370 | Operator                                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.380 | Owner                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.390 | Peace Officer                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.400 | Pedestrian                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.405 | Person                                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.410 | Pneumatic Tires                                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.414 | Pull Trailer                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.420 | Private Road or Driveway                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.430 | Public Highway                                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.435 | Public Scale                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.450 | Railroad Sign or Signal                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.460 | Registered Owner                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.470 | Residence District                                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.480 | Revoke                                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.490 | Road Tractor                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.500 | Roadway                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.510 | Safety Zone                                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.520 | School Bus                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.530 | Semi-Trailer                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.540 | Sidewalk                                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.550 | Solid Tire                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.560 | State Highway                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.570 | Street Car                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.580 | Suspend                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.585 | Temporarily Sojourning                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.590 | Traffic                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.600 | Traffic Control Signal                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.610 | Traffic Devices                                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.620 | Trailer                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.630 | Train                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.640 | Trolley Vehicle                                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.650 | Truck Tractor                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.660 | Used Vehicle                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.670 | Vehicle                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.04.680 | Director - Department                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.08.040 | Application to Bicycle Riding, Animal-Drawn                |
|               | Vehicles, Etc.                                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.08.050 | Exemption From Vehicle Operation Provisions                |
|               | - Emergency Vehicles, Highway Work, Other                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.08.060 | Classification as Emergency Vehicles - Approval            |
|               | of Operators                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.08.080 | Liability of Host for Injury to Guest in Motor             |
|               | Vehicle                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.08.190 | Jurisdiction of Justice of the Peace, Police               |
|               | Court and Superior Court                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.20.020 | Operator's License Required - Exemptions -                 |
|               | Surrender of License Held From Another Jurisdiction        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.20.230 | Unlawful to Allow Unlicensed Person to Operate             |
|               | Vehicle                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.20.420 | Operation of Motor Vehicle prohibited While                |
|               | License is Suspended or Revoked                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.184 | Red Flashing Lights on Fire Department Vehicles            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.185 | Blue Light on Firemen's Private Cars                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.187 | Blue Light, Siren or Plate - Identification                |
|               | Card Required - Funeral Coach May Display                  |
|               | Blue Light                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.188 | Penalty for Violation of RCW 46.37.184 through             |
|               | RCW 46.37.188                                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.190 | Red Lights - School Buses - Police Vehicles                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.450 | Display of Warning Devices When Vehicle Disabled           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.37.460 | Vehicles Transporting Explosives                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.010 | Scope of Chapter - "Bicycle" Defined (With                 |
|               | the exception ofthe first sentenc e thereof)               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.020 | Road Rights and Duties In General                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.030 | Must Ride on a Seat                                        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.040 | Number of Passengers                                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.050 | "Hitching On" Prohibited - Bikes and Other                 |
|               | Recreational Equipment                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.060 | Bicycle Rules of the Road                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.070 | Keep One Hand on Handle Bars                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.080 | Lights, Reflector, Bells, Brakes                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.47.090 | Violations - Penalties - Duties, Liabilities               |
|               | of Parents, Guardians- Negligence                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.011 | General Criterion Stated - Maximum Speed Limits            |
|               | Specified - Duty to Drive at Reduced Speed                 |
|               | (except §(2)a.)                                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.023 | School or Playground Crosswalks                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.025 | Due Care Required                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.026 | Exceeding Speed Limit Evidence of Reckless                 |
|               | Driving                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.027 | Violation Charges - Speed to be Specified                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.050 | Racing of Vehicles on Highways, Reckless Driving           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.060 | Advertising of Unlawful Speed Attained, Reckless           |
|               | Driving                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.130 | Stop Signals and Flasher Signal Lamps Required             |
|               | - Mandatory Display, Exceptions                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.140 | Vehicles Must Stop on Approaching Stopped School           |
|               | Bus                                                        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.270 | Prohibited Parking Places                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.48.280 | Stopping and Securing Car When Standing                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.010 | Duty on Striking Unattended Car or Other Property          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.020 | Duty in Case of Injury to or Death of Person               |
|               | or Damage to Attended Vehicle                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.030 | Accident Reports                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.040 | Report When Operator Disabled                              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.050 | Coroner's Reports to Sheriff and State Patrol              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.060 | Tabulation and Analysis of Reports - Availability          |
|               | for Use                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.070 | Peace Officer's Report                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.080 | Reports Confidential                                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.090 | Reports by Repairmen, Storage Men and Appraisers           |
|               | -Violations, Penalties                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.52.110 | Stolen and Abandoned Vehicles - Reports of                 |
|               | - Notice - Sale Violations, Penalties                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.010 | Operating Under Influence of Intoxicants or                |
|               | Drugs Chemical Analysis, Tests, Presumptions               |
|               | Penalties (except the last paragraph thereof)              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.020 | Operating Motor Vehicle in Reckless Manner                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.030 | Operating Motor Vehicle in Negligent Manner                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.050 | Transporting Passengers for Hire With Trailers             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.060 | Operating With Gears in Neutral or Clutch Disengaged       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.080 | Riding on Other Than Seat of Motorcycle                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.100 | Embracing Another While Driving                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.110 | Driving Over Fire Hose                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.120 | Driving or Parking in Proximity to Fire Apparatus          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.130 | Driving With Wheels Off Roadway                            |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.135 | Permitting Escape of Load Materials - Throwing             |
|               | Debris on Right-Of-Way                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.140 | Leaving Debris on Roadway                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.150 | Failure to Stop at Stop Sign                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.160 | Failure to Comply With Restrictive Signs -                 |
|               | Penalty                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.170 | Disobedience of Traffic Control Devices                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.180 | Disobedience of Signals of Officer or Flagman              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.190 | Refusal to Give Information to or Cooperate                |
|               | With Officer                                               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.200 | Causing or Permitting Vehicle to be Unlawfully             |
|               | Operated                                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.210 | Attempting, Aiding, Abetting, Coercing, Committing         |
|               | Violations, Punishable                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.220 | Lowering Passenger Motor Vehicle Below Legal               |
|               | Clearance - Penalty                                        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.56.230 | Leaving Children Unattended in Standing Vehicle            |
|               | With Motor Running - Penalty (with the exception           |
|               | of the second paragraph thereof)                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.010 | Operator Must Drive to the Right of Center                 |
|               | Line - Excepted - Instances                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.020 | Divided Highways                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.040 | Overtaking and Passing Another Vehicle - Requirements      |
|               | - Sounding of Horn                                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.050 | When Overtaking Vehicle May Pass to Right                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.070 | Additional Rules for Multiple-Laned Highways               |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.080 | Interval Between Vehicles                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.100 | Passing Stopped Streetcar or Bus on Right                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.110 | Positions to be Assumed for Right and Left                 |
|               | Hand Turns                                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.120 | Turning and Stopping Signals - Mechanical Signals          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.130 | Turning Left at Intersection - Requirements                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.140 | Making "U" Turns, Restrictions On                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.150 | Right-of-Way and Approaching Intersections                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.160 | Right-of-Way and Making Left Turn in Intersection          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.170 | Right-of-Way at Arterial Intersection                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.180 | Duty in Backing of Vehicle                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.190 | Emerging From Alleys or Private Property or                |
|               | Across Sidewalk Area                                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.200 | Starting Parked Vehicle                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.210 | Duty on Approach of Emergency Vehicles                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.220 | Observance of Pedestrians Safety Zones                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.230 | Traffic Control Signals - Colors - Indications             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.240 | Pedestrian Control Signals                                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.250 | Pedestrian Traffic Regulations                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.260 | Blind Pedestrians                                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.270 | Use of Device for Blind by Others, Prohibited              |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.280 | Hitchhiking Prohibited                                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.290 | Pedestrians Walking Along Highway                          |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.300 | Stopping at Railroad Crossing or Movable Span              |
|               | at Signal                                                  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.310 | Stop Signs at Dangerous Grade Crossings - Stopping         |
|               | Distance                                                   |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.60.320 | Stopping or Reducing Speed at Other Grade Crossings        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.64.010 | Traffic Citations - Record of - Cancellation               |
|               | Prohibited - Penalty - Citation Audit                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.64.015 | Citation and Notice to Appear in Court - Issuance          |
|               | - Contents - Written Promise -Arrest                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.64.020 | Nonappearance After Written Promise, Misdemeanor           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 46.64.030 | Procedure Governing Arrest and Prosecution                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.130 | Meddling With Signs Prohibited                             |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.140 | Structures Concealing Signs Prohibited                     |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.170 | Imitation of Signs                                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.180 | Forbidden Devices - Penalty                                |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.200 | Signs or Flagmen at Thoroughfare Worksites                 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
| RCW 47.36.220 | Drivers of vehicle Engaged in Work Must Obey               |
|               | Signs or Flagmen                                           |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 9.40.010)

10.64.020 Regulations supplementary.
The regulations adopted by this chapter shall be supplemental to the existing ordinances of this city and it shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers to enforce such regulations accordingly.
(Prior code § 9.40.020)

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:
12.02        Complete Streets Policy
12.04        Use of Public Property
12.10        Petition for Vacation
12.12        Bench Marks and Grades
12.16        Carnivals Prohibited on Streets
12.20        Curb Gas Pumps Prohibited
12.24        Draw Bridges
12.28        Driveways
12.32        Filling Drainage Ditches
12.40        Sidewalks
12.41        Sidewalks – Restrictions On Sitting or Lying Down Upon
12.42        Sidewalk Cafes
12.44        Streets – Obstructing
12.46        Public Camping
12.48        Obstruction by Trees and Vegetation
12.52        Street Maintenance Program
12.72        Festival Events

Chapter 12.02 COMPLETE STREETS POLICY

Sections:
12.02.010    Purpose.
12.02.020    Exceptions.
12.02.030    Complete streets infrastructure.
12.02.040    Goals to foster partnerships.
12.02.050    Best practice criteria.
12.02.060    Performance standards.

12.02.010 Purpose.
The city of Aberdeen shall, to the maximum extent practical, scope, plan, design, construct, operate and maintain appropriate facilities for the safe accommodation of pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, emergency responders, freight and users of all ages and abilities in all new construction, retrofit or reconstruction projects. Cost-effective opportunities to include complete streets practices shall be identified by the city as part of the standard operations and maintenance of city streets.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

12.02.020 Exceptions.
Facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, and people of all abilities are not required to be provided when:
A. A documented absence of current or future need exists;
B. Nonmotorized uses are prohibited by law;
C. Routine maintenance of the transportation network is performed that does not change the roadway geometry or operations, such as mowing, sweeping and spot repair;
D. The cost would be disproportionate to the current need or probable future uses;
E. In instances where a documented exception is granted by the mayor.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

12.02.030 Complete streets infrastructure.
The city shall incorporate complete streets infrastructure into existing public and private streets, as feasible, to create a comprehensive, integrated, connected transportation network for Aberdeen that balances access, mobility, health and safety needs of pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users, motorists, emergency responders, freight and users of all ages and abilities, ensuring a fully connected, integrated network that provides transportation options. “Complete streets infrastructure” means design features that contribute to a safe, convenient, or comfortable travel experience for users, including but not limited to features such as: sidewalks; shared use paths; bicycle lanes; automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street trees and landscaping; planting strips; curbs; accessible curb ramps; bulb outs; crosswalks; refuge islands; pedestrian and traffic signals, including countdown and accessible signals; signage; street furniture; bicycle parking facilities; public transportation stops and facilities; transit priority signalization; traffic calming devices such as rotary circles, traffic bumps, and surface treatments such as paving blocks, textured asphalt, and concrete; narrow vehicle lanes; raised medians; and dedicated transit lanes.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

12.02.040 Goals to foster partnerships.
It is a goal of the city of Aberdeen to foster partnerships with all Washington State transportation funding agencies including the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT), the Federal Highway Administration, Grays Harbor County, Aberdeen School District, citizens, businesses, interest groups, neighborhoods, and any funding agency to implement this chapter.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

12.02.050 Best practice criteria.
The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall modify, develop and adopt policies, design criteria, standards and guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction, and operations including but not limited to the latest editions of American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) while reflecting the context and character of the surrounding built and natural environments and enhance the appearance of such.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

12.02.060 Performance standards.
The city of Aberdeen shall adopt performance standards with measurable benchmarks to continuously evaluate this chapter for success and opportunities for improvement. Performance standards may include transportation and mode shift, miles of bicycle facilities or sidewalks, public participation, number of ADA accommodations built, and number of exemptions from this policy approved.
(Ord. 6591 § 1, Added, 03/23/2016)

Chapter 12.04 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY

Sections:
12.04.010    Permissive use of public property.
12.04.020    Commercial use of public right of way.
12.04.030    Residential use of public right of way.

12.04.010 Permissive use of public property.
The city engineer may grant permission for the use of street right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the city of Aberdeen subject to such terms and conditions as set out herein. The city council may grant permission for the use of other city property on such terms as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 6416, Amended, 11/29/2006)

12.04.020 Commercial use of public right of way.
The city engineer may grant a permissive use permit for the commercial use of public right-of-way subject to the following conditions:
A. Commercial uses, such as customer parking, landscaping, fencing, sidewalk sales, and customer use will not be required to pay an annual fee for the use of city right-of-way. Permits for sidewalk sales shall only be issued for the downtown commercial district and shall limit the sales to two (2) consecutive days each seven day period.
B. Commercial uses establishing a permanent structure, such as a building, carport, or garage, where vacation of the right of way is not recommended by the city engineer, shall pay an application fee and an additional annual fee set by the city council resolution. The city engineer may waive the annual fee for using unimproved right of way that has not been opened for public travel where the permitted use does not interfere with actual or future public use of the right of way.
C. An individual requesting a permissive use permit for a commercial purpose shall provide proof that they have liability insurance for and are the owner or occupant of the porperyt abutting that portion of the city right-of-way for which the request is made, prior to issuance of the permit. A permissive use permit shall not be issued for private driveways on unimproved or unopened right-of-way without the written permission of the underlying property owners of the right-of-way to be used by the applicant.
D. All uses contrary to the terms and conditions of the permit shall result in automatic termination of the permit.
E. In the event the city or its franchise holders require use of his area to install, repair, renew or to maintain any utilities, or for any other purpose, the applicant shall, at his expense, remove any improvements which he may have placed on the property, all at his expense; provided, that if the applicant does not comply with the city's direction in this regard promptly, the city may remove improvements and charge the applicant for any expenses incurred by the city in so doing.
F. The permit shall remain in force and effect until a breach of any of the conditions of the permit or the city may cancel the permit on proper notice to the permit holder if the city determines that the property is to be sued for another purpose. The city shall retain the absolute right to terminate the permit upon proper notice to the permit holder. The city shall promptly notify the permit holder of any termination of the permit and the permit holder shall within thirty (30) days remove all improvements from the area and terminate his use of that area and restore the area to a condition equal to or better than existed at the time of granting the permit.
G. The applicant agrees to protect and save harmless the city of Aberdeen from all claims, actions or liabilities to third persons by reason of the use of the property by the permit holders; and in case any suit or action is brought against the city of Aberdeen for damages arising out of or by reason of the use, the applicant shall, upon notice to him of the commencement after any such suit or action shall have been finally determined if adverse to the city of Aberdeen.
H. The city council by resolution may adopt permit fees, approve variances from the above standards, grant an application denied by the city engineer, and modify or revoke a permit issued by the city engineer.
(Ord. 6416, Amended, 11/29/2006)

12.04.030 Residential use of public right of way.
The city engineer may grant a permissive use permit for a residential use subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Residential uses, such as landscaping, fencing and retaining walls and bulkheads installed for the purpose of protecting property, will not be required to pay a fee for use of city right-of-way.
B. Residential uses establishing a permanent structure, such as a building, carport, or a garage where vacation of the right of way is not recommended by the city engineer, shall pay an application fee and an additional annual fee as set by city council resolution. The city engineer may waive annual fees for unimproved right of way that has not been opened to public travel where the permitted use does not interfere with actual or future public use of the right of way.
C. An individual requesting a permissive use permit for a residential purpose shall provide proof that they have liability insurance for and are the owner or occupant of the property abutting that portion of the city right-of-way for which the request is made, prior to issuance of the permit. A permissive use permit shall not be issued for private driveways on unimproved or unopened right-of-way without the written permission of the underlying property owners of the right-of-way to be used by the applicant.
D. Upon termination of ownership or control of the property adjacent to the city right-of-way for which the permit was issued, all rights granted by the permit shall automatically terminate.
E. All uses contrary to the terms and conditions of the permit shall result in automatic termination of the permit.
F. In the event the city or its franchise holders require use of this area to install, repair, renew or to maintain any utilities, or for any other purpose, the applicant shall, at his expense, remove any improvements which he may have placed on the property, all at his expense; provided, that if the applicant does not comply with the city's direction in the regard promptly, the city may remove the improvements and charge the applicant for any expenses incurred by the city in so doing.
G. The permit shall remain in force and effect until a breach of any of the conditions of the permit or the city may cancel the permit on proper notice to the permit holder if the city determines that the property is to be used for another purpose. The city shall retain the absolute right to terminate the permit upon proper notice to the permit holder. The city shall promptly notify the permit holder of any termination of the permit and the permit holder shall within thirty (30) days remove all improvements from the area and terminate his use of that area and restore the area to a condition equal to or better than existed at the time of granting the permit.
H. The applicant agrees to protect and save harmless the city of aberdeen from all claims, actions or liabilities to third persons by reason of the use of the property by the permit holders; and in case any suit is brought against the city of Aberdeen for damages arising out of or by reason of the use, the applicant shall upon notice to him of the commencement of the action, defend the same at his own expense and will satisfy any judgment after any such suit or action shall have been finally determined if adverse to the city of Aberdeen.
I. The city council by resolution may adopt permit fees, approve variances from the above standards, grant an application denied by the city engineer, and modify or revoke a permit issued by the city engineer.
(Ord. 6416, Amended, 11/29/2006)

Chapter 12.10 PETITION FOR VACATION

Sections:
12.10.010    Petition for vacation.
12.10.020    Petition Fees.
12.10.030    Appraisals.
12.10.040    Notice of Hearing.
12.10.050    Protest of Council Initiated Vacation.
12.10.060    Hearing.
12.10.070    Reserved Easements.
12.10.080    Vacation of Waterfront Streets.
12.10.090    Compensation for Vacation.
12.10.100    Payment of Compensation for Conveyance.
12.10.110    Posting and Mailing Notices — Recording Ordinance.

12.10.010 Petition for vacation.
A. Petitions authorized. The owners of an interest in any real estate abutting upon any street desiring to vacate the street, or any part thereof, may petition the City Council to make such vacation. The term “street” when used in this chapter shall include streets, alleys, public ways, easements, and any other forms of public right of way.
B. Elements of petition. The vacation petition shall include the following:
    1. Affidavits on forms provided by the city engineer signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of such street sought to be vacated (based on front footage), or underlying the public easement (based on square footage);
    2. The vacation petition fee as established by ordinance;
    3. Any additional information or material that the city engineer determines is reasonably necessary for the city council to consider the requested vacation, including but not limited to a legal description of the area to be vacated prepared by a licensed surveyor.
C. Filing of petition. The petition shall be addressed to the City Council and filed with the Finance Director together with the fee for the petition. The Finance Director shall refer the petition to the city engineer and the Public Works Committee.
D. Review by Public Works Committee. The committee shall confirm that the petition complies with Section 12.10.010(B) and report back to the city council with its recommendation for or against the requested vacation. The committee’s report should include recommendations on the appraisal method, compensation, reserved easements, and any findings required by Section 12.10.090 (waterfront streets). The committee in making its recommendations should also consider criteria developed by the city engineer to evaluate the effects of the requested vacation on vested rights and the city’s transportation and utility systems.
E. Council action on petition or resolution for vacation. Upon receipt of a Public Works Committee report verifying that the vacation has been requested by the owners of two-thirds of the abutting property, the City Council shall adopt a resolution fixing a time when the petition will be heard and determined, which time shall not be more than sixty days nor less than twenty days after the date of the passage of the resolution. Where the city council has initiated a vacation by resolution, without a petition by the owners of more than two-thirds of the abutting property, the time for the hearing may be set in the resolution initiating the vacation process.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.020 Petition Fees.
A. Processing fee. Every petition for the vacation of any street, or any part thereof, shall be accompanied by an initial nonrefundable payment to the City of a processing fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the City’s administrative costs. The resolution setting the fee may also provide for a partial refund of the fee if the requested vacation is denied.
B. Appraisal fees to be paid after council recommends vacation. After holding a public hearing, if the City Council recommends granting a vacation petition and does not waive an independent appraisal under subsection C of this section the petitioner shall deposit the estimated cost of the appraisal with the city engineer. The estimated cost shall be set forth in a schedule adopted by city council resolution. In the event that the appraisal cost is less than the amount deposited, the vacation compensation payable to the City shall be reduced by the difference between the deposit and the actual cost, or, in the alternative, such difference shall be refunded. In the event the cost of the appraisal cost is more than the amount deposited, the vacation compensation payable to the City shall be increased by the difference between the deposit and the actual cost, or in the alternative, such difference shall be separately billed and paid by the petitioners prior to the approval of the vacation.
C. Waiver of appraisal. The city council may waive the requirement of an independent appraisal if the cost of obtaining an appraisal would be uneconomical, due to the assessed value of the abutting property and the relative size of the area to be vacated, or due to the nature and extent of any easement reserved by the city, and the city council determines that an independent appraisal is not necessary to determine the fair market value of the area to be vacated. If an independent appraisal is waived the ordinance vacating the right-of-way shall include findings identifying the reasons for the waiver and the manner in which fair market value was determined (such as, the assessed value per square foot of the abutting property).
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.030 Appraisals.
The city engineer is authorized to obtain appraisals from qualified, independent appraisers of such streets as are recommended for vacation, after the hearing by the City Council or a committee thereof, and is further authorized to obtain appraisals from qualified, independent real estate appraisers of the fair market value of the alternate right-of-way land proposed to be granted or dedicated to the City for street purposes in lieu of a cash payment in the manner contemplated by Section 12.10.090. In such instance, an additional appraisal deposit fee shall be paid for the appraisal of such parcel(s), and according to the fee and time schedule provided in Section 12.10.020. Appraisals shall take into consideration the value of any easement reserved in the vacated area by the City pursuant to Section 12.10.070.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.040 Notice of Hearing.
A. Notice to be provided. Upon the passage of the resolution setting a public hearing, the city engineer shall give twenty (20) days' notice of the hearing by a written notice posted in three of the most public places in the City, and a like notice in a conspicuous place on the street sought to be vacated.
B. Elements of notice. The said notice shall contain a statement that a petition has been filed to vacate the street described in the notice, together with a statement of the time and place fixed for the hearing of the petition. The notice will state that the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed vacation in the manner required in this chapter. In addition, the notice posted on the street proposed to be vacated shall indicate that the area is a public right-of-way, it is proposed to be vacated, and that anyone objecting to the proposed vacation should attend the public hearing or send a letter to the City Council indicating his or her objection.
C. Notice where council initiates vacation by resolution. In all cases where the proceeding is initiated by resolution of the City Council without a petition having been signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property abutting upon the part of the street sought to be vacated, in addition to the notice hereinabove required, there shall be given by mail at least fifteen days before the date fixed for the hearing, a similar notice to the record owners or reputed owners of all lots, tracts or parcels of land or other property abutting upon any street or portion thereof sought to be vacated, as shown on the rolls of the County Treasurer.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.050 Protest of Council Initiated Vacation.
If the owners of fifty percent (50%) of the abutting property file written objections to a City Council initiated vacation with the Finance Director prior to the time of the hearing, the City shall terminate the vacation proceedings.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.060 Hearing.
The hearing on a petition or resolution may be held before the City Council or before a committee thereof upon the date fixed by resolution or at the time said hearing may be adjourned to. The City Council may grant the requested vacation of the street or any part thereof by ordinance, with or without conditions, or the City Council may deny the requested vacation.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.070 Reserved Easements.
Ordinances vacating streets, or portions thereof, may contain a provision retaining or requiring conveyance of easements for construction, repair and maintenance of existing and future public utilities and services, or to protect vested rights of other property owners.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.080 Vacation of Waterfront Streets.
A. The City shall not vacate a street, or portion thereof, if the street abuts a body of fresh or salt water, unless:
    1. The vacation is sought to enable the City to acquire the property for port purposes, beach or water access purposes, boat moorage or launching sites, park, public view, recreation, educational purposes, or other public uses; or
    2. The City Council, by resolution, declares that the street is not presently being used as a street and that the street is not suitable for the following purposes: port, beach or water access, boat moorage, launching sites, park, public view, recreation or education; or
    3. The vacation is sought by the City to implement a plan, adopted by resolution or ordinance, that provides comparable or improved public access to the same shoreline area to which the streets sought to be vacated abut, had the property included in the plan not been vacated.
B. Before adopting a resolution vacating a street under subsection (A)(2) of this section, the City shall:
    1. Compile an inventory of all rights-of-way within the City that abut the same body of water that is abutted by the street sought to be vacated;
    2. Conduct a study to determine if the street to be vacated is suitable for use by the City for any of the following purposes: port, boat moorage, launching sites, beach or water access, park, public view, recreation, or education;
    3. Make a finding that the street sought to be vacated is not suitable for any of the purposes listed under (b) of this subsection, and that the vacation is in the public interest.
C. No vacation under this section shall be effective until the fair market value has been paid for the street that is vacated. Moneys received from the vacation may be used by the City only for acquiring additional beach or water access, acquiring additional public view sites to a body of water, or acquiring additional moorage or launching sites.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.090 Compensation for Vacation.
A. Vacations initiated by petition. Ordinances granting a petition to vacate any street which has not been acquired at public expense shall provide that the vacation shall not take effect until a sum equal to one-half (1/2) of the fair market value of the area vacated is paid to the City. Where the area vacated was acquired at public expense, or is a water front street under Section 12.10.080, the sum to be paid to the City shall be equal to the full fair market value of the area vacated.
B. In-lieu transfers of property. Conveyance of other property acceptable to the City may be made in lieu of the payment required by subsection (A), whether required to mitigate adverse impacts of the vacation or otherwise. When such conveyance is made for street purposes, one-half (1/2) of the fair market value of the land conveyed shall be credited to the required payment. When the conveyance is made in fee for other than street purposes, the full fair market value of the land conveyed shall be credited to the required payment. When the value of the in-lieu parcel is less than the payment required by subsection (A), the petitioner shall pay the difference to the City. When the value of the in-lieu parcel exceeds the payment required by subsection (A), the City shall pay the difference to petitioner.
C. Vacations initiated by council resolution. The City Council may pass an ordinance to vacate a street without requiring that the abutting property owners make payment to the City for such vacation where the vacation was initiated by city council resolution and not by a petition signed by more than two-thirds of the abutting property owners.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.100 Payment of Compensation for Conveyance.
Upon securing the appraisal of the value of the street to be vacated as provided in this chapter, or the City Council’s determination of fair market value, the city engineer shall notify the petitioner of the amount of compensation, deducting therefrom any remaining appraisal fee deposit not previously refunded to the petitioner. The payment shall be delivered to the city engineer, who, upon receipt of any such payment, shall forthwith transmit the same to the Finance Director for deposit. One-half of the revenue received by the City as compensation for the area vacated shall be deposited in a fund dedicated to the acquisition, improvement, development, and related maintenance of public open space or transportation capital projects within the City. In the event that the petitioner has received approval of delivery of an instrument granting or dedicating to the City a parcel(s) of land in lieu of a cash payment as contemplated by Section 12.10.090(B), the city engineer, at the applicant's expense, shall obtain a policy of title insurance insuring title thereto in the City.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

12.10.110 Posting and Mailing Notices — Recording Ordinance.
Posting and mailing of the notices provided for in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city engineer. A certified copy of the ordinance vacating a street, or any portion thereof, shall be recorded by the Finance Director with the Grays Harbor County Auditor as required by RCW 35.79.030 and a copy shall be mailed to the Grays Harbor County Assessor.
(Ord. 6514, Added, 03/09/2011)

Chapter 12.12 BENCH MARKS AND GRADES

Sections:
12.12.010    Profile measurements adopted.
12.12.020    Definitions.
12.12.030    Datum movement.
12.12.040    Streets to conform to established grades.
12.12.050    River Street.
12.12.060    First Street.
12.12.070    Wishkah Street.
12.12.080    Heron Street.
12.12.090    Market Street.
12.12.100    Hume Street.
12.12.110    Third Street.
12.12.120    G Street.
12.12.130    H Street.
12.12.140    4th Street.
12.12.150    5th Street.
12.12.160    2nd Street.
12.12.170    Broadway.
12.12.180    I Street.
12.12.190    K Street.
12.12.200    Space for grades.

12.12.010 Profile measurements adopted.
The grades of streets and avenues, at the points herein mentioned, are established in accordance with the profile measurement and notes of survey made by Cummings & Cook, civil engineers, and by them filed on the 18th day of June, 1890.
(Prior code § 7.04.010)

12.12.020 Definitions.
The "datum plane" to which are referred the elevations of street grades, is the level of extreme low tide in grays Harbor assumed as 0 (zero), and indicated by a reading of 84.0 on a tide gauge fastened to a pile of the Harbor Dock, situated at the foot of "F" Street.
(Prior code § 7.04.020)

12.12.030 Datum movement.
A galvanized iron ship spike driven into a spruce stump in "F" Street between Heron and Wishkah Streets is 13.98 above the datum plane.
(Prior code § 7.04.030)

12.12.040 Streets to conform to established grades.
The grade as indicated by the red line on the profile on file with city clerk is for the top of the sidewalk next to the property line.
(Prior code § 7.04.040)

12.12.050 River Street.
+-----------------------+-----------+
| At intersection with: | Elevation |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Monroe Street         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street     | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Park Street           | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street      | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| M Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| L Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| K Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Broadway Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| I Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| H Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| G Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| F Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.050)

12.12.060 First Street.
+-----------------------+-----------+
| At intersection with: | Elevation |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Division Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street     | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Park Street           | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street      | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| M Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| L Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| K Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| I Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| H Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| G Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| F Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| E Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| D Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| C Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| B Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| A Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Grant Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Chicago Avenue        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Stanton Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Wishkah River         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.060)

12.12.070 Wishkah Street.
+-----------------------+-----------+
| At intersection with: | Elevation |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Division Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Garfield Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Monroe Street         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street     | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Park Street           | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street      | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| M Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| L Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| K Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Broadway              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| I Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| H Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| G Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| F Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| E Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Wishkah River         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.070)

12.12.080 Heron Street.
+-----------------------+-----------+
| At intersection with: | Elevation |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Division Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Garfield Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Monroe Street         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street     | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Park Street           | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street      | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| M Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| L Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| K Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Broadway              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| I Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| H Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| G Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| F Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Wishkah River         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.080)

12.12.090 Market Street.
+-----------------------+-----------+
| At intersection with: | Elevation |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Division Street       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Monroe Street         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street     | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Park Street           | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue       | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street      | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| M Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| L Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| K Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Broadway              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| I Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| H Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| G Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| F Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| E Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| D Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| C Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| B Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| A Street              | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Grant Street          | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Chicago Avenue        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
| Wishkah River         | 16.0      |
+-----------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.090)

12.12.100 Hume Street.
+------------------------------+-----------+
|    At intersection with:     | Elevation |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| meander line of Grays Harbor | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Garfield Street              | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Monroe Street                | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Lincoln Street               | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Washington Street            | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Park Street                  | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Alder Street                 | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Michigan Avenue              | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Jefferson Street             | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| M Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| L Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| K Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| Broadway                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| I Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| H Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| G Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
| F Street                     | 16.0      |
+------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.100)

12.12.110 Third Street.
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
|          At intersection of Third and:           | Elevation |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| K Street                                         | 38.0      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| Broadway                                         | 31.4      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| I Street                                         | 30.0      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| H Street                                         | 16.0      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| At point one hundred (100) feet east of H Street | 26.0      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| At intersection of Third and G Street            | 16.0      |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
| At point one hundred fifty (150) feet west of G  | 26.0      |
| Street                                           |           |
+--------------------------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.110)

12.12.120 G Street.
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
|             At intersection of:              | Elevation |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| G and 1st Street                             | 16.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| G and 2nd Street                             | 16.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| G and 3rd Street                             | 16.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| G and 4th Street                             | 32.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| At point eight (80) feet north of 4th Street | 35.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
| At intersection of G and 5th Street          | 60.0      |
+----------------------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.120)

12.12.130 H Street.
+---------------------+-----------+
| At intersection of: | Elevation |
+---------------------+-----------+
| H and 1st Street    | 16.0      |
+---------------------+-----------+
| H and 2nd Street    | 16.0      |
+---------------------+-----------+
| H and 3rd Street    | 16.0      |
+---------------------+-----------+
| H and 4th Street    | 19.0      |
+---------------------+-----------+
| H and 5th Street    | 44.0      |
+---------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.130)

12.12.140 4th Street.
+-------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection of: | Elevation |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| 4th and K Street        | 39.0      |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| 4th and Broadway        | 34.0      |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| 4th and I Street        | 30.0      |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| 4th and H Street        | 22.0      |
+-------------------------+-----------+
| 4th and G Street        | 34.0      |
+-------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.140)

12.12.150 5th Street.
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection of 5th and: | Elevation |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| K Street                        | 38.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| Broadway Street                 | 28.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| I Street                        | 38.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| H Street                        | 44.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| G Street                        | 56.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.150)

12.12.160 2nd Street.
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection of 2nd and: | Elevation |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| K Street                        | 18.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| Broadway                        | 38.4      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| I Street                        | 34.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| H Street                        | 18.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
| G Street                        | 18.0      |
+---------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.160)

12.12.170 Broadway.
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection Broadway and: | Elevation |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 1st Street                        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 2nd Street                        | 38.4      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 3rd Street                        | 31.4      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 4th Street                        | 34.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 5th Street                        | 36.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.170)

12.12.180 I Street.
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection I Street and: | Elevation |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 1st Street                        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 2nd Street                        | 34.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 3rd Street                        | 30.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 4th Street                        | 30.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 5th Street                        | 38.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.180)

12.12.190 K Street.
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| At the intersection K Street and: | Elevation |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 1st Street                        | 16.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 2nd Street                        | 18.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 3rd Street                        | 38.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 4th Street                        | 39.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| 5th Street                        | 39.0      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+
(Prior code § 7.04.190)

12.12.200 Space for grades.
The space for grades at intersections of streets shall be so indicated upon the aforesaid profile.
(Prior code § 7.04.200)

Chapter 12.16 CARNIVALS PROHIBITED ON STREETS

Sections:
12.16.010    Use of public streets by carnivals, etc., unlawful.
12.16.020    Penalty for violation.

12.16.010 Use of public streets by carnivals, etc., unlawful.
It is unlawful for any carnival or street show to use any of the public streets of the city of Aberdeen in carrying on such carnival or street show.
(Prior code § 7.06.010)

12.16.020 Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by thirty (30) days in the city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 7.06.020)

Chapter 12.20 CURB GAS PUMPS PROHIBITED

Sections:
12.20.010    Gasoline pumps on curb unlawful.
12.20.020    Violations—Penalty.

12.20.010 Gasoline pumps on curb unlawful.
It is unlawful hereafter to erect or install any gasoline pump or filling apparatus on any street, alley or sidewalk within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 7.08.010)

12.20.020 Violations—Penalty.
Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 7.08.020)

Chapter 12.24 DRAW BRIDGES

Sections:
12.24.010    Draw bridges—Gates or bars required at each end.
12.24.020    Draw bridges—Lights at each end required.
12.24.030    Draw bridge tender—Duties.
12.24.040    Draw bridges—Reasons for opening.
12.24.050    Violations—Penalties.

12.24.010 Draw bridges—Gates or bars required at each end.
From and after the taking effect of this chapter, there shall be, at the expense of the city of Aberdeen, made, placed and maintained at each end of every draw bridge crossing in the city of Aberdeen, and upon each side of such crossings, vertically movable street gates or bars, of such character and description as may be necessary and required for the safety of human life and protection from accident while crossing or attempting to cross any bridge in the city, which said bridge is open, being opened, closed or being closed, in the due course of business.
(Prior code § 7.10.010)

12.24.020 Draw bridges—Lights at each end required.
There shall be at the expense of the city, kept and maintained upon each side of each draw bridge in the city, and at a point no greater than ten feet from each end of said bridge, from sunset until sunrise, of each and every day, a light of such character and power as may be necessary for the protection of human life against accident, while such bridge is open, or being opened, closed or being closed, in the due course of business.
(Prior code § 7.10.020)

12.24.030 Draw bridge tender—Duties.
It shall be the duty of the bridge tender or tenders of any such bridge, by day and by night, to operate, and maintain the operation of such gate or bars and lights as may be necessary by the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 7.10.030)

12.24.040 Draw bridges—Reasons for opening.
From and after the taking effect of this chapter and the construction of said vertically movable street gates or bars and lights, as hereinbefore provided, no bridge tender, or tenders, officer, or employee of the city or any other person or persons shall open or cause to be opened any draw bridge in the city, unless the gates or bars herein provided for are then and there first actually placed across the street or approaches to said bridge, and if within the night time, or between sunset and sunrise, then and in that event, unless the lights herein provided for are lighted and actually burning.
(Prior code § 7.10.040)

12.24.050 Violations—Penalties.
A. Every bridge tender who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall forfeit his contract with the city as such tender, and shall be subject to a fine of not less than five or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Any other person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall in any wise interfere with the operation of the gates and lights hereinbefore provided for, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in a sum not to be less than five or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or be imprisoned in the city jail for a period of not less than five nor more than sixty (60) days.
(Prior code § 7.10.050)

Chapter 12.28 DRIVEWAYS

Sections:
12.28.010    Purpose of chapter.
12.28.020    Definitions.
12.28.030    Permit—Required—Application—Contents.
12.28.040    Specifications and inspection.
12.28.050    Driveway construction—Regulations.
12.28.060    Parking strips—Paving.
12.28.070    Driveways—Parking strips—Paving—Conduit for ornamental street lights—Required.
12.28.080    Drainage of surface water.
12.28.090    Barriers required between sidewalk and vehicle parking areas on private property.
12.28.100    Maintenance of improvements.
12.28.110    Application of chapter to local improvement districts.
12.28.120    Uniform Building Code amended.
12.28.130    Service stations, parking lots, etc.—Layout and construction of driveways, pump islands, etc.
12.28.140    Violations—Penalties.

12.28.010 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to standardize and regulate the location, size and construction of driveways from the standpoint of proper design and safe and efficient entry to and exit from roadways, and the safety of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk area. Any access from a public roadway to private property hereafter provided, constructed, altered or repaired, shall be through driveways constructed according to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 7.12.010)

12.28.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
"Change of use" means any change of purpose for which any land, building or structure is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended.
"Driveway" means any area, construction or facility between the roadway of a street and private property, to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a street to private property.
"Parking strip" means the space between the street roadway or curb line and the property line, with the exception of the sidewalk area.
"Roadway" means the paved, improved or proper driving portion of a street, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
"Sidewalk area" means that portion of the space lying between the street roadway or curb line and the property line which is reserved for sidewalks, either existing or proposed.
"Street" as hereinafter used is intended to include any street, alley or other public place within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 7.12.020)

12.28.030 Permit—Required—Application—Contents.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence work on the construction, alteration, repair or removal of any driveway or the paving of any parking strip on any street, alley or other public place in the city of Aberdeen without a written permit first having been obtained from the city engineer as provided for by Sections 12.40.030 to 12.40.050, inclusive.
B. Any party requesting such permit shall file a written application therefor with the city engineer; such application shall be made on a standard city form provided for that purpose, and shall include:
    1. The name and address of the applicant;
    2. The name and address of the owner of the property abutting the street where the work is proposed;
    3. The exact location of the proposed work, giving the street address or legal description of the property involved;
    4. A detailed plan showing the exact dimensions of the abutting property and the exact dimensions and location of all existing or proposed driveways and other pertinent features within the limits of the frontage of said property;
    5. The plan shall also show the location of buildings, loading platforms or off-street parking facilities being served or to be served by such driveways.
C. The city engineer may require, at his discretion, the filing of any other information when in his opinion such information is necessary to properly enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. No plan shall be approved nor a permit issued where it appears that the proposed work, or any part thereof, conflicts with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city of Aberdeen nor shall issuance of a permit be construed as a waiver of the zoning ordinance or other ordinance requirements concerning the plan.
(Prior code § 7.12.030)

12.28.040 Specifications and inspection.
All construction outlined in this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the city of Aberdeen General Specifications issued by the city engineer in 1958 and subsequent amendments thereto, and shall be performed to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his duly authorized representatives.
(Prior code § 7.12.040)

12.28.050 Driveway construction—Regulations.
Every driveway hereafter constructed or altered in street right of way shall conform to the following regulations:
A. Location. 
    1. No driveway shall be so located as to create a hazard to pedestrians or motorists, or invite or compel illegal or unsafe traffic movements.
    2. Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, all driveways including the returns shall be confined within lines perpendicular to the curb line and passing through the property corners.
    3. Whenever it is necessary for the purpose of construction of such driveway to move and relocate any street lighting standard, traffic regulation device or fire hydrant, the same shall be done at the sole cost and expense of the property owner and such removal and relocation shall be performed under the direction of and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
    4. Every driveway must provide access to something definite on private property, requiring the entrance of vehicles.
    5. No construction, alteration or repair shall be permitted for any driveway which can be used only as a parking space or which provides access only to the area between the street roadway and private property.
B. Size and Number. 
    1. Except as otherwise provided herein, the width of any driveway shall not exceed thirty (30) feet exclusive of the radii of the returns, the measurement being made parallel to the center line of the street roadway. Where driveways are to enter on courts, or alleys having a right-of-way width of forty (40) feet or less, the width of the driveways may exceed thirty (30) feet and the limitation of the percentage of property frontage in driveways may be waived; provided, the overall plan of the location of such driveways shall meet the approval of the city engineer.
    2. The width of any driveway shall not be less than ten feet exclusive of the radii of the returns, the measurement being made perpendicular to the center line of the driveway.
    3. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, the total width of all driveways for any one ownership on a street shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the frontage of that ownership along the street. Any driveway, which has become abandoned or unused through a change of the conditions for which it was originally intended, or which for any other reason has become unnecessary, shall be closed and the owner shall replace any such driveway with a standard curb and sidewalk to be constructed according to the city's general specifications.
        a. Whenever in a single ownership the total width of existing driveways on a street is over fifty (50) percent of the frontage of the ownership on that street, such existing driveways shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter in the event of any of the following changes:
            (i) Any alteration or repair of such existing driveways in excess of twenty-five (25) percent of the frontage of the ownership on that street, or any widening of any such existing driveways;
            (ii) Any construction of additional driveways in the ownership or the alteration or repair of any driveways in the ownership in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the frontage on which the driveways are to be altered or repaired, when the ownership has frontage on two or more streets.
            (iii) Any change of use of the ownership as defined in Section 12.28.020.
        b. Upon the alteration or repair of any one or more of the driveways, as aforesaid, the city engineer may require such changes in any or all of the driveways of that ownership as he may deem necessary for the better movement of traffic or to provide better protection to pedestrians.
        c. Where a single ownership is developed into more than one unit of operation each sufficient in itself to meet the requirements of off-street parking and/or loading, as required by the zoning ordinance, and where the city engineer determines that the safety of pedestrians or vehicular traffic is not endangered, then and in those events the requirements outlined above shall be construed to apply to each separate unit of operation rather than to the entire ownership.
    4. There shall be not more than two driveways on one street for any one ownership, except where a single ownership is developed into more than one unit of operation each sufficient in itself to meet the requirements of off-street parking and/or loading as required by the zoning ordinance and where the necessity for separate access to the street is evident. In such cases there shall be not more than two driveways on one street for any one unit of operation.
    5. The radius for any driveway return shall be five feet unless otherwise directed by the city engineer.
    6. The angle between any driveway and the street roadway or curb line shall not be less than forty-five (45) degrees.
    7. The two side borders of each driveway shall be parallel.
C. Provisions Based on Existing Conditions. 
    1. Where standard curbs and gutters of Portland cement concrete are existing or to be constructed in conjunction with driveways, the following provisions shall apply to the driveway construction:
        a. When Portland cement concrete sidewalks are existing, driveways shall be placed from the curb line to the existing sidewalk line, and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. When that section of sidewalk in line with the proposed driveway is in poor condition and determined by the city engineer to be unsafe, the driveway section shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete through the sidewalk to that edge of the sidewalk which faces the property line. Any portion of the remaining sidewalk which is in poor condition shall be repaired or replaced. In either case, driveways may also be extended to the property line either with Portland concrete cement or asphaltic cement concrete.
        b. Whenever any driveway is constructed to cross an existing sidewalk which has been determined by the city engineer to differ in grade from the established grade, the driveway shall nevertheless be placed at the established grade, and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete through the sidewalk to that edge of the sidewalk which faces the property line. Such driveways may also be extended to the property line either with Portland cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete. If the existing sidewalk is below the established grade, an approved temporary patch shall be applied over the sidewalk to meet the driveway, and such patch shall be feathered out to a smooth and even edge. If the sidewalk is above the established grade, a suitable amount of sidewalk shall be removed and replaced as directed by the city engineer to meet the driveway at the proper elevation. Such changes of sidewalk grade shall be confined to the limits of the frontage of the property involved, unless written agreements form the adjoining property owners are presented to the city engineer. Warps, dips, or other conditions existing in the sidewalk which would cause an uneven joint between such sidewalk and a driveway shall be repaired as directed by the city engineer.
        c. When Portland cement concrete sidewalks are to be placed in conjunction with driveways, the driveways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete from the curb line to that edge of the sidewalk which faces the property line. Such driveways may also be extended to the property line either with Portland cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete.
        d. When Portland cement concrete sidewalks are neither existing nor included in the immediate project under proposal, driveways shall be paved as follows:
            (i) Where the proposed distance between the curb and the sidewalk area is less than five feet, driveways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete from the curb line to that line of the proposed sidewalk nearest to the property line.
            (ii) Where the proposed distance between the curb and the sidewalk area is five feet or more, driveways shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete from the curb line a distance of five feet toward the property line.
            (iii) Such driveways shall be placed to conform to the established curb grade and sloped as directed by the city engineer to attain the proper elevation for a true fit with future sidewalks.
            (iv) It shall be permissible to place either Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete from the limits outlined above toward and into private property; provided, that the proper grade is maintained through the sidewalk area when Portland cement concrete is used. In the event asphaltic cement concrete is used, the pavement shall be considered temporary and subject to removal and replacement, the cost of which shall be paid by or assessed against the abutting property owner at such time as the sidewalks are placed.
    2. Where standard curbs and gutters of Portland cement concrete are not existing, the following provisions shall apply to the construction of driveways:
        a. In such location it shall not be mandatory to pave driveways for property developed for residential use only. Where such driveways are to be paved, the construction shall be of asphaltic cement concrete from the edge of the roadway to the sidewalk if the sidewalk is existing. Such driveways may also be extended to the property line either with Portland cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete. If the existing sidewalk has been determined by the city engineer to differ in grade from the established grade, asphaltic cement concrete only shall be used between the sidewalk and the property line as such paving shall in any case be considered a temporary measure to be replaced at such time as the sidewalk is readjusted to the established grade.
        Where Portland cement concrete sidewalks are neither existing nor being constructed in conjunction with driveways, driveways of asphaltic cement concrete may be constructed form the line of the street roadway to the property line. Such driveways shall be considered temporary and subject to the removal and replacement at the expense of the abutting property owner at such time as standard curbs and gutters or sidewalks are constructed. Portland cement concrete driveways shall not be permitted unless standard curbs and gutters are constructed.
        b. When driveways are constructed to serve any other property than that developed for residential use only, the following improvements shall be required in connection with such driveway construction:
            (i) Where the existing roadway is at the established grade line or if it is practical to establish the curb grade, and where adequate storm water drainage is provided, the construction of standard curbs and gutters of Portland cement concrete along the ultimate edge of the pavement as determined by the city engineer shall be continuous between any two driveways for one ownership. Standard curbs and gutters of Portland cement concrete shall also be continuous between any two driveways and lines extended from the property corners perpendicular to the curb line. Where a single ownership is developed into more than one unit of operation, each sufficient in itself to meet the requirements of off-street parking and/or loading as required by the zoning ordinance, the requirements for curbs and gutters as outline above shall be construed to apply to each separate unit of operation above shall be to the entire ownership. Construction of the driveways shall be as outlined in subsection (B)(1) of this section.
            (ii) Where it is not practical to establish the grade and/or where there are no provisions for storm water drainage, driveways shall be properly delineated by spot posts or other means as directed. The driveways shall be of asphaltic cement concrete from the existing roadway line to the property line. Such driveways shall be considered temporary and subject to removal and replacement at the expense of the abutting property owner at such time as standard curbs and gutters or sidewalks are constructed.
(Prior code § 7.12.050)

12.28.060 Parking strips—Paving.
A. Any paving of outer parking strips in residential zones shall be of asphaltic cement concrete to a depth of no less than one and one-half (11/2) inches. The sue of Portland cement concrete shall not be permitted. "Outer parking strip" as referred to in this paragraph shall mean that area lying between the curb and the sidewalk and not normally used as walkway, such as is common in commercial and industrial zones. Nothing herein provided shall be construed as permitting the parking of vehicles on such strips.
B. The use of asphaltic cement concrete or Portland cement concrete for the paving of parking strips in zones other than residential shall be determined by the city engineer.
C. Any paving of parking strips shall be considered to be a temporary measure only.
D. The paving of parking strips shall not be permitted in any location where Portland cement concrete sidewalks do not exist or where Portland cement concrete curbs do not exist.
(Prior code § 7.12.060)

12.28.070 Driveways—Parking strips—Paving—Conduit for ornamental street lights—Required.
Whenever driveways or parking strips are to be paved with Portland cement concrete, there shall first be placed an approved conduit for ornamental street lights. Conduits shall be placed one foot toward the street from the edge of the sidewalk, unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. Locations of conduits shall be identified by scribing a two-inch diameter circle at each edge of the slab when it is poured.
(Prior code § 7.12.070)

12.28.080 Drainage of surface water.
A. Paved or Hard Surfaced Areas. 
    1. Whenever any area in connection with a service station, parking lot or similar place is to be paved or hard surfaced, a plot plan of the entire area to be improved shall be submitted to the city engineer. In addition to the information required under Section 12.28.030(B) for application for a driveway permit, the plot plan shall show the details of grading drainage and surfacing including the surfacing material to be used. Developers of public parking areas shall also meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
    2. All such paved or hard surfaced areas shall be provided with approved catch basins or drainage to dispose of all the water that may fall upon such areas. Under no circumstances shall water be allowed to run across a sidewalk area. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry surface water to the nearest practical storm sewer or other means of disposal approved by the city engineer.
    3. No person shall construct or alter any such storm drainage structure without having first obtained a written authorization therefor from the city engineer.
    4. No permit shall be issued until the proposal has been approved by the city engineer and where necessary by the planning commission.
B. Any person wishing to construct a pedestrian or vehicle accessway over a drainage ditch located on the public right-of-way shall provide at his expense, when so directed by the city engineer, a culvert pipe in said drainage ditch for the full length of his abutting property footage, including the fill therefor. Said culvert pipe shall be of the size, type and placed as directed by the city engineer and in accordance to the requirements of Chapter 12.32 of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 7.12.080)

12.28.090 Barriers required between sidewalk and vehicle parking areas on private property.
Whenever any area on private property is used for the purpose of parking automobiles, trucks or other vehicles, whether for the sale of such vehicles, public parking, or for other reasons, adequate barriers shall be provided to prevent the parking of vehicles in such a manner that they overhang the sidewalk. Such barriers shall be constructed as directed by the city engineer.
(Prior code § 7.12.090)

12.28.100 Maintenance of improvements.
All driveway paving, parking strip paving, drainage structures or any other improvements within the space between the property line and the roadway shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition at the expense of the abutting property owner.
(Prior code § 7.12.100)

12.28.110 Application of chapter to local improvement districts.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply with equal force and effect to similar construction in connection with local improvement districts.
(Prior code § 7.12.110)

12.28.120 Uniform Building Code amended.
An additional section, numbered and reading as hereinafter set forth, is added to the Uniform Building Code in this chapter by reference adopted and shall be a part of the official building code of the city.
(Prior code § 7.12.120)

12.28.130 Service stations, parking lots, etc.—Layout and construction of driveways, pump islands, etc.
A. The layout and construction of driveways, pump islands, etc., in connection with service stations, parking lots and similar installations shall in general comply with the standard street plan relative to service station layouts as compiled by the city engineer and designated as Engineering department General Specification, 1958. The location and size of driveways into stores, public garages, warehouses and similar places of business shall be as approved by the city engineer pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 12.40.
B. In no case, however, shall any such driveway be so arranged as to allow the loading or servicing of any vehicle on a public sidewalk.
C. The city engineer may vary the general requirements for driveways if in his opinion such a variance would facilitate a better movement of traffic or provide better protection to pedestrians.
(Prior code § 7.12.140)

12.28.140 Violations—Penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 7.12.140)

Chapter 12.32 FILLING DRAINAGE DITCHES

Sections:
12.32.010    Purpose of chapter.
12.32.020    Permit—Required.
12.32.030    Conformance with plans and specifications—Bond required.
12.32.040    Depositing debris.
12.32.050    Violations—Penalties.

12.32.010 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to standardize and regulate the filling of city drainage ditches. The city of Aberdeen shall, to the maximum extent practical, protect and retain vegetated drainage ditches within city limits, with the purpose of maintaining drainage functions and stormwater retention volume, and retaining existing pervious land cover. The provisions of this chapter shall be carried out pursuant to Chapters 13.70 and 14.14.
(Ord. 6644 § 1, Added, 03/27/2019)

12.32.020 Permit—Required.
No person, except duly authorized city officials, shall fill, alter or otherwise impede the flow of any drainage ditch upon any street or alley right-of-way of the city of Aberdeen without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer authorizing such work.
(Ord. 6644 § 1, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.14.010. Formerly 12.32.010)

12.32.030 Conformance with plans and specifications—Bond required.
Any such work shall be done in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. Before any such work is authorized, the person doing such work shall deposit with the city of Aberdeen a bond in such amount deemed sufficient by the city engineer to guarantee the faithful performance of said work in accordance with such plans and specifications and within the time specified in such permit. The amount set for the bond may be appealed to the building code commission, which, after a hearing, shall have the power to affirm or modify the decision of the city engineer.
(Ord. 6644 § 1, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.14.020. Formerly 12.32.020)

12.32.040 Depositing debris.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any waste material, litter, or debris of any kind, including vegetation debris, in any drainage ditch located upon any street or alley right-of-way in the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6644 § 1, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.14.025. Formerly 12.32.030)

12.32.050 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6644 § 1, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.14.030. Formerly 12.32.040)

Chapter 12.40 SIDEWALKS

Sections:
12.40.010    Vehicles not to use sidewalks.
12.40.020    Bicycles, motorcycles, etc., not to use certain designated sidewalks.
12.40.030    Sidewalks, streets, etc.—Removing, etc.—Permit required.
12.40.040    Bond required.
12.40.050    Violations—Penalties.

12.40.010 Vehicles not to use sidewalks.
No person shall ride, drive or lead any animal; move or trundle any automobile or other vehicle upon any sidewalk, except light carriages for the conveyance of children, unless for the purpose of necessarily crossing the sidewalk; allow any vehicle or animal belonging to him, or in his care, to stand on any sidewalk; saw or cut or split firewood or lumber; break coal or stone; mix mortar on any sidewalk without a building permit or do any other act which obstructs the passage of pedestrians; provided, this section does not apply to bicycles.
(Prior code § 7.18.010)

12.40.020 Bicycles, motorcycles, etc., not to use certain designated sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle or vehicle of similar character upon the sidewalk or any of the approaches of the bridge of the Oregon-Washington Railroad & Navigation Company across the Chehalis River, extended from H Street to Mill Street.
(Prior code §7.18.030)

12.40.030 Sidewalks, streets, etc.—Removing, etc.—Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation for any reason to tear up, remove and disturb any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk or to construct any sidewalk or footwalk on any street or any driveway across said sidewalk without first securing a permit therefor from the city engineer of the city of Aberdeen. Application shall be made to the city engineer for such permit and shall be in such form as prescribed by the city engineer.
(Prior code § 7.18.050)

12.40.040 Bond required.
A. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant shall have furnished a bond approved by the city engineer and the corporation counsel of the city of Aberdeen conditioned that the applicant will repair, replace and recondition said street, alley, sidewalk or public way in such manner and with such materials as to restore the same to its condition prior to such tearing up or repair or to a condition approved by the city engineer, expeditiously without undue delay, and will comply with the terms of said permit, and will indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all liability caused by the granting of such permit or the doing of such work under such permit.
B. The amount of such bond shall be in such sum as fixed by the city engineer, taking into consideration the nature of the work contemplated under said permit, but in no event shall it be less than the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Cash in the sum of one-half (1/2) of the amount of bond required, may be deposited with the city engineer in lieu of such bond; provided, that persons, firms or corporations engaged in the plumbing business with an established place of business in the city of Aberdeen, shall furnish a continuing bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned as above set forth, which bond shall be in lieu of the above bond requirements and in lieu of the bond formerly required by Ordinance No. 599.
(Prior code § 7.18.060)

12.40.050 Violations—Penalties.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 12.40.010 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Section 12.40.020 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not less than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with the costs of the prosecution, and shall be committed to the city jail until such fine and costs are paid.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of Sections 12.40.030 or 12.40.040 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), by thirty (30) days imprisonment in the city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code §§ 7.18.020, 7.18.040, 7.18.070)

Chapter 12.41 SIDEWALKS – RESTRICTIONS ON SITTING OR LYING DOWN UPON

Sections:
12.41.010    Sitting or lying down on public sidewalks in downtown commercial zones.
12.41.020    Civil infraction.
12.41.030    Severability.

12.41.010 Sitting or lying down on public sidewalks in downtown commercial zones.
A. Prohibition. No person shall sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk, or upon a blanket, chair, stool or other object placed upon a public sidewalk within the city of Aberdeen Downtown Parking and Business Improvement District as defined in Chapter 10.20 during the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
B. Exceptions. The prohibition in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to any person:
    1. Sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical emergency;
    2. Who, as a result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker or similar device to move about the public sidewalk;
    3. Operating or patronizing a commercial establishment conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use permit;
    4. Participating or attending a parade, festival, performance, rally, demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted on the public sidewalk pursuant to a street use or other applicable event;
    5. Sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk which is supplied by a public agency or by the abutting private property owner; or
    6. Sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while waiting for public or private transportation.
C. No person shall be cited under this section unless the person engages in conduct which is prohibited by this section after having been notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct violates this section.
(Ord. 6626, Added, 05/23/2018)

12.41.020 Civil infraction.
A. The violation of Section 12.41.010 shall be a civil infraction as contemplated by Chapter 7.80 RCW and deemed to be a Class 3 civil infraction under RCW 7.80.120(d) and shall subject the violator to a maximum penalty and a default amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus statutory assessments. If a person is unable to pay the monetary penalty, the court may order performance of a number of community service hours in lieu of a monetary penalty.
B. As contemplated by RCW 7.80.160, a person who fails to sign a notice of civil infraction or who willfully violated his or her written and signed promise to appear in court or his or her written and signed promise to respond to a notice of civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the notice of civil infraction.
(Ord. 6626, Added, 05/23/2018)

12.41.030 Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or its application to any person or situation be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or its application to any other person or situation.
(Ord. 6626, Added, 05/23/2018)

Chapter 12.42 SIDEWALK CAFES

Sections:
12.42.010    Permit required.
12.42.020    Permit application.
12.42.040    Terms and conditions.
12.42.050    Liquor.
12.42.060    Insurance.
12.42.070    Indemnity.
12.42.080    Sidewalk condition.

12.42.010 Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk cafe without a written permit to do so from the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, as provided in this chapter. A sidewalk cafe permitted under this chapter is not required to also obtain a permissive use permit under chapter 12.04 AMC.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.020 Permit application.
An application for a sidewalk cafe permit shall be made on forms approved by the Director. In addition to information required by AMC 12.42.040, the applicant shall state the anticipated periods of use during the year, and the proposed hours of daily use, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; and whether any liquor, as defined in RCW 66.04.010(6), will be sold or consumed in the area to be covered by the permit.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.040 Terms and conditions.
A. The Director may issue a permit for use of a sidewalk for sidewalk cafe purposes in the event and to the extent that he or she determines that:
    1. The applicant is the owner or occupant of the adjacent property and operates a cafe, restaurant, or tavern thereon;
    2. The proposed use for a sidewalk cafe would not unduly and unreasonably impair passage to and fro by the public on the sidewalk for which the permit is sought and is consistent with any applicable standards established by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act;
    3. The proposed sidewalk cafe area is included within a food-service establishment permitted by the city and authorized by the Grays Harbor County Department of Health.
B. The Director may include in the permit such terms and conditions as the Director may deem appropriate including, but not limited to:
    1. Restrictions as to the number and placement of tables and chairs and as to the hours and dates of use;
    2. A requirement that the area be cleared when not in use as a sidewalk cafe, or upon the order of the City Engineer or other appropriate City officer such as the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or their authorized representatives;
    3. Provisions that the applicant shall maintain the sidewalk in a clean and safe condition for pedestrian travel;
    4. A requirement that the applicant clear the sidewalk as may be necessary to accommodate deliveries to adjacent or other nearby properties;
    5. Regulations upon lighting and illumination of the sidewalk cafe; limitations upon noise; and restrictions upon the placement of furniture or equipment used in connection with the sidewalk cafe;
    6. The posting of a surety bond or establishment of an escrow account in accordance with the provisions of this title;
    7. If the sidewalk cafe causes a change in pedestrian travel patterns, appropriate repairs to the sidewalk in the immediate vicinity in order to accommodate the change or to assure compliance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act;
    8. Restoration of the sidewalk upon completion of the use.
C. Unless expressly authorized by the City no pavement shall be broken, no sidewalk surface disturbed, and no permanent fixture of any kind shall be installed in or on sidewalk area in connection with a sidewalk cafe.
D. The Director may suspend or revoke the permission granted if an applicant violates this title, any implementing rules, or the terms and conditions of the permit.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.050 Liquor.
It shall be unlawful to serve liquor, as defined in RCW 66.04.010(16), as now existing or hereinafter amended, at a sidewalk cafe unless authorized in both the permit issued under this chapter and by permit of the Washington State Liquor Control Board.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.060 Insurance.
An applicant for a permit for a sidewalk cafe shall, prior to issuance of such a permit, provide and maintain in full force and effect while the permit is in effect, public liability insurance in an amount specified by the Director sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death, or disability and for property damage, which may arise from or be related to the use of sidewalk area for sidewalk cafe purposes, naming the City an additional insured.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.070 Indemnity.
The applicant for a sidewalk cafe permit shall execute and deliver to the City upon a form supplied by the Director an agreement in writing and acknowledged by the applicant, forever to hold and save the City free and harmless from any and all claims, actions or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to, or be suffered by, any persons by reason of or related to the operation of such sidewalk cafe. In addition such agreement shall contain a provision that the permit is wholly of a temporary nature, that it vests no permanent right whatsoever, that upon thirty (30) days' notice, posted on the premises, or by publication in the official newspaper of the City, or without such notice, in case the permitted use shall become dangerous or unsafe, or shall not be operated in accordance with the provisions of this title, the same may be revoked and the sidewalk cafe furniture ordered removed. Every such agreement shall be filed with the Finance Department.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

12.42.080 Sidewalk condition.
The applicant shall comply with the terms and conditions of the sidewalk cafe permit issued, and shall maintain the sidewalk in a clean and safe condition for pedestrian travel, and shall immediately clear the sidewalk area when ordered to do so by the Director or other appropriate City officer such as the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or their authorized representatives.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

Chapter 12.44 STREETS – OBSTRUCTING

Sections:
12.44.010    Building materials in street—Permit required.
12.44.020    Permit—Expiration.
12.44.030    Completion of building—Restoring street to previous condition.
12.44.040    Obstruction of street or sidewalk prohibited.
12.44.050    Violation—Penalty.
12.44.060    Enforcement of chapter.

12.44.010 Building materials in street—Permit required.
No person shall leave or place or cause to be left or placed, any stones, bricks, timber, lumber or other material for building, in or upon, any public street of the city, without first obtaining permission, from the street commissioner, subject to the approval of the city council.
(Prior code § 7.20.010)

12.44.020 Permit—Expiration.
The council may permit any person to place and keep, any kind of building material in any of the streets of the city, for a period not exceeding three months, but such permission shall not authorize the obstruction of any part of the sidewalk, or gutters, or any crosswalk, nor more than one-third of the carriage way opposite the lot or place where such building is proposed to be erected.
(Prior code § 7.20.020)

12.44.030 Completion of building—Restoring street to previous condition.
Any person to whom such permission shall be given as aforesaid, shall cause all such building material and all the rubbish arising therefrom, to be removed from the street, as soon as said building is completed, and shall leave the street in as good condition as when first occupied for such purpose.
(Prior code § 7.20.030)

12.44.040 Obstruction of street or sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall place or cause to be placed or keep or suffer to remain, any article in any street or on any sidewalk of the city, so as to obstruct the free use and passage thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city. This section shall not be construed to prohibit merchants or others, from placing goods, wares and merchandise, household furniture and other commodities, on the sidewalk for the purpose of loading or unloading, providing the same be removed without unreasonable delay.
(Ord. 6416, Amended, 11/29/2006)

12.44.050 Violation—Penalty.
Any person wilfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and costs of prosecution, and in default of the payment of said fine and costs shall be committed to the city jail until such fine and costs are paid, not exceeding thirty (30) days.
(Prior code § 7.20.060)

12.44.060 Enforcement of chapter.
It is made the special duty of the street commissioner of the city of Aberdeen, his assistants and employees, to see that the provisions of this chapter are strictly enforced and to cause the arrest of any person or persons violating the same.
(Prior code § 7.20.070)

Chapter 12.46 PUBLIC CAMPING

Sections:
12.46.010    Findings.
12.46.020    Purpose.
12.46.030    Definitions.
12.46.040    Unlawful camping and storage of personal property in public places.
12.46.045    Enforcement of this chapter.
12.46.050    Penalty for violations.
12.46.060    Public duty created.

12.46.010 Findings.
Camping on public property and on public rights-of-way constitutes a public health and safety hazard because of the lack of proper electrical and/or sanitary facilities. People without proper sanitary facilities have openly urinated, defecated, and littered on public property on the public rights-of-way. Use of public property for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

12.46.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent harm to the health or safety of the public and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by making public streets and other areas readily accessible to the public and to prevent use of public property for camping purposes or storage of personal property which interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

12.46.030 Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Available overnight shelter” means a public or private shelter with an available overnight space, open to an individual or family unit experiencing homelessness at no charge; entry denied due to unruly behavior does not render a shelter unavailable by an individual or family unit; a shelter is not considered “available” under this chapter if an individual or family unit is not able to access the shelter due to:
    1. Gender, familial or marital status, religious beliefs, disability, or a shelter’s length of stay restrictions; or
    2. Attempt to secure shelter by lining up in advance of the shelter opening, and being denied entry due to lack of space.
B. “Camp” or “camping” means to pitch, create, use, or occupy camp facilities for the purposes of habitation, as evidenced by the use of camp paraphernalia.
C. “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, or vehicles.
D. “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, blankets, mattresses, hammocks, or non-city-designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.
E. “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
F. “Vehicle” means the same as defined in RCW 46.04.670 and vehicle “parking” means the same as defined in RCW 46.04.381, as adopted by Section 10.04.010.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

12.46.040 Unlawful camping and storage of personal property in public places.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by ordinance:
    1. Public parks, except as authorized under Chapter 2.60;
    2. Any publicly owned property to which the public is not ordinarily allowed access, including but not limited to: public buildings, water storage tank sites, well sites, stormwater ponds and facilities, and other secured properties;
    3. That portion of any street or sidewalk that is expressly reserved for vehicular or pedestrian travel;
    4. Portions of any street right-of-way that are not expressly reserved for vehicular or pedestrian travel; and
    5. Any other publicly owned parking lot or publicly owned property, improved or unimproved.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a vehicle for the purpose of camping while that vehicle is parked in any of the areas listed in subsection (A) of this section, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to store camp facilities (other than vehicles) and camp paraphernalia in any of the areas listed in subsection (A) of this section, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

12.46.045 Enforcement of this chapter.
A. Prohibitions contained in Sections 12.46.040(A)(1), (2), (3) and (5) shall be enforced at all times.
B. Law enforcement shall not enforce prohibitions in Section 12.46.040(A)(4) when there is no available overnight shelter for individuals or family units experiencing homelessness on the date that camping occurs.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Added, 02/13/2019)

12.46.050 Penalty for violations.
When enforced, violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a Class 4 civil infraction with penalties not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), consistent with RCW 7.80.120.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

12.46.060 Public duty created.
A. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons or individuals who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees or agents.
(Ord. 6642 § 1, Amended, 02/13/2019; Ord. 6522, Added, 10/26/2011)

Chapter 12.48 OBSTRUCTION BY TREES AND VEGETATION

Sections:
12.48.010    Purpose of chapter.
12.48.020    Removal of certain vegetation.
12.48.030    Notice to remove.
12.48.040    Serving notice.
12.48.050    Hearing by city council.
12.48.060    Costs of removal.
12.48.070    Lien.
12.48.080    Penalty.
12.48.090    Other remedies.

12.48.010 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to standardize and regulate the removal of trees and vegetation for the reasons set forth in Section 12.48.020. The city of Aberdeen shall, to the maximum extent practical, protect and retain existing vegetation and pervious land cover within city limits. The provisions of this chapter shall be carried out pursuant to Chapters 13.70 and 14.14.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Added, 03/27/2019)

12.48.020 Removal of certain vegetation.
The owner of any property within the city of Aberdeen shall remove or destroy all trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or any parts thereof, which overhang any sidewalk or street, and which are situated on his property or on the portion of the street abutting thereon, in such a manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the sidewalk or street, including the interruption or interference with the clear vision of pedestrians or persons operating vehicles thereon, and including interference with poles, wires, pipes, fixtures or any other part of any public utility situated in the street. The owner of any property shall remove or destroy all trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation or any parts thereof situated on his property or the street abutting thereon, which are a fire hazard or a menace to public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.010. Formerly 12.48.010)

12.48.030 Notice to remove.
Whenever, in the opinion the department head charged by this city with the control of the matter, any trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or parts thereof, should be removed or destroyed for any of the reasons set forth in Section 12.48.010, he shall cause a notice to be served upon the owner of the property in the manner hereinafter set forth. The notice shall describe the property involved and the condition to be corrected, and shall require that the owner cause the condition to be corrected within such period of time as shall be designated in the notice, which in no event shall be less than five days. The notice shall further provide that if the condition is not corrected within the time specified, after the termination of the period of time, and on the date specified in the notice, a resolution will be presented to the city council to provide for the removal or destruction of the trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation, or parts thereof, and the cost of the removal or destruction becomes a charge against the owner and a lien against the property.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.020. Formerly 12.48.020)

12.48.040 Serving notice.
The notice provided for in Section 12.58.020 shall be served by delivering the notice or a copy thereof to the owner personally, or by leaving the same at his place of residence with a person of suitable age or discretion, or if the owner is not a resident of the city, by leaving the same with the agent handling the property or the tenant in possession thereof, or if there be no such agent or tenant, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises involved and mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known place of residence, if any.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.030. Formerly 12.48.030)

12.48.050 Hearing by city council.
If the conditions described in the notice have not been corrected prior to the time specified therein, a resolution shall be presented to the city council on the date designated in the notice therefor, which resolution shall provide that the department of the city of Aberdeen named therein shall, after the date set therein, forthwith cause the removal or destruction of the vegetation, or any part thereof, as specified or complained of in the notice. Upon the introduction of the resolution, the owner shall be entitled to be heard and show cause, if any, why the vegetation or such part thereof, should not be removed or destroyed. The finding of the city council determining that the vegetation described in the notice is or is not a nuisance shall be conclusive. If the city council finds that the same is a nuisance and the owner has appeared at the hearing thereon, the owner may, in the discretion of the council, be given additional time as may be specified by the council to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.040. Formerly 12.48.040)

12.48.060 Costs of removal.
Whenever, after authorization by resolution of the city council, any trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or parts thereof, are removed or destroyed, the department causing the removal or destruction thereof shall keep an accurate record of the necessary costs thereof, and the costs shall become a charge against the owner and a lien against the property, as authorized by Chapter 113 of the Laws of Washington, 1949.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.050. Formerly 12.48.050)

12.48.070 Lien.
Notice of a lien herein authorized shall, as nearly as practicable, be in substantially the same form, filed with the same officer within the same time and manner and enforced and foreclosed as is provided by law for liens for labor and material.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.060. Formerly 12.48.060)

12.48.080 Penalty.
The owning or maintaining of any trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation, or parts thereof, in the manner described in Section 12.48.010, is declared to be a public nuisance. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter by failing to abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice hereinbefore described, or within the time set by resolution of the city council, whichever time may be later, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.070. Formerly 12.48.070)

12.48.090 Other remedies.
The provisions of this chapter shall be exclusive and are supplemental and additional to other ordinances covering the same or similar subject matter.
(Ord. 6644 § 2, Renumbered, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 7.24.080. Formerly 12.48.080)

Chapter 12.52 STREET MAINTENANCE PROGRAM

Sections:
12.52.010    Ten year maintenance program.

12.52.010 Ten year maintenance program.
Within one month after the adoption of the annual budget, the city engineer and the street committee shall prepare and submit to the city council a schedule for the maintenance of existing streets and sidewalks which, upon adoption by the city council, shall serve as a guide for such maintenance for the ensuing year and as a guide for the budgeting for such maintenance for the succeeding year.
(Prior code § 7.30.010)

Chapter 12.72 FESTIVAL EVENTS

Sections:
12.72.010    Purpose.
12.72.020    Definitions.
12.72.030    Permit duration.
12.72.040    Permit duration.
12.72.050    Administration.
12.72.055    Appeal of denial or revocation of permit.
12.72.060    Conditions authorized and additional permits.
12.72.070    Fees and charges.
12.72.080    Waiver of fees and charges.
12.72.090    Hold Harmless.
12.72.100    Insurance Requirements.
12.72.110    Revocation of permit.

12.72.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote Festival Events on the public properties and rights-of-way of the city by providing a uniform permit process to assist sponsors and city staff in planning and allocating available city resources. Conditions in Festival Events permits are imposed in the interest of public health, safety and welfare; to provide for fees and charges as authorized by the city council; and to administer the permit process. Nothing contained in this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the applicant or sponsor to comply with the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows, unless a different meaning is expressly stated:
A. "Applicant" means the individual who completes the application and who shall act as primary contact for the event.
B. "Director" means the Parks and Recreation Director or the Director's designee.
C. "Festival event" means an event held in a fixed location on city property or city right-of-way, which the general public may attend, and any activity in a non-fixed location associated with the event such as a parade, walk-a-thon, or run-a-thon. Festival Events include arts and craft shows, carnivals, circuses, dances, entertainment activities, exhibitions, fairs, flea markets, parades, rallies, shows, or other similar events. Not included in this definition of Festival Events are events exclusively involving political or religious activity or events intended primarily for the communication or expression of ideas where no vendor activities are involved and which are protected under the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Also not included in this definition of Festival Event are requests for road or sidewalk closures associated with traffic safety or pedestrian safety related to an event held on private property where no vendor activities on public property are involved.
D. "Nonprofit vendor" means any person, firm or organization who sells goods and services at a Festival Event and who has active status registration with the Washington Secretary of State as a nonprofit corporation.
E. "Permit" means the permit issued by the Parks & Recreation Director or the Director's appointed designees pursuant to this chapter.
F. "Sponsor" means the group who is listed on the permit application as the responsible party for the event.
G. "Qualified nonprofit event sponsor" means a sponsor who has an active status registration with the Washington State Secretary of State as a nonprofit corporation.
H. "Vendor" means any individual, firm, or organization who sells goods or services at a Festival Event, including but not limited to concessions, food counters, and booths for the sale of crafts, memorabilia, souvenirs, services, or other similar items.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.030 Permit duration.
A. Any person or group desiring to conduct or sponsor a Festival Event on city property or city rights-of-way, other than Festival Events conducted entirely within a city park under jurisdiction of the Aberdeen Parks Board, shall first apply for a Festival Event permit under this chapter. Applications should be submitted at least ninety (90) days prior to the proposed date of the Festival Event to allow adequate time for event planning. The Director shall issue or deny a permit within thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is received.
B. Any person or group desiring to conduct or sponsor a Festival Event in a city park under the jurisdiction of the Aberdeen Parks Board shall comply with all regulations and permit requirements established by the Parks Board. A Festival Event permit under this chapter shall also be required for Festival Events that do not take place entirely within a city park under the jurisdiction of the Parks Board. The Director, with the approval of the Park Board, may issue a consolidated Festival Events permit under this chapter that incorporates the permitting requirements adopted by the Park Board.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.040 Permit duration.
A Festival Event permit issued under this chapter shall be valid only for the time period approved by the city and vests no permanent rights in the applicant. A single permit may cover multiple events associated with a licensed business or non-profit in the same calendar year where each event is for the same activity. Single permits issued for multiple events may be revoked under AMC 12.72.110 or by providing 90 days written notice to the event sponsor by personal service or by certified mail at the address specified by the permittee in the application.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.050 Administration.
A. The Director shall establish a Festival Event permit application form, process, and approval/denial criteria; and publish such forms, process and criteria on the city's website. The criteria for approval/denial shall be reviewed and approved by the Police and Fire Departments prior to adoption by the Director. The process for approval/denial of individual permit applications shall include an opportunity for review and comment by all city departments
B. The Director may approve, deny, modify, or condition an application for a Festival Event permit.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.055 Appeal of denial or revocation of permit.
Any sponsor aggrieved by the action of the Director in refusing to issue any permit or revoking a permit issued under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the Director's action to the Aberdeen City Council, or such other hearing body or officer as may be designated by the City Council, by filing a notice of appeal with the Finance Director within ten (10) calendar days of issuance of notice of the denial or revocation. Any appeal shall be accompanied by a statement indicating the grounds for such appeal. The hearing body or officer shall set a date for hearing such appeal, to take place within twenty (20) calendar days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, unless the appellant agrees to a longer time frame. If the twentieth day falls on a weekend or holiday, the next business day would be the final day for holding a hearing. At such hearing the appellant and other interested persons may appear and be heard, subject to rules adopted by the city council or the hearing body. The hearing body or officer shall render its decision on the appeal within ten (10) business days following the close of the appeal hearing. The decision of the hearing body or officer is final.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.060 Conditions authorized and additional permits.
A. The Director may include in a Festival Event permit, among other provisions, reasonable terms or conditions as to the: (1) time, place and manner of the event; (2) compliance with health and sanitary regulations; (3) provision of emergency services, security, and other services deemed necessary by the city for health, safety, and welfare purposes; and (4) payment of or reimbursement for city costs associated with the event.
B. In addition to the reasonable terms and conditions that may be included in a Festival Event permit, a Festival Event permit shall ensure that:
    1. No fee may be charged no donations solicited for admission to a Festival Event located on City properties or rights-of-way or any entertainment venue at the event located on City properties or rights-of-way. This condition does not prevent the event sponsor from collecting vendor fees and charges, or allowing the sale of goods and services at the event, or soliciting or allowing the solicitation of donations for support of non-profit organizations in a manner such that the solicitation would not reasonable be construed by the general public as a charge or donation for admissions.
    2. The event sponsor is responsible for all equipment set-up and take-down, litter and garbage clean-up and disposal at the event venue, and prompt removal of all event equipment and site clean-up at the end of the event.
    3. No stakes, pegs, or other affixed hardware may be placed into city property or rights-of-way unless such activity is allowed under the Festival Event permit.
    4. The sponsor of a Festival Event shall make provision for the free exercise of speech at the event. If the sponsor intends to impose any manner and location restrictions on the free exercise of speech at the event the restrictions must be submitted in writing with the application and must include a statement as to how the free exercise of speech will be accommodated. Any manner and location restrictions imposed by the sponsor must comply with those clearly set forth in the permit.
    5. Each Festival Event sponsor at which food is sold or served shall propose a method of notifying event vendors and attendees that only service animals are allowed in areas where food is prepared and served. Sponsors will be presumed to have provided adequate notice by prominently placing in or adjacent to all areas where food is sold or served signs which state "No animals other than service animals are allowed in food sales, serving, and preparing areas."
C. The city may condition any event permit on a requirement that the permittee give written advance notice of the event and its probable impact to the general public and any property owners or tenants adjacent to the event location or any event venue.
D. Additional permits and licenses may be required for Festival Events to meet the conditions established by the permit or other city, county, and state codes, including food permits and business licenses for vendors.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.070 Fees and charges.
The Festival Event permit is for the use of city property and the provision of city services associated with the event. Any person, firm or organization who sponsors a Festival Event within the city must also:
A. Pay all city property usage fees in accordance with applicable code or fees in accordance with applicable code or fee schedules adopted by city council resolution.
B. Obtain all applicable permits and licenses required by Aberdeen Municipal Code and pay associated fees in accordance with the code.
C. Apply for city utility services in advance of the event and pay associated usage charges and fees in accordance with city utility billing policies and practices. Pay the city's commercial customer fees for city utility services provided to the event.
D. Reimburse the city for actual costs of city personnel, services and supplies required as a direct result of the sponsor's failure to comply with permit conditions for the event within 45 days of the date of issuance of invoices for such by the city.
E. Pay taxes, as applicable to the event, in accordance with city and state regulations.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.080 Waiver of fees and charges.
The director may waive all or any portion of the following fees and charges for an event sponsor if in the Director's opinion support for the event will not cause a significant disruption in the delivery of normal city services and the event is of sufficient public benefit to warrant the expenditure of city funds without reimbursement by the sponsor.
A. The actual cost of city personnel for services incurred on behalf of the even during regular work hours.
B. Incidental city cost for supplies, mileage and vehicle maintenance that are not included in the ordinary rate for city utility services.
C. The fees for solid waste collection services provided to the event by the city if the sponsor files a recycling plan with the event application, said plan is approved by the city, and the event sponsor makes a good faith effort to implement the approved plan.
The Director's decision to deny a requested waiver of fees or costs may be appealed under AMC 12.72.055. In the alternative, the Director may directly submit requests for waivers to the city council for approval. The Director should take reasonable steps to determine the approximate cost of all city services provided to the event without charge.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.090 Hold Harmless.
As a condition to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, the sponsor shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents, for any and all suits, claims or liabilities caused by, or arising out of any use or activity authorized by any such permit.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.100 Insurance Requirements.
The sponsor shall provide general liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. Limits of coverage will be determined by the city's risk manager. Certificates of insurance are to be submitted to the city for approval prior to the issuance of the Festival Event permit. Acceptability of insurance is subject to approval by the city's Finance Director or the city's designated risk manager.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

12.72.110 Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this chapter may be summarily revoked by the city at any time when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency or exigent circumstances, the city determines the safety of the public or property requires such immediate revocation. The city may also summarily revoke any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance if the city finds that the permit has been issued based upon false information or when the permittee exceeds the scope of the permit or fails to comply with any condition of the permit. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the event sponsor by personal service or by certified mail at the address specified by the permittee in the application.
(Ord. 6582, Added, 10/28/2015)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:
13.04        Gas Distribution System
13.08        Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials Collection System
13.12        Radio Reception—Interference
13.16        Utility Construction Permit
13.20        Cesspools and Septic Tank Construction
13.24        Injury to Drainage System
13.28        Injury to Utility Fixtures
13.32        Installation of Pipe Lines
13.36        Watersheds
13.40        Laying of Utility Mains and Erection of Electric Wires
13.44        Private Fire Protection Systems—Cross-Connections
13.48        Sewers—Rates and Charges
13.52        Sewer System Regulations
13.56        Water System Regulations
13.60        Water—Rates and Charges
13.64        Low Income Senior Citizens—Rate Remission
13.70        Storm and Surface Water Management
13.80        Ambulance and Emergency Medical Services Utility

Chapter 13.04 GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM

Sections:
13.04.010    Definitions.
13.04.020    Nonliability of city.
13.04.030    Inspections.
13.04.040    Permit requirements.
13.04.050    Powers and duties of gas company.
13.04.060    Code adopted.
13.04.070    Board of appeals.
13.04.080    Fees.
13.04.090    Violation—Penalties.

13.04.010 Definitions.
The following definitions are provided for the purpose of interpretation and administration of this chapter:
"Certificate of approval" means a document issued and attached to the material, piping, or other location which is completely filled out and signed by the inspector.
"City engineer" means the city engineer or his duly authorized representative.
"Consumer" means any person, persons, customer, firm, association, municipal corporation or corporation that uses gas.
"Distribution system or lines" means and includes the gas pipes, pipe lines, mains, laterals, conduits, feeders, regulators, meters, fixtures, connections and all attachments, appurtenances and appliances necessary and incidental thereto or in any way pertaining to the distribution and use of gas.
"Gas" means natural, artificial and mixed gas.
"Gas company" means any person, firm or corporation holding and exercising a franchise or permit to distribute gas within the corporate limits of the city.
"Gas inspector" means any person authorized by the city engineer to inspect the gas distribution system or lines.
(Prior code § 2.16.010)

13.04.020 Nonliability of city.
This chapter shall not be construed to mean that the city or any representative will assume any liability for injury to persons or property by reason of inspection authorized thereunder or by reason of issuance of a certificate of inspection by the inspector.
(Prior code § 2.16.020)

13.04.030 Inspections.
A. The gas inspector is authorized and directed to make inspections of all gas installations and distribution systems and to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. The inspector is given the right to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting and can enter any building or into any property at any time when a suspected hazard to life or property may exist. No person, firm or corporation shall refuse to allow the inspector the right to inspect and if such refusal is given the inspector shall obtain a court order prior to inspection.
B. The inspector shall be required to keep a record of all inspections made and the record shall clearly state the date and findings thereof.
C. All work done under a permit shall be inspected. The permittee shall notify the inspector when work is ready for inspection, and if a test is required, the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued shall furnish all tools, equipment, labor and assistance necessary for any test; if after inspection it is found that such work has complied with the provisions of this chapter, the inspector shall issue a certificate of approval and the gas shall not be turned on until the inspector has attached the certificate in a conspicuous place.
D. The inspector may cause to have any gas piping, fixture or appliance, which has been connected before approval, or which has been found to be defective or is in such condition as to endanger life or property, to be disconnected. In all such cases a notice shall be attached in a conspicuous place. The notice shall state clearly the reasons for the disconnect and it is unlawful for any person to remove the notice or to reconnect said gas piping, fixture or appliance until authorized by the inspector to do so.
(Prior code § 2.16.030)

13.04.040 Permit requirements.
No person, firm or corporation shall extend, alter, enlarge, repair, move, remove, install or convert any gas system or appliance without obtaining a permit; provided, that no permit is required for servicing and/or maintaining gas appliances. The person, firm or corporation performing the work shall be responsible for obtaining the permit from the city engineering department and shall supply the department with information and drawings as prescribed by the department; provided, however, in case of an emergency arising where an immediate repair would be necessary, the repairs shall be made under the expressed condition that a permit be obtained on or before noon of the next following business day.
B. Any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the inspector whenever it appears that the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued is in violation of any adopted provisions of this chapter and the inspector shall serve a notice to stop work and place such notice on the job site in a conspicuous location.
(Prior code § 2.16.040)

13.04.050 Powers and duties of gas company.
A. The gas company may discontinue or refuse to supply gas for any gas piping, fixture or gas appliance which it finds to be defective, or in such condition as to endanger life and property; also, the gas company may discontinue or refuse to supply any consumer gas for any reason which may be dangerous to life and property; provided, however, that the gas company shall so notify the consumer with a written notice.
B. In all cases in which the supplying of gas has been discontinued, the supplying of gas shall not be resumed until authorized by the inspector.
C. The gas company shall save harmless the city from all suits and actions of every description brought against the city for damages caused by the gas company or its agents and sustained by person, persons or property.
D. The gas company shall file with the city detailed plans and/or maps of all gas pipes or mains and fixtures that have been installed underneath public properties, and said plan or maps shall show the size, location and depth of the distribution system.
E. The gas company shall file with the city detailed plans and specifications and any other information prescribed by the city engineer of all gas pipes, mains and fixtures to be laid or installed. Only after examining the plans and approval given by the city engineer can a permit be issued. The permit shall specify the location of public properties, a description of work to be performed, and time allowed for completion. Acceptance of the work performed under a permit shall not prevent the city from making claim against the gas company for any work completed or defective work. The fact that an inspector was present during the progress of construction shall not relieve the gas company from responsibility for defects discovered after the completion of the work.
F. If the gas company has failed to restore the surface of the public properties to their original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such permit, the city engineer shall, if he deems it advisable, have the right to do all work. The gas company shall be liable for the expense, and the city shall have a cause for such work.
G. The gas company shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city engineer and any movement or change of same will be done at the expense of the gas company.
(Prior code § 2.16.050)

13.04.060 Code adopted.
The following is adopted by reference and any amendment thereto, and shall be used as the criteria for inspection and installation of gas distribution system: NFPA No. 54, Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping 1969, published by the National Fire Protection Association. Three copies of the above enumerated code adopted by reference shall be filed with the city clerk of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 2.16.060)

13.04.070 Board of appeals.
There is created the board of appeals which shall consist of the members of the board of adjustment. The board shall determine the suitability of alternate materials, types of construction, interpretation of the provisions of this chapter and hear appeals from an order of the inspector. The inspector shall act as secretary of the board. The board shall adopt rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall meet upon the call of the inspector.
(Prior code § 2.16.070)

13.04.080 Fees.
A. The following fees shall be paid in addition to the two dollar ($2.00) permit fee:
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas stoves                                       | $ 1.50                   |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Each space heater to 70,000 BTU input cap        | 1.50                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas hot water tank, residential up to 60 gallons | 1.50                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas hot water tanks, commercial, over 60 gallons | 2.00                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas furnaces up to 180,000 BTU input cap         | 2.00                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas furnaces 180,000 to 400,000 BTU cap          | 4.00                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas furnaces 400,000 to 1,000,000 BTU cap        | 6.00                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Gas Furnaces over 1,000,000 BTU input cap        | 10.00                    |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Domestic dryers                                  | 1.50                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Commercial dryers under 400,000 BTU input cap    | 2.00                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Commercial dryers over 400,000 BTU input cap     | 2.50                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| All small appliances                             | 1.50                     |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Pipe inspection                                  | $0.05 per foot for first |
|                                                  | 50';0.02 per foot over   |
|                                                  | 50'                      |
+--------------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
B. When a permit is issued to connect an appliance to an existing stub or outlet, no additional fee will be charged for pipe inspection. Where new piping is required to supply the appliance, the above fees will be collected.
(Prior code § 2.16.080)

13.04.090 Violation—Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned in the city jail not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be subject to both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 2.16.090)

Chapter 13.08 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION SYSTEM

Sections:
13.08.010    Police power invoked.
13.08.020    System compulsory.
13.08.030    Definitions.
13.08.040    Enforcement.
13.08.050    Solid waste and recyclable fund.
13.08.060    Solid waste and recyclable containers.
13.08.070    Approved solid waste and recyclable containers.
13.08.075    Locks required — Downtown Aberdeen Business District — Defined — Charges.
13.08.080    Proper use and maintenance of containers.
13.08.090    Unlawful disposal.
13.08.100    Collection regulations.
13.08.110    Rates for curbside service.
13.08.120    Violations.
13.08.130    Violation constitutes public nuisances.
13.08.140    Penalty for violations.
13.08.150    Prior contract not affected.

13.08.010 Police power invoked.
This chapter is enacted under the police power of the city of Aberdeen, to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the public, and shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 4.14.010)

13.08.020 System compulsory.
There is established a system for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclables within the city of Aberdeen which shall be compulsory and mandatory upon all persons, dwellings and business establishments within the city.
(Prior code § 4.14.020)

13.08.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be construed to have the meanings set forth:
1. "Brush" means and includes the cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, leaves, grass, weeds or unattached portions of trees, bushes or shrubs.
2. "Business establishment" means and includes the plant, store, shop or other location of every kind of industrial, commercial and professional occupation including public or governmental agencies, schools and hospitals.
3. "City" means the City of Aberdeen, Washington.
4. "Comprehensive solid waste management plan" means the county solid waste management plan adopted by the county as it may be amended or superseded from time to time. The comprehensive solid waste management plan is incorporated herein by this reference.
5. "County" means Grays Harbor County, Washington, a political subdivision of the state of Washington.
6. "Director" means the City of Aberdeen Public Works Director or his designee which may include agents or employees of a private contractor performing solid waste collection services under agreement with the City.
7. "Disposal site" means a disposal site as defined by RCW 70.95.030.
8. "Dwelling" means every place or enclosure occupied by one or more persons as a temporary or permanent home or residence, and includes hotels, apartment houses, motels, cabin courts, single and multiple residences, house trailers and/or mobile homes.
9. "Handling" means solid waste handling, as defined herein.
10. "Hazardous waste" means any waste, material or substance (other than asbestos), which is:
    a. Defined as hazardous by 40 C.F.R. Part 261 and regulated as hazardous waste by the United States Environmental Protection Agency under Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq., as amended by the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments ("HSWA") of 1984; the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2901 et seq.; the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act ("SARA") of 1986, or any other federal statute or regulation governing the treatment, storage, handling or disposal of waste, materials or substances, which imposes special handling or disposal requirements similar to those required by Subtitle C of RCRA; or
    b. Defined as dangerous or extremely hazardous by WAC 173-303 and regulated as dangerous waste or extremely hazardous waste by the Washington Department of Ecology under the State Hazardous Waste Management Act, RCW Chapter 70.105D, or any other Washington State statute or regulation governing the treatment, storage, handling or disposal of wastes, materials or substances, which imposes special handling or disposal requirements similar to those required by RCW Chapter 70.105. "Hazardous waste" shall include certain mixed waste as defined under WAC Chapter 173-303, i.e., a dangerous, extremely hazardous, or acutely hazardous waste that contains both a nonradioactive hazardous component and source or special nuclear or by-product material subject to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, moderate risk waste as defined by RCW Chapters 70-102 and 70.105 and problem wastes as defined by WAC Chapter 173-304. "Hazardous waste" shall not include biomedical waste as defined by RCW Chapter 70.95K, the handling of such biomedical waste being governed by regulations promulgated by the Grays Harbor County Department of Health;
    c. Any other waste, material or substance determined by a governmental entity with jurisdiction to be hazardous waste at the time of disposal but only so long as and go the extent that it is included in the definition of hazardous waste set forth above.
11. "Health officer" means the Grays Harbor District health officer and his authorized representatives and the authorized representatives of any other governmental health agency having jurisdiction within the city.
12. "Multiple dwelling" means structures or establishments containing more than one family dwelling, and shall include hotels, apartment houses, motels, cabin courts, triplexes, duplexes, and house trailer or mobile home courts.
13. "Operator" means any person with whom the county contracts for the design, construction, ownership or operation of any solid waste handling facility.
14. "Person" means an individual, firm, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever.
15. "Recyclable materials" means recyclable materials as defined by RCW 70L.95.030.
16. "Recycle Bin" shall mean those separate stackable bins, as specified and approved by Grays Harbor County, for the sorting and temporary storage of cans (tin and aluminum), glass bottles, newspaper, and other recyclable materials as identified by regulations or ordinance.
17. "Recycling" means recycling as defined by RCW 70.95.030.
18. "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semi-solid wastes, except sewage, from all public and private dwellings or other establishments including, but not limited to, waste vegetable and animal substances, waste containers of all kinds, rubbish, garbage, ashes, brush, swill, carcasses of dead animals not intended for food purposes, industrial wastes, recyclable materials, and demolition and construction wastes.
19. "Solid waste handling" or "handling" means solid waste handling as defined by RCW 70.95.030.
(Ord. 6327, Amended, 07/17/2002)

13.08.040 Enforcement.
The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the Grays Harbor County Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan (the "plan"), any intergovernmental agreements regarding solid waste disposal ("agreements"), and all other ordinances relating to the accumulation, removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclables. The director shall cooperate with and assist the health officer in all matters relating to solid waste and public health and sanitation and shall investigate all violations of this chapter, the plan, agreements, or other ordinances relating to solid waste, report the same to the proper officials, and assist in the prosecution of violators. If the city shall have an agreement with a private contractor for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste and recyclables, the director shall be responsible to see that the provisions of such agreement are performed by the contractor.
(Prior code § 4.14.040)

13.08.050 Solid waste and recyclable fund.
The "garbage fund" created by Ordinance 4770 is renamed and reestablished as a special fund to be known as the "solid waste and recyclable fund" into which shall be paid all moneys collected by the city for the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste and from which shall be paid all costs of such services. The city council may transfer funds into or from the solid waste and recyclable fund as may be deemed necessary from time to time, subject to the laws relating to such transfers.
(Prior code § 4.14.050)

13.08.060 Solid waste and recyclable containers.
Solid Waste and Recyclable Containers. Every person occupying, or in possession, charge, or control of any dwelling or business establishment, as herein defined, shall at all times keep and maintain, or cause to be kept and maintained, portable approved solid waste and recyclable containers and, except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, shall promptly deposit in the containers all solid waste and recyclables accumulated on the premises. Solid waste and recycle containers furnished by the city shall remain the property of the city and replacements for lost, damaged, destroyed, or worn-out solid waste or recycle containers shall be provided at actual cost, to be collected in the same manner as other charges for services. If a single container is inadequate to accommodate the usual amount of solid waste and recyclables accumulated, such additional containers as the Director deems necessary shall be provided. In the case of multiple dwellings, it shall be the duty of the owner and/or person in charge to see that all tenants have such containers as required available.
(Ord. 6431, Amended, 01/10/2007; Ord. 6327, Amended, 07/17/2002)

13.08.070 Approved solid waste and recyclable containers.
The director shall designate standard containers to be furnished by the city for the collection of solid waste and recyclables. The director may, in the case of business establishments or other special instances, approve containers of different size or construction than the containers furnished by the city; provided, that solid waste and recyclable materials shall always be kept in watertight covered containers designed to prevent the scattering of waste.
(Ord. 6431, Amended, 01/10/2007; Ord. 6327, Amended, 07/17/2002)

13.08.075 Locks required — Downtown Aberdeen Business District — Defined — Charges.
A. All customers in the Downtown Aberdeen Business District using quantity garbage or commercial collection containers, as set forth in section 13.08.110(c)(8), shall use containers with locking metal lids. The lock shall be installed and maintained by the collection contractor. The customer shall be responsible for keeping the lids to the containers closed and locked between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Containers may be temporarily unlocked during said hours while waste material is actually being deposited in the container, provided that no unlocked container shall be left unattended.
B. The Downtown Aberdeen Business District shall consist of property located within the following boundaries: from the intersection of "F" Street and First Street, thence westerly along the centerline of First Street to the intersection of First Street and "M" Street, thence southerly along the centerline of "M" Street to the intersection of "M" Street and State Street, thence easterly along the centerline of State Street to the intersection of State Street and "F" Street, thence northerly along the centerline of State Street to the point of beginning.
C. Customers using quantity garbage or commercial collection containers (1-6 cubic yard boxes, drop boxes, and compactors) which are required to have a lock, or who elect to have a lock installed, will be assessed a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for installation of the lock by the collection contractors. A fee of one dollar and thirty-nine cents ($1.39) per container per month for weekly collection, and an additional one dollar thirty-nine cents ($1.39) per container for each additional pickup per week, will be assessed in addition to those charges set forth in section 13.08.110.
(Ord. 6203, Added, 11/04/1998)

13.08.080 Proper use and maintenance of containers.
The following regulations shall apply to the use and maintenance of solid waste and recyclable containers:
A. Every solid waste and recycle container shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of any accumulation of grease or other decaying substances and free of offensive smells. All solid waste accumulated on the premises served must be collected and deposited in the approved container unless otherwise authorized by the Director or this chapter.
B. A tight-fitting cover shall be kept on each approved solid waste and recycle container at all times except when waste or recyclable material is being deposited in or removed from the container.
C. Each container shall be placed for collection within two (2) feet from the curb or roadway (next to road or alley as used where a truck can drive while proceeding in normal route) and at least three (3) feet from obstructions (such as fences, lamp posts, mail boxes, basketball hoops, vehicles) with the handle facing away from the street, unless special collection services have been approved by the Director.
D. Each recycle container shall only be used for the separation, deposit and collection of the particular type of recyclable material identified on the container or otherwise permitted by regulation.
E. Except by special agreement with the Director, no container shall be filled to a gross of weight of more than seventy (70) pounds.
F. Brush, as defined by this chapter, may be kept outside a container if tied in bundles or placed in other suitable containers so that the same may be easily handled by the collector; provided, that an extra service charge may be imposed for handling such separately contained brush.
G. The Director may, in the case of recyclable materials and business establishments or with city council approval in other instances, require the separation of different types of waste in different containers.
(Ord. 6431, Amended, 01/10/2007; Ord. 6327, Amended, 07/17/2002)

13.08.090 Unlawful disposal.
A. It is unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, remove, or in any manner dispose of solid waste and recyclables originating within the city of Aberdeen at any site or facility other than a disposal site or other solid waste handling facility designated by the county or through the use of the collection system provided by the city directly or through the services of a collection contractor or licensed recycler, and except in the following specific instances:
    1. Waste paper, boxes and brush may be burned in indoor furnaces, stoves and fireplaces or, upon special permit from the fire chief, in outdoor fireplaces and incinerators;
    2. Ashes and brush may be buried on a person's own private property; provided, it is buried at such depth and in such manner as not to cause an unhealthy or unsanitary condition;
    3. Waste foods may be fed to animals; provided, it is done in a neat and sanitary manner and is thereafter promptly consumed or placed in a waste receptacle.
B. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prohibit the specialized methods of disposal approved by the health officer or state or federal laws or regulations for large industries, hospitals, crematoriums, and other like instances.
C. Unless the county allows the disposal or other handling of such a material, article or substance, it is unlawful for any person to dispose of or otherwise handle any material, article or substance originating within the city at a disposal site or other solid waste handling facility if that article or substance: (1) is hazardous waste; (2) is not solid waste, or (3) is not solid waste allowed by the county, by interlocal agreement or by contract between the county and an operator to be disposed of or other handling at the relevant facility based on the type, volume, time of delivery, means and manner of conveyance or person delivering that solid waste.
(Prior code § 4.14.090)

13.08.100 Collection regulations.
The director is authorized to adopt and enforce such reasonable rules and regulations as may be consistent with and necessary to carry out the provisions relating to the collection and disposal of solid waste and recyclables not in conflict with the provisions of this code, the Grays Harbor County Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Plan, and intergovernmental agreements regarding solid waste disposal.
(Prior code § 4.14.100)

13.08.110 Rates for curbside service.
A. Payment. The finance director shall collect all charges for solid waste and recyclable collection as agent for any private contractor who provides collection services in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and such charges shall be payable concurrent with water and/or sewer charges for the premises served, except that charges for quantity waste disposal and extra service shall be collected monthly by the contractor.
B. Delinquency. Any charges not paid within twenty-one (21) days of billing date shall be delinquent, and, upon delinquency, shall become a lien upon the real property to which the collection services have been rendered. Such lien shall become effective upon the filing by the city of a notice of lien in the office of the Grays Harbor County Auditor, which notice shall specify the amount of the charges, the period covered by the charges, and a legal description of the premises. Such lien shall be foreclosed in the same manner as are liens for labor and materials for the improvement of real property.
C. Rates for Curbside Service. Rates include one (1) ninety-five (95) gallon recycle cart serviced every other week. Containers must be placed at the curb (next to road or alley where a truck can drive while proceeding in normal route) on the scheduled service day. The monthly standard curb rates for cart(s) serviced weekly, every other week or monthly for approved property used and maintained solid waste and recycle containers shall be as follows:
    1. Residential Cart Service. 
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65/30 gallon monthly:                 | $9.33  |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65 gallon monthly:                    | $13.61 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65 gallon every other week:           | $21.05 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65 gallon weekly:                     | $34.11 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Additional 65 gallon (each):          | $8.73  |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 90 gallon monthly:                    | $15.39 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 90 gallon every other week:           | $29.96 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 90 gallon weekly:                     | $47.11 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Additional 95 gallon (each):          | $12.98 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Return trip:                          | $14.37 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Extra unit (can, bag, box) 30 gallon: | $4.48  |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    2. Commercial Cart Service. 
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65 gallon every other week:           | $21.05 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 65 gallon weekly:                     | $34.11 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 90 gallon every other week:           | $29.96 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | 90 gallon weekly:                     | $47.11 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Return trip:                          | $14.11 |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
    | Extra unit (can, bag, box) 30 gallon: | $4.48  |
    +---------------------------------------+--------+
D. Special Service Charges. The following special service charges are in addition to the monthly curb service rates. Charges for special services may be billed by and paid directly to the contractor and, if unpaid, shall be added to the utility bill under Section 13.08.110(A).
    1. Physical Hardship – Roll Out. The Director may authorize special collection services and rates, in addition to those set forth in this chapter, when special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings of the property being served or physical disabilities of the utility customer create an unnecessary hardship; provided, that the additional costs charged do not exceed the actual cost of providing the special collection services. If the special collection services require the collector to roll the cart out to the curb, for each increment of fifty (50) feet the monthly curbside service rate shall be increased by one dollar and twenty-six cents ($1.26) for carts serviced monthly, two dollars and fifty-one cents ($2.51) for carts serviced every other week, and five dollars and four cents ($5.04) for carts serviced weekly.
    2. Special Item Removal. For each of the following types of items picked up on a one-time basis the charge will be:
        a. Small appliances, furniture, bulky items, etc.: $27.02 each
        b. Large appliances, refrigerators, freezers, etc.: $62.79 each
    3. Prepaid plastic thirty (30) gallon bags furnished by the city: $4.48 each.
    4. Special Collection Calls. Collection calls requested by a customer for a regular packer truck requiring loading of loose material, including travel time, will be charged at an hourly rate of sixty-five dollars and fifty-nine cents ($65.59) plus disposal fee.
    5. Loose material collection. Collection of container overflows or solid waste or recyclable materials not properly placed in approved containers, and collections ordered pursuant to 13.08.130(B), will be charged at an hourly rate, including travel time, or $64.73, plus disposal fee.
    Code reviser’s note: Subsection (D)(5) has been retained in the text of the code to correct a scrivener’s error in Ordinance 6602.
E. Container Services. Rates for quantity garbage, commercial collection, customer-owned compactors, or permanent and temporary drop box services shall be as follows, not including refuse collection tax:
    1. Permanent Commercial Container Service. 
    +-----------------------------------+--------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $89.69 |
    +-----------------------------------+--------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $87.53 |
    +-----------------------------------+--------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $30.67 |
    +-----------------------------------+--------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $137.56 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $129.54 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $44.92  |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $172.93 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $161.54 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $53.51  |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $255.31 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $234.93 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $79.60  |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $345.56 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $314.43 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $107.00 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $491.05 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $446.62 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $149.44 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per week (basic)       | $644.73 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup per week   | $613.50 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    | Special or additional pickup each | $193.58 |
    +-----------------------------------+---------+
    2. Temporary Commercial Container Service. 
    +--------------+--------+
    | Delivery     | $36.06 |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Rent per day | $0.50  |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Each pickup  | $44.85 |
    +--------------+--------+
    +--------------+--------+
    | Delivery     | $36.06 |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Rent per day | $0.50  |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Each pickup  | $44.92 |
    +--------------+--------+
    +--------------+--------+
    | Delivery     | $46.37 |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Rent per day | $0.63  |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Each pickup  | $53.51 |
    +--------------+--------+
    +--------------+--------+
    | Delivery     | $46.37 |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Rent per day | $0.97  |
    +--------------+--------+
    | Each pickup  | $79.60 |
    +--------------+--------+
    +--------------+---------+
    | Delivery     | $46.37  |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Rent per day | $1.13   |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Each pickup  | $106.99 |
    +--------------+---------+
    +--------------+---------+
    | Delivery     | $46.37  |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Rent per day | $1.71   |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Each pickup  | $149.44 |
    +--------------+---------+
    +--------------+---------+
    | Delivery     | $46.37  |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Rent per day | $1.99   |
    +--------------+---------+
    | Each pickup  | $193.57 |
    +--------------+---------+
    3. Customer-Owned Compactor Service. 
    +------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per month   | $167.42 |
    +------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup | $176.96 |
    +------------------------+---------+
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | One pickup per month                         | $257.73 |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Each additional pickup                       | $268.13 |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Access fee weekly (monthly charge)           | $8.92   |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Access fee every other week (monthly charge) | $4.46   |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Access fee 2x weekly (monthly charge)        | $17.85  |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Lock fee (each)                              | $5.15   |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Cable fee (each)                             | $10.30  |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Return trips, containers                     | $28.13  |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    | Additional yard                              | $44.85  |
    +----------------------------------------------+---------+
    4. Drop Box Services. 
        a. Permanent Drop Boxes. 
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | First haul each month | $198.71 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Each additional haul  | $133.42 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | First haul each month | $273.68 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Each additional haul  | $169.83 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | First haul each month | $350.29 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Each additional haul  | $238.67 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        b. Temporary drop Boxes. 
        +--------------+---------+
        | Delivery     | $51.52  |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Rent per day | $5.40   |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Each pickup  | $136.50 |
        +--------------+---------+
        +--------------+---------+
        | Delivery     | $51.52  |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Rent per day | $6.54   |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Each pickup  | $180.13 |
        +--------------+---------+
        +--------------+---------+
        | Delivery     | $51.52  |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Rent per day | $7.40   |
        +--------------+---------+
        | Each pickup  | $251.02 |
        +--------------+---------+
        c. Customer-Owned Compactor Drop Boxes. 
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Each scheduled pickup | $180.85 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Special pickup        | $186.80 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Each scheduled pickup | $219.52 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        | Special pickup        | $229.90 |
        +-----------------------+---------+
        +-------------------------+---------+
        | Each scheduled pickup   | $245.73 |
        +-------------------------+---------+
        | Special pickup          | $253.68 |
        +-------------------------+---------+
        | Drop box lids per month | $13.65  |
        +-------------------------+---------+
        | Disposal rate per ton   | $96.73  |
        +-------------------------+---------+
The tipping fee to be added to the charges for drop boxes is at the rates established by contract with Grays Harbor County and other regulatory agencies for disposal sites meeting minimum functional standards set by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
No load is to exceed nine (9) tons.
Tipping fee is based on sixty-four (64) pound sixty-five (65) gallon cart, ninety-six (96) pound ninety-five (95) gallon cart, one hundred eighty (180) pound one (1) yard container, and actual weight of drop boxes.
F. Monthly Billing. No refund of charges paid shall be made for other than a full calendar month for which service is not required. In the event the city shall combine the billing for solid waste and recyclable collection with the billing for city water and sewer services, the city shall have the right to apply any partial payments on utility bills first to the payment of charges for solid waste and recyclable collection with the balance to be applied toward the payment of remaining current utility charges, in such order as the finance director shall see fit, but lastly to charges for water service.
(Ord. 6602 §§ 1—3, Amended, 12/14/2016; Ord. 6585, Amended, 11/23/2015; Ord. 6566, Amended, 12/10/2014; Ord. 6554, Amended, 01/08/2014; Ord. 6548, Amended, 09/11/2013; Ord. 6539, Amended, 12/12/2012; Ord. 6524, Amended, 12/14/2011; Ord. 6472, Amended, 12/29/2008; Ord. 6454, Amended, 12/27/2007; Ord. 6431, Amended, 01/10/2007; Ord. 6392, Amended, 01/11/2006; Ord. 6376, Amended, 01/12/2005; Ord. 6350, Amended, 01/21/2004; Ord. 6343, Amended, 08/06/2003; Ord. 6337, Amended, 01/22/2003; Ord. 6327, Amended, 07/17/2002; Ord. 6318, Amended; Ord. 6285, Amended, 04/25/2001; Ord. 6273, Amended, 12/06/2000; Ord. 6252, Amended, 06/28/2000; Ord. 6236, Amended, 12/15/1999; Ord. 6143, Amended, 11/13/1996)

13.08.120 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts, each of which shall constitute a separate offense:
A. To permit or suffer waste material to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises, or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting upon any lot, block or premises owned or occupied by him, or for which he may be the agent, or to permit any accumulation of waste material to remain in such place;
B. To collect, remove or dispose of any waste except as permitted by this chapter;
C. To collect, remove or dispose of any waste for hire except by virtue of a contract with the city of Aberdeen;
D. To dump, bury or otherwise deposit any waste anywhere in the city of Aberdeen except in the manner specifically permitted by this chapter;
E. To fail or refuse to provide and maintain an approved container or containers as required by this chapter;
F. To permit to flow openly upon or from any premises any foul, unsanitary, odorous or nauseous liquids, sewage, waste oil or petroleum products;
G. To erect, keep or maintain any privy, cesspool, or septic tank which does not meet the approval of the health officer as to location, construction and operation;
H. To engage in any trade or occupation on any premises which, by reason of the substances or materials used or produced, creates an unhealthy, unsanitary or offensive condition for other persons residing in the area;
I. To violate any other provision of this chapter, including regulations adopted by the director pursuant to Section 13.08.100.
(Prior code § 4.14.120)

13.08.130 Violation constitutes public nuisances.
A. The violations enumerated in Section 13.08.120 shall each constitute a public nuisance subject to injunction, abatement or such other remedies as may be provided by law in the case of public nuisances.
B. In addition to such other remedies, whenever any violation under Section 13.08.120 constitutes or reasonably appears to constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, the director shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement shall become a civil debt against the owner or other responsible party and shall be collectable in the same manner and at the same rates as any other service or charge for services as provided by Section 13.08.110.
(Prior code § 4.14.130)

13.08.140 Penalty for violations.
A. Each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be a civil violation which shall be imposed and collected in the same manner as provided for in Chapter 1.12 Aberdeen Municipal Code; provided, that the maximum civil penalty imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), excluding costs.
B. Each knowing violation of or knowing failure to comply with the provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and any person found guilty thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by law or imprisonment in jail not to exceed the maximum allowed by law, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. The penalties authorized in subsections (B) and (C) of this section shall not be exclusive. Violation of the provisions of this chapter may also give rise to revocation of licenses, franchises, contracts, and permits or such other remedies or actions necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter including but not limited to:
    1. Barring that person from use of a disposal site or other solid waste handling facility;
    2. Requesting that the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission revoke any person's certificate to collect or transport solid waste or recyclable material;
    3. Seeking equitable relief against that person; and
    4. Any other legally available remedy.
(Prior code § 4.14.140)

13.08.150 Prior contract not affected.
This chapter shall not be deemed or construed as impairing any obligation of the city of Aberdeen under any existing contract for the collection, removal or disposal of waste; provided, that the terms of this chapter shall be followed to the extent that there is no impairment of any existing contract.
(Prior code § 4.14.150)

Chapter 13.12 RADIO RECEPTION—INTERFERENCE

Sections:
13.12.010    Permit—Required.
13.12.020    Definitions.
13.12.030    Permit—Application—Fee—Hours of operation—Compliance with building and fire codes.
13.12.040    Permit—Transfer—Expiration.
13.12.050    Inspection—Interference with inspection.
13.12.060    Revocation of permit.
13.12.070    Permit—Revocation—Notice and hearing.
13.12.080    Violations—Penalties.

13.12.010 Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate in the city of Aberdeen any apparatus generating or causing high frequency oscillations which interfere with radio broadcast transmitting or receiving apparatus, without a permit to use the same, save and except as hereinafter provided in Section 13.12.030.
(Prior code § 7.46.010)

13.12.020 Definitions.
The following electrical apparatus shall be considered as coming within the meaning of this chapter, namely, violet ray machines, machines using Tesla coil or principal, X-Ray machines, open or quenched spark machines, or any machine including or incorporating a device producing high frequency oscillations, provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcast, commercial or amateur, who are licensed by the federal government and/or who are employed in interstate communication.
(Prior code § 7.46.020)

13.12.030 Permit—Application—Fee—Hours of operation—Compliance with building and fire codes.
Any person desiring to operate any apparatus in the city of Aberdeen coming within the terms of this chapter shall file a written application therefor with the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall prepare a form of application. If the information in the application be indefinite or incomplete, the electrical inspector shall refuse to issue a permit until sufficient information shall have been submitted. If an application be rejected the applicant, upon request, shall be entitled to receive a definite statement in writing setting forth the reasons for the rejection. If the application conforms to the provisions of this chapter and to the form prepared by the electrical inspector, a permit shall be issued to the applicant conditioned that all requirements of the building code, fire code and other ordinances of the city of Aberdeen have been complied with. Each applicant to whom a permit is granted shall pay a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for one machine and fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional machine. It is unlawful to operate any apparatus permitted under the terms of this chapter and for which a permit has been issued, between 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. of any day, unless the operation be by a practitioner duly licensed by the state of Washington, or under his or her direction in the regular course of practice of his or her profession in emergency cases.
(Prior code § 7.46.030)

13.12.040 Permit—Transfer—Expiration.
Each permit shall be personal and not transferable. All permits shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
(Prior code § 7.46.040)

13.12.050 Inspection—Interference with inspection.
The electrical inspector, or any of his authorized deputies or assistants, shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the installation and the working of all apparatus coming within the terms of this chapter, and it is unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector or his deputies or assistants to enter the premises for such purposes. The inspector or his deputies or assistants before entering any premises shall exhibit to any person there in charge his authority as inspector.
(Prior code § 7.46.050)

13.12.060 Revocation of permit.
All permits shall be subject to further regulation that may be imposed by the council, and nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to create any vested right in any person to the assignment, renewal, reissuance or continuance of any permit, and the right shall be and remain at all times vested in the council, and the council may as hereinafter provided, revoke and cancel any permit for fraud or misrepresentation in its procurement, or for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance of the city, or for a violation of any state or federal statute, or for any conduct or act on the part of the person to whom the permit is issued, or the employees of such person, or permitted by him or them on the premises where such apparatus is used, or in connection therewith, or adjacent thereto, tending to render such premises where the same is used a public nuisance, or a menace to the health, peace or general welfare of the city.
(Prior code § 7.46.060)

13.12.070 Permit—Revocation—Notice and hearing.
Whenever information shall come to the electrical inspector that any person to whom a permit has been granted under the terms of this chapter has committed any act rendering the permit subject to revocation, it shall be the duty of the officer having such information forthwith to submit the facts in writing to the council, and at the same time serve upon the person to whom a permit has been granted, a copy thereof, together with a notice citing such person to appear before the council for investigation of said complaint at a time and place stated in such notice. In case service cannot be had upon said person, the same shall be mailed to their last known business address. No further pleadings shall be necessary. Such hearing or investigation shall be informed if on such hearing or investigation the council shall find that cause exists for the revocation of such permit and same may be revoked by a majority vote of the council.
(Prior code § 7.46.070)

13.12.080 Violations—Penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 7.46.080)

Chapter 13.16 UTILITY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT

Sections:
13.16.010    Permit—Required.
13.16.020    Violations—Deemed public nuisance.
13.16.030    Violations—Penalty.

13.16.010 Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect any telephone, telegraph, electric light or power line poles or lines within the city of Aberdeen upon any street, alley or public way within the city of Aberdeen, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city council of the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 7.62.010)

13.16.020 Violations—Deemed public nuisance.
Any pole or wiring constructed thereon in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared a public nuisance and liable to abatement as such nuisance.
(Prior code § 7.62.020)

13.16.030 Violations—Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 7.62.030)

Chapter 13.20 CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANK CONSTRUCTION

Sections:
13.20.010    Cesspool or septic tanks required.
13.20.020    Approval of plans.
13.20.030    Conformity required.
13.20.040    Unlawful to drain cesspool or septic tank into drainage ditch.
13.20.050    Violations—Penalties.

13.20.010 Cesspool or septic tanks required.
Any place located more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any sewer which is not connected with a sewer, must be provided with cesspools or septic tanks wherever an outlet for sewerage is necessary in the use of such premises.
(Prior code § 10.02.010)

13.20.020 Approval of plans.
All plans for cesspools or septic tanks hereafter constructed shall be submitted to the plumbing inspector for acceptance before a permit is issued for plumbing. All work from fixtures to such cesspools or septic tanks must conform to the same specifications and rules as are now, or may hereafter be, made applicable in sewer districts of the city.
(Prior code § 10.02.020)

13.20.030 Conformity required.
Where proper cesspools or septic tanks are not now provided or where connection of fixtures to any cesspool or septic tank do not conform to the specifications and rules applicable in sewer districts, all such premises shall be provided therewith and conform thereto within ninety days (90) from the date of this chapter.
(Prior code § 10.02.030)

13.20.040 Unlawful to drain cesspool or septic tank into drainage ditch.
It is unlawful to run any fixture or pipe or drain from any cesspool or septic tank into any open drainage ditch now constructed or hereafter constructed within the city.
(Prior code § 10.02.040)

13.20.050 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 10.02.050)

Chapter 13.24 INJURY TO DRAINAGE SYSTEM

Sections:
13.24.010    Tampering with dikes, drains, ditches, etc., unlawful.
13.24.020    Violations—Penalties.

13.24.010 Tampering with dikes, drains, ditches, etc., unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, wilfully or negligently tamper with, destroy, damage or injure any dike, ditch, drain or improvement of that nature used in connection with or forming part of any diking or drainage district system within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 10.04.010)

13.24.020 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon the conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 10.04.020)

Chapter 13.28 INJURY TO UTILITY FIXTURES

Sections:
13.28.010    Tampering with water conduits unlawful.
13.28.020    Violations—Penalties.

13.28.010 Tampering with water conduits unlawful.
It is declared to be unlawful for any person or persons to cut, alter, injure, remove, disconnect or connect with or in any manner interfere with, meddle or tamper with any main, pipe, stop cock, meter, hydrant, pump or any other water conduit owned by the city of Aberdeen, or by any private owner, except with the consent of the water superintendent of such city or of such private owner.
(Prior code § 10.06.010)

13.28.020 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not less than five or more than fifty dollars ($50.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail of not more than twenty (20) days.
(Prior code § 10.06.020)

Chapter 13.32 INSTALLATION OF PIPE LINES

Sections:
13.32.010    Map showing location of all pipelines to be filed.
13.32.020    Violations—Penalty.
13.32.030    Additional penalty.

13.32.010 Map showing location of all pipelines to be filed.
Any person, firm or corporation who has been granted a franchise to lay pipe lines along or across any street or alley within the city limits of the city of Aberdeen, Grays Harbor County, Washington, shall file in the office of the city engineer, not later than January 1, 1921, a map showing the location of all such pipelines; notation shall be made on each block of size of pipe, location in reference to centerline of street or alley, and year of installation. Beginning January 1, 1921, all extensions or installations during any month must be filed in the office of the city engineer not later than thirty (30) days after the installation. Where any pipeline is located on the north or west side of any street or alley within the city limits, and extension of such line is contemplated, notice of such extension shall be filed in the office of the city engineer and no extension of such line will be allowed within thirty (30) days after filing of such notice.
(Prior code § 10.08.010)

13.32.020 Violations—Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00); for each day that any of the provisions of this chapter remain uncomplied with shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior code § 10.08.020)

13.32.030 Additional penalty.
In addition to the penalty provided herein, the city council shall have the power to direct its city attorney to institute legal proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel such person, firm or corporation to comply with any of the provisions of Section 13.32.010 of this chapter.
(Prior code § 10.08.030)

Chapter 13.36 WATERSHEDS

Sections:
13.36.010    Watershed area described.
13.36.020    Intent and purpose.
13.36.030    Entry unlawful.
13.36.040    Depositing of contamination material prohibited.
13.36.050    Enforcement authorities.
13.36.060    Penalty for violations.

13.36.010 Watershed area described.
The following described land area is declared to be and constituted as the watershed for the domestic water supply of the city of Aberdeen:SW1/4 of SE1/4 of Section 8
E1/2 and SW1/4 of SE1/4 of Section 9
W1/2 of W1/2 of Section 10
W1/2 of Section 15
All of Section 16
All of Section 17
SE1/4 of Section 18
E1/2 of Section 19
All of Section 20
All of Section 21
W1/2 of NW1/4, and SW1/4, and SW1/4 of SE1/4 of Section 22
All of Section 27
All of Section 28
All of Section 29
NE1/4, and E1/2 of NW1/4, and N1/2 of SE1/4, and NE1/4 of SW1/4, Section 30
NE1/4, and E1/2 of NW1/4, and N1/2 of SE1/4 of Section 32
N1/2, and N1/2 of SW1/4, Section 33
N1/2, and N1/2 of S1/2, and SE1/4 of SW1/4 of Section 34
All in Township 21 North, Range 8, West, W.M.
(Prior code § 10.10.010)

13.36.020 Intent and purpose.
The city of Aberdeen does exercise its jurisdiction over the land area described in Section 13.36.010 for the purpose of the prevention of pollution to the domestic water supply of the city and for the purpose of general regulations and control of the use of said area.
(Prior code § 10.10.020)

13.36.030 Entry unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to enter or go upon the watershed of the city of Aberdeen, as the same is defined in Section 13.36.010, for any purpose whatsoever; provided, that this section shall not apply to authorized officials, employees or agents of the city of Aberdeen engaged in city business, officers authorized to enforce this chapter, nor to the owners of the land and their authorized employees who enter the area for purposes of inspection and control.
(Prior code § 10.10.030)

13.36.040 Depositing of contamination material prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit any material or substance within the area of the watershed, as defined in Section 13.36.010, which material or substance might in any way pollute or be harmful to the water derived from the area.
(Prior code § 10.10.040)

13.36.050 Enforcement authorities.
In addition to the city police department, the officials and employees of the city water department, the Grays Harbor County Sheriff and his deputies, and the officers of the Washington State Game Department are authorized to enforce all the terms and provisions of this chapter and are further authorized to arrest, with or without a warrant of arrest, any person violating this chapter.
(Prior code § 10.10.050)

13.36.060 Penalty for violations.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days in the city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 10.10.060)

Chapter 13.40 LAYING OF UTILITY MAINS AND ERECTION OF ELECTRIC WIRES

Sections:
13.40.010    Permit required to lay utility mains.
13.40.020    Permit required to erect electric wires.
13.40.030    Issuance of permits.
13.40.040    Violations—Penalties.

13.40.010 Permit required to lay utility mains.
It is unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to lay down or construct any gas pipes, water pipes or other conduits in any of the streets or alleys of the city of Aberdeen, without first procuring from the city engineer a permit so to do.
(Prior code § 10.12.010)

13.40.020 Permit required to erect electric wires.
It is unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to erect or maintain any telegraph, telephone or electric light wires in, upon, across or along any of the streets or alleys within the city of Aberdeen, without first procuring from the city engineer a permit so to do.
(Prior code § 10.12.020)

13.40.030 Issuance of permits.
The permits herein provided for shall be issued by the city engineer, shall describe the portion of the streets or alleys to be laid with pipes or upon which telegraph, telephone or electric light wipes are to be constructed, and shall designate the particular portion of the street or alley in which pipes are to be laid or upon which wires are to be constructed.
(Prior code § 10.12.030)

13.40.040 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 10.12.040)

Chapter 13.44 PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS—CROSS-CONNECTIONS

Sections:
13.44.010    Definitions.
13.44.020    Cross-connections prohibited under certain conditions.
13.44.030    Failure to discontinue use of cross-connections.
13.44.040    Availability of public water supply for fire protection.
13.44.050    Establishing or maintaining by-passes prohibited.
13.44.060    Establishing or maintaining emergency intakes prohibited.
13.44.070    Map of water pipes to be filed with water superintendent.
13.44.080    Violations—Penalty.
13.44.090    Additional penalties.

13.44.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
"By-pass" means a physical arrangement whereby water may be diverted around any feature of the purification process of a public water supply.
"Cross-connection" means a physical arrangement whereby a public water supply system is connected with another water supply system, either public or private, in such a manner that a flow of water into such public water supply system from such other water supply system is possible.
"Emergency intake" means an intake or other device capable of introducing water into the public water supply system from a source of supply which, because of its usage characteristics, has not been approved for drinking and culinary purposes by the state department of health.
(Prior code § 10.14.010 (part))

13.44.020 Cross-connections prohibited under certain conditions.
All cross-connections are hereafter prohibited within the limits of the city of Aberdeen unless both water supplies are of safe, sanitary quality, and both supplies and the connection thereof have received the approval of the state department of health. All persons, firms or corporations now having or maintaining any cross-connections whether or not such cross-connections are controlled by automatic devices such as check-valves, or by hand-operated mechanisms such as gate-valves or stop cocks which may or may not be sealed, shall on or before the 15th day of April, 1924, discontinue and physically separate all such cross-connections, unless both supplies and the connection thereof have received the approval of the state department of health.
(Prior code § 10.14.010 (part))

13.44.030 Failure to discontinue use of cross-connections.
Failure on the part of persons, firms or corporations to discontinue the use of any and all cross-connections and to physically separate such cross-connections before the 15th day of April, 1924, will be sufficient cause for the discontinuance of the public water service to the premises on which the cross-connections exist; unless the quality of the water from the two supplies used has been approved by the state department of health.
Provided, that in the case of persons, firms or corporations having installed before April 15, 1924, cross-connections consisting of two gate valves with indicator posts, two check-valves of the factory mutual type with drip cocks and gauges for testing, all to be placed in a vault of water-tight construction accessible to ready inspection; the date of discontinuance of the same shall be extended until January 1, 1927; provided, further, that such cross-connections are subject to such inspections as the state department of health deems proper, the expense of such inspections to be borne by the person, firm, or corporation using such a cross-connection.
(Prior code § 10.14.020)

13.44.040 Availability of public water supply for fire protection.
After January 1, 1927, public water supplies shall be made available for fire protection by the following methods only:
A. Construction of a pump well or reservoir to which the city mains are connected, pumps taking suction from well or reservoir and pumping to an elevated tank for storage and pressure; or
B. An elevated tank or standpipe supplied at the top and above the overflow by a connection from the city main. Such tank or standpipe may then be connected to the fire protection system; or
C. Two independent systems or piping without any connection whatsoever, one being supplied from the city mains and the other from the independent water supply.
(Prior code § 10.14.030)

13.44.050 Establishing or maintaining by-passes prohibited.
No by-pass shall be established or maintained whereby water may be diverted around any feature of a purification process of a public water supply system, provided that with the specific approval of the state department of health, by-passes may be permitted around primary sedimentation basins, aerators or mixing chambers.
(Prior code § 10.14.040)

13.44.060 Establishing or maintaining emergency intakes prohibited.
No emergency intake shall be established or maintained in connection with a public water supply system.
(Prior code § 10.14.050)

13.44.070 Map of water pipes to be filed with water superintendent.
On or before April 10, 1924, each person, firm or corporation using water from the municipal water supply system of the city of Aberdeen for private fire protection systems, shall file with the water superintendent of the city of Aberdeen a map of the plant showing all water pipes upon such premises, and shall at the same time file a sworn statement with the water superintendent of the city of Aberdeen that the map is a true and correct one, and that no cross-connection exists between the water pipes supplied by city water, and those pipes supplied with water from a source other than the city water system. In case a cross-connection does exist upon such premises, such statement shall so state; and shall be so designated upon the map and in such statement shall show the location of such cross-connection or cross-connections.
(Prior code § 10.14.060)

13.44.080 Violations—Penalty.
In the event that any person, firm or corporation shall fail or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the superintendent of the water department shall have the right and is authorized to physically disconnect all water systems lines from city mains to said plants on or after April 15, 1924. No service will again be connected up until all provisions of this chapter are fulfilled and the cost of making such disconnection and reconnection from and to the city mains have been duly paid to the city treasurer.
(Prior code § 10.14.070)

13.44.090 Additional penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the other penalties provided herein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior code § 10.14.080)

Chapter 13.48 SEWERS—RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:
13.48.010    Definitions.
13.48.020    Sewer rates.
13.48.030    Review and revision of rates.
13.48.040    Responsibility, payment, delinquencies and penalties.
13.48.050    Appeals.
13.48.060    Sewer fund created.
13.48.070    Collecttion of fees—Lien—Sewer deposit.

13.48.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
"Commercial Class" means any user other than a single or two family dwelling.
"Director" means the Public Works Director or the Director's designee.
"Extraneous flow" means the discharge of either storm drainage water or ground water not permitted under section 13.52.380 and where the user has been given sixty (60) days to correct the problem and the city has determined that a correction of the problem is practicable.
"Meter" means a device installed by and under the control of the city water department for the purpose of measuring water consumption.
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.
"Residential Class" means any single or two family dwelling.
"Significant Portion" means more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total metered water use.
"User" means every person using any part of the public treatment works of the city of Aberdeen.
"User charge" means the periodic charges levied on all users of the public treatment works, and shall, at a minimum, cover each user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance.
(Ord. 6352, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6228, Amended, 09/08/1999)

13.48.020 Sewer rates.
A. The sewer user charges are as follows:
    1. Residential Class. Thirty-eight dollars and sixty-two cents ($38.62) per month per dwelling unit.
    2. Commercial Class. A base rate for one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of water consumption, thirty-eight dollars and sixty-two cents ($38.62) per month, plus four dollars seventy-six cents ($4.76) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet thereafter.
    3. Other Services. For outside vendors/agencies who directly haul waste to the plant site, the rate is thirteen cents ($0.13) per gallon; if the waste is deemed hazardous the rate is thirty-nine cents ($0.39) per gallon.
B. The excess charge for commercial users shall be based upon the water meter reading and the presumption that all metered water is discharged into the sewer. Any user may make written application to the Director in accordance with section 13.48.050 and present evidence that a significant portion of the metered water has been diverted or consumed and not discharged into the sewer.
C. Should any user believe that he has been incorrectly assigned to a particular user class or incorrectly assigned a wastewater volume or should any user believe that a significant portion of his metered flow is not discharged into the sewerage system, that user may apply for review of his user charge as provided in Section 13.48.050.
D. Should the director determine that a user is incorrectly assigned to a user class or incorrectly assigned a wastewater volume, the Director shall assign a more appropriate user class or wastewater volume to that user and shall notify that user of such reassignment.
E. The sewer user charge for all occupied property shall begin sixty (60) days after the sewer service becomes available or the day that connection is made to the public sewer, whichever occurs first. Once the sewer user charge has commenced, no credit shall be given for vacancy unless it can be demonstrated that water service to that property from any and all sources has been discontinued. The regular user charge shall be reinstated as soon as water service to that property from any source has begun. If the dates upon which the user charge is commenced or altered does not fall on the first day of a billing period, the rates shall be prorated as provided in section 13.56.560A.
F. A sewer rate surcharge equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the normal sewer rate shall be applied to each user who discharges extraneous flow to the sewer system. Payment of the sewer rate surcharge for the discharge of extraneous flow shall be a charge for services and shall be in addition to other penalties imposed pursuant to chapter 1.12 AMC and 13.52 AMC and shall not relieve a user from the responsibility to comply with Orders to Correct Violation or Notices of Civil Violations issued pursuant to chapter 1.12 AMC or notices to repair side sewers issued pursuant to chapter 13.52 AMC. The regular user charge shall be reinstated as soon as the Director determines that the user has taken appropriate steps to eliminate the discharge of extraneous flow.
(Ord. 6640 § 1, Amended, 01/30/2019; Ord. 6586, Amended, 11/23/2015; Ord. 6565, Amended, 12/10/2014; Ord. 6537, Amended, 12/12/2012; Ord. 6452, Amended, 12/27/2007; Ord. 6421, Amended, 12/13/2006; Ord. 6401, Amended, 04/26/2006; Ord. 6320, Amended, 02/13/2002; Ord. 6280, Amended, 01/31/2001; Ord. 6272, Reenacted, 11/22/2000; Ord. 6270, Reenacted, 11/22/2000; Ord. 6233, Amended, 11/24/1999; Ord. 6228, Amended, 09/08/1999; Ord. 6211, Amended, 01/06/1999; Ord. 6169, Amended, 11/19/1997; Ord. 6140, Amended, 10/30/1996)

13.48.030 Review and revision of rates.
The sewer user charges established in Section 13.48.020 shall, as a minimum, be reviewed biannually and revised periodically to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the treatment works and to maintain the equitability of the user charges with respect to proportional distribution of the costs of operation and maintenance in proportion to each user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works.
(Ord. 6352, Amended, 02/25/2004)

13.48.040 Responsibility, payment, delinquencies and penalties.
A. The person who owns the premises served by the sewerage system shall be responsible for payment of the sewer user charge for that property, notwithstanding the fact that the property may be occupied by a tenant or other occupant who may be required by the owner to pay said charges.
B. The users of the sewerage system shall be billed on a monthly basis for services rendered in accordance with the rate schedule as set forth in section 13.48.020.
C. The date of billing shall be the last day of each month in which the meter is read.
D. Sewer user charges shall be due and payable to the finance department upon date of billing. If payment is not received within twenty-one (21) days of billing date, the amount shall be deemed delinquent.
E. Bills for sewer user charges shall be mailed to the address specified in the application for service unless and until a different owner or user of the property is reported to the Finance Department.
F. In the event of failure to pay sewer charges after they have become delinquent, the city shall have the right to remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes. The expense of discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service, shall be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the property and may be recovered by civil action or such other remedy as may be available to the city.
G. Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including interest accrued and the expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.
H. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.
(Ord. 6352, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6252, Amended, 06/28/2000)

13.48.050 Appeals.
A. A user may appeal the user charge applied pursuant to section 13.48.020 to the premises owned or occupied by the user by making a written application to the Director. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the Director shall notify the user of the date, time and location for an informal hearing of the user's appeal before the Director. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. The Director may combine the appeal of a surcharge applied pursuant to section 13.48.020F with a pending appeal of an Order to Correct Violation or Notice of Civil Violation for the same premises commenced by the user under chapter 1.12 AMC.
B. Following the appeal hearing, the Director shall determine if the user charge has been correctly applied. The Director may continue the hearing for further study of the matter. The decision of the Director shall be final.
C. If the Director determines that the user charge has been incorrectly applied, the user charges for that user shall be recomputed based on the approved revised flow data and the new charges thus recomputed shall be applicable retroactively up to six (6) months, as applicable.
(Ord. 6352, Amended, 02/25/2004)

13.48.060 Sewer fund created.
A. There is created a fund to be known as the sewer fund, and all of the gross revenues received from the charges, rates and penalties collected for the use of the sewerage system charges collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited with the Finance Department and placed in said fund.
B. Expenditures from the sewer fund may be made only for the purpose of engineering, construction and financing costs of a sanitary sewer system and such storm sewers as may be legally constructed in connection therewith, sanitary disposal plant or plants, the operation and maintenance costs of the aforesaid facilities, the payment of principal and interest on any revenue bonds that may be authorized by ordinance of the city council and such collection costs as the city council may authorize to be paid to the Finance Department for rendering collection services for the sewer department.
(Ord. 6352, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6228, Amended, 09/08/1999)

13.48.070 Collecttion of fees—Lien—Sewer deposit.
A. The rates and fees to be collected under this chapter shall be collected by the Finance Department at the same time and in the same manner as charges for domestic water are collected. The charges herein provided for shall become a lien upon the premises in the same manner as is now provided by law. In addition to said lien, the city may disconnect and refuse to furnish water to any premises delinquent in the payment of sewer charges hereinbefore provided. In the event the city shall combine the billing for sewer services with the billing for solid waste and recyclable collection, the city shall have the right to apply any partial payments on utility bills first to the payment of charges for sewer services with the balance to be applied toward the payment of remaining current utility charges, in such order as the Finance Director shall see fit, but lastly to charges for water service.
B. A sewer deposit equal to and in addition to the deposit now required by law for water connections shall be collected from all persons ordering water turn-ons, other than the owners or contract purchasers of the premises to be served, said amount to be held by the city as security for the payment of sewer charges provided for and may be applied to said sewer charges in the event of delinquency.

Chapter 13.52 SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS

Sections:
13.52.010    Definitions.
13.52.020    Public sewers, use and connection.
13.52.030    Connection and charges.
13.52.040    Connection of nonassessed property.
13.52.050    Connection of all plumbing outlets.
13.52.060    Side sewer repair.
13.52.070    Connection notice and charges.
13.52.080    Same—Failure to connect within time allowed—Penalty—Lien.
13.52.090    Failure to connect or repair side or stub sewer.
13.52.100    Side sewer permits and fees.
13.52.110    Exhibition of permit.
13.52.120    Installation.
13.52.130    Community side sewer.
13.52.140    Repair.
13.52.150    Capping.
13.52.160    Inspection.
13.52.170    Materials and workmanship.
13.52.180    Testing.
13.52.190    Variance to installations.
13.52.200    Fees.
13.52.210    Registered side sewer contractors.
13.52.220    Work in rights-of-way—Construction.
13.52.230    Protection.
13.52.240    Maintenance.
13.52.250    General provision requirements.
13.52.260    Grade and depth.
13.52.270    Alignment.
13.52.280    Design standards.
13.52.290    Sewer pipe size.
13.52.300    Manhole.
13.52.310    Trailer and mobile living unit connection provisions.
13.52.320    Clean-out.
13.52.330    Water line location.
13.52.340    Plumbing contractors.
13.52.350    Grafts to public sewers—Wye or tee not found.
13.52.360    Saddles.
13.52.370    Payment for grafts.
13.52.380    Discharge to sewer—Storm or other waters.
13.52.390    Other substances.
13.52.400    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
13.52.410    Violation—Cost liability.
13.52.420    Regulations relating to sampling and analysis—Examination of water and sewage.
13.52.430    Special regulations.
13.52.440    Prohibited connection.
13.52.450    Excavations.
13.52.460    Structures, appurtenances and equipment.
13.52.470    Unauthorized construction of sewers.
13.52.480    Industrial cost recovery.
13.52.490    Severability.
13.52.500    Cumulative penalty provisions.
13.52.510    Violations—Penalty.

13.52.010 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used shall be as set forth in this section. Terms not specifically defined herein shall be as defined in the publication "Glossary Water and Wastewater Control Engineering" published by the American Public Health Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association and Water Pollution Control Federation.
"APWA specifications" means standard specifications for municipal public works construction prepared by the Washington State Chapter, American Public Works Association; latest edition with latest revisions.
"A.S.T.M." means American Society for Testing Materials.
"B.O.D." (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
"Capping permit" means a permit required for the disconnection of sewer service.
"City" means the city of Aberdeen, Washington.
"City sewerage system" means the system of conduits, pumps, treatment plants, and structures, used for the purpose of conveying from their source, treating in any manner, and conveying to final points of disposal, all wastes of any nature permitted by this chapter.
"Cluster living units" means living units, such as trailers, cabins or houses which have utilities operated and maintained by an association or by common owner.
"Commercial service" means all sanitary sewerage system other than domestic service.
"Council" means the city council of the city of Aberdeen, Washington.
"Cover" means the depth of material lying between the top of the sewer or drain and the finish grade immediately above it.
"Domestic service" means any sanitary sewage system serving a living unit.
"Downspout" means a pipe which conducts water from a roof of a building or structure.
"Garbage" means putrescible waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
"Inside" means the side sewer constructed on private property from the plumbing outlet to the side sewers.
"Multiple dwelling" means a multiple family dwelling; namely, a building designed and/or used to house two or more families living independently of each other and including all necessary household functions of each such family, such as motels, hotels and apartments.
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake, bay, or other body of surface or ground water.
"Other structure" means any building other than a single-family or multiple dwelling.
"Outside connection" means any sewer constructed in a public right-of-way and where the public agency who has jurisdiction of such right-of-way requires a permit fee or any other charge.
"Person" means any individual, company, partnership, corporation, association, society or group and the singular tense shall include the plural.
"pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
"Plumbing outlet" means in plumbing, the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side sewer (house connection). The latter begins thirty (30) inches outside the inner face of the building wall.
"Properly shredded garbage" means garbage which has been Garbage shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
"Public sewer" means any sanitary sewers, including but not limited to trunks, laterals, stubs and forcemains and being constructed by the city or any person within the public right-of-way or perpetual easement obtained by the city.
"Sanitary sewage" means wastewater derived from domestic, commercial and industrial wastes and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
"Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sanitary sewage.
"Sewage" means a comprehensive term including industrial waste, storm drainage and wastewater.
"Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
"Side sewer" means a sanitary sewer pipe leading from a plumbing outlet, drain or other facility to the stub sewer of the public sewer system.
"Single-family dwelling" means a structure designed and/or used to house a single family.
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location or attachment to something having location on attachment to something having location on the ground, and shall, in addition, include but not be limited to trailers, mobile homes and housetrailers, but shall not include fences and walls.
"Stub sewer" means a sewer constructed from the lateral or trunk sewer to the property line, or edge of perpetual easement of the property being served.
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, which are largely removable by laboratory filtering.
"Unpolluted water" means water in its natural state or water which, after use for any purpose, is not substantially changed as to chemical or bio-chemical qualities.
"Wastewater" means the spent water of a community. From the standing of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residence and commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
(Prior code § 10.17.010)

13.52.020 Public sewers, use and connection.
All structures located on property assessed for sewers shall be required to connect to the city's sewer system where service is available.
(Prior code § 10.17.020)

13.52.030 Connection and charges.
The owner shall connect all applicable plumbing outlets to the public sewer by the construction of a side sewer at his expense at the point designated by the city; provided, however, that the city shall bear the expense of connection to city sewer where hookup is necessitated by the replacement of an existing public sewer serving the property. Such installation and connection, unless otherwise authorized, shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the date of mailing or personal service of notice to the property owner directing such owner to make such connection.
(Prior code § 10.17.030)

13.52.040 Connection of nonassessed property.
The owner of property that has not been subject to special assessments for sewers by the city may connect structures on that property to the public sewer of the city and obtain sewage disposal service by paying a connection charge in lieu of assessment.
(Prior code § 10.17.040)

13.52.050 Connection of all plumbing outlets.
All plumbing outlets from any building or structure hereafter constructed or made available for human occupation and/or use for any purpose shall, when required by this section, be connected to a public sewer of the city before completion of the construction of such building or structure or before any occupancy or use thereof is allowed. In the event that a public sewer capable of serving that building or structure has not been completed by the city prior to the construction or occupancy of such building or structure, said building or structure shall be connected to the public sewer within ninety (90) days after written notification of public sewer availability.
(Prior code § 10.17.050)

13.52.060 Side sewer repair.
Any needed repair to a side sewer shall be made within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing or personal service of a notice to the owner of the property served notifying such owner to make such repair. In the event of an emergency, the city may establish a shorter period of time for the repair to be made or, if the owner cannot be located or does not promptly make such repairs, the city may make the repairs under the procedure of Sections 13.52.080 and 13.52.090.
(Prior code § 10.17.060)

13.52.070 Connection notice and charges.
The city shall mail to the owner a notice that sewer service is available and all applicable service charges shall begin the first day of the month that begins thirty (30) days after the mailing of such notice.
(Prior code § 10.17.070)

13.52.080 Same—Failure to connect within time allowed—Penalty—Lien.
If any such connection or ordered side sewer repair is not made within the time provided, the city engineer of the city, or such other employee of the city as the city council may designate, is authorized and directed to cause such connection or side sewer repair to be made and to file a statement of the cost thereof with the city comptroller, and thereupon a warrant shall be issued under the direction of the city council and drawn on the sewer fund of the city for the payment of such cost. Such amount, together with a penalty of ten percent plus interest at the rate of eight percent per year upon the total amount of such cost and penalty, shall be assessed against the property, and shall become a lien thereon as provided by RCW 35.67.200. Such total amount, when collected, shall be paid into the sewer fund.
(Prior code § 10.17.080)

13.52.090 Failure to connect or repair side or stub sewer.
Alternatively, the city attorney may be authorized by the mayor and council to bring suit against the owner or other responsible person to compel said owner or responsible person to make the connection or repair required by Sections 13.52.020 through 13.52.080, or to authorize the city to make the connection at the owner's cost, or for such other relief as may be appropriate. The suit may obligate the owner to pay the city's costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney's fees and the penalty authorized by RCW 35.67.190 and provided for herein. The city attorney may be authorized by the mayor and council to bring suit against the owner, or other responsible person to make the needed repair to a side sewer, or stub sewer, as provided in Sections 13.52.020 through 13.52.080, to authorize the city to make the repair at the expense of the owner or other responsible person, or for such other relief as may be appropriate. The suit may obligate the owner or other responsible person to pay the city's costs, disbursements and reasonable attorney's fees.
(Prior code § 10.17.090)

13.52.100 Side sewer permits and fees.
Prior to connection of any house, building, or structure to the public sewer or the making of any repairs, alterations, or addition to any side sewer or line connected thereto, an application for a side sewer permit shall be made by the owner or his agent at the office of the city engineer or his representative. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city engineer or his representative. Upon approval of the application, the city engineer or his representative shall issue a side sewer permit to the applicant, which permit shall be authorization to the applicant to proceed to connect in accordance with the permit. If the applicant proceeds in any manner other than as authorized, the city engineer or his representative may require the applicant to redo any work that is not in accordance with the permit. Any permit shall be valid for ninety (90) days unless extended or renewed by the engineering department upon good cause being shown, upon application therefor, prior to the original expiration date. A renewal permit shall be valid for not more than thirty (30) days.
(Prior code § 10.17.100)

13.52.110 Exhibition of permit.
Any permit required by this chapter shall at all times during the performance of the work and until completion thereof and approval by the city be posted at some conspicuous place at or near the work and must be readily and safely accessible to the city's representative.
(Prior code § 10.17.110)

13.52.120 Installation.
A property owner may install the side sewer on his own property; provided, he complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter. A side sewer contractor, registered in accordance with Section 13.52.210, shall be required for any work on public right-of-way and/or any connection to the main line sewer. Should the owner or occupant choose to employ a bonded side sewer contractor to do the work on this property, such contractor shall obtain the permit in his own name.
(Prior code § 10.17.120)

13.52.130 Community side sewer.
Whenever a side sewer is to be located on property other than the property being served, the owner or owners of the side sewer shall secure a written easement on an appropriate form, covering and granting the right to occupy such property for such purpose. The written easement shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the county auditor and a copy of same shall be furnished to the city prior to issuance of a permit.
(Prior code § 10.17.130)

13.52.140 Repair.
A repair permit shall be obtained from the city for the repair of any minor portion of an existing side sewer on an appropriate form provided by the city. If the repair is not minor, the city shall require the replacement of the existing side sewer. A repair is not minor if the integrity of the side sewer is impaired.
(Prior code § 10.17.140)

13.52.150 Capping.
When any property owner desires to have sewer service terminated for any property because the building or structure thereon is either removed, destroyed or condemned, the side sewer shall be capped or sealed in a manner approved by the city. The owner shall apply to the city for a capping permit, on a form supplied by the city. Upon the issuance of the permit, the owner shall cap his sewer line at the point designated by the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.150)

13.52.160 Inspection.
No person shall cover or backfill any side sewer or public sewer without having called for an inspection and received permission and approval from the city. The city shall be given twenty-four (24) hours notice when such construction is ready for inspection. If any person covers or backfills any side sewer or public sewer without having obtained approval, the city may require the person to uncover the work so that a proper inspection and approval can be made. The city shall have access at reasonable times to all single-family, multiple dwellings and other structures, for the purpose of examining any and all plumbing outlets and/or side sewers for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
(Prior code § 10.17.160)

13.52.170 Materials and workmanship.
The city shall inspect and make such tests deemed necessary to ensure that the new construction meets all requirements of this chapter in respect to materials and workmanship.
(Prior code § 10.17.170)

13.52.180 Testing.
The city shall require all four-inch and six-inch sewer construction to be tested by water exfiltration test in accordance with these regulations. Eight-inch and larger sewer lines may be tested by low pressure air tests in accordance with the current edition of the standard specifications.
(Prior code §10.17.180)

13.52.190 Variance to installations.
Any variance to this chapter shall not be permitted without the express approval of the city and all releases requested by the city shall be obtained in writing by the person requesting such installation.
(Prior code § 10.17.190)

13.52.200 Fees.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, all fees required by Chapter 13.48 of the Aberdeen Municipal Code shall be paid to the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.200)

13.52.210 Registered side sewer contractors.
Any side sewer contractor must be licensed with the state of Washington pursuant to RCW 18.27, the Contractors Registration Act, and must provide the city with proof of his registration.
(Prior code § 10.17.210)

13.52.220 Work in rights-of-way—Construction.
No person shall install stub sewers in any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way unless he is registered with the city pursuant to Section 13.52.210 and has complied with all of the requirements of this chapter. Any work on rights-of-way shall be in conformity with the requirements of the city. It will be the contractor's responsibility to notify the city representatives before beginning work on the right-of-way and to ascertain that the schedule of operation proposed is satisfactory to the city; provided, however, that all work must be completed with dispatch and in a reasonable time. If a contractor or owner has been notified by the city representative that certain work must be done and that person fails to do said work, the city may complete the work and charge the cost thereof to the person responsible.
(Prior code § 10.17.220)

13.52.230 Protection.
Any excavation made by any sewer contractor in a right-of-way shall be protected and guarded by fencing or covering and properly lighted. The protection of the public from the danger of such excavation shall be the responsibility of the sewer contractor; and the contractor shall be liable for any damage caused by his failure to properly protect and guard such excavation. If the contractor or owner fails to properly protect and guard such excavation, the city may properly protect and guard such excavation and charge the cost thereof to the sewer contractor or owner, who shall, upon receiving written notice of the amount of such charge immediately pay the same to the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.230)

13.52.240 Maintenance.
Whenever construction work under this chapter is undertaken on easements or rights-of-way over private property or public right-of-way, all work shall be confined to a reasonable limit and accomplished to cause the least amount of disturbance and a minimum amount of damage.
(Prior code § 10.17.240)

13.52.250 General provision requirements.
A. The standards set forth in Sections 13.52.250 through 13.52.260 are only for gravity lines and not intended for pressure mains. Pressure mains shall meet A.S.T.M. specifications or equivalent.
B. All material and workmanship in connection with the installation of any sewers connected to the public sewer shall be as specified by this chapter and the standard specifications.
C. Connection will be made at the point designated by the city, and all plumbing outlets shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
D. The contractor shall make his own arrangements with the person or property owner(s) for whom he is working as to how the work is to be conducted and scheduled. The contractor shall also reach an understanding with the property owner as to what condition the owner's property is to be left in upon completion of construction. The aforesaid arrangements shall be completed prior to the commencement of work.
E. The contractor shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist on private or public property, or in parking strips, without first having notified the property owner or authorities maintaining same. If necessary to remove trees, shrubs, etc., the contractor shall restore the same to an equal or better condition satisfactory to the property owner(s) and the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.250)

13.52.260 Grade and depth.
A. All side sewers shall be laid on not less than two percent grade (two feet per one hundred (100) feet) nor more than two hundred (200) percent (two foot vertical; one foot horizontal) grade. Side sewers shall not be laid less than thirty (30) inches from any foundation wall of any building; and if there is no foundation wall, not less than thirty (30) inches from the outer lines of any footings, pilings, or building supports. Minimum cover shall be not less than thirty (30) inches at the curb line and not less than thirty (30) inches at the property line, and not less than eighteen (18) inches on private property. Any side sewer laid generally parallel to the curb line shall have not less than thirty (30) inches of cover, and all cover measurements shall be based on the established grade or on existing improvements.
B. If required for connection to the sewer main, the city may approve a variance to a minimum grade of one percent on four-inch and six-inch side sewers upon receiving a signed grade release form from the owner. Whenever a side sewer is laid at more than one hundred percent grade, the city shall require cast iron or plastic pipe which conforms with this chapter.
(Prior code § 10.17.260)

13.52.270 Alignment.
The side sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment so far as is possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with curved pipe with no greater than forty-five (45) degree bends. The connection to the building drain and combination bends of ninety (90) degrees shall include a clean out. All pipe shall be laid on a firm earth bedding containing no material larger than one inch. If the trench bottom contains mud or water, the pipe shall be laid on a four-inch granular base of 3/4-inch minus rock, pea gravel, sand, or combination thereof. Backfill around the pipe and to a point four inches above shall be selected trench side material hand-placed and hand-tamped, with no material larger than one inch.
(Prior code § 10.17.270)

13.52.280 Design standards.
Unless otherwise called for side sewer pipe shall be concrete, clay, cast iron, asbestos cement, or plastic and meet the following specifications:
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
| * Concrete(w/rubber gasket joints)   | A.S.T.M. | C-14X                           |
|                                      |          | Class 2                         |
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
| * Clay (Vitrified)                   | A.S.T.M. | C700                            |
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
| * Cast Iron (w/mechanical or roll-on | A.S.T.M. | A74                             |
| rubber joints)                       |          | C564                            |
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
| * Asbestos Cement (rubber gasket/oil | A.S.T.M. | C428                            |
| resistant)                           |          | C644                            |
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
| * Plastic                            | A.S.T.M. | D3034, SDR(35) (PVC)            |
|                                      |          | D1785 (PVCschedule 40,(80) 120) |
|                                      |          | D3033, SDR41 (PVC)              |
+--------------------------------------+----------+---------------------------------+
All A.S.T.M's specifications shall be the latest issue.
*Bedding, laying and joining to be done in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
(Prior code § 10.17.280)

13.52.290 Sewer pipe size.
A four-inch side sewer shall be required for any single-family dwelling. Two or more single-family dwellings to a maximum of four, two or more cluster living units to a maximum of fourteen (14), and multiple dwellings to a maximum of thirty (30) family units may be served by a six-inch line. Eight-inch lines shall be required for any additional units thereafter. A six-inch side sewer shall be required for any building or structure not listed above.
(Prior code § 10.17.290)

13.52.300 Manhole.
As the city deems necessary, it may prescribe standard manholes in side sewers of a greater length than one hundred (100) feet. The city may prescribe a thirty-six-inch extra shallow manhole in cases where the side sewer depth is forty-two (42) inches or less.
(Prior code § 10.17.300)

13.52.310 Trailer and mobile living unit connection provisions.
Sewer connections for trailers and other mobile living units shall be of the type approved by the city, but in all cases shall be above grade and shall have the ability to be made air- and watertight when not in use.
(Prior code § 10.17.310)

13.52.320 Clean-out.
A clean-out is required whenever more than an 1/8 (451/4 bend) is used. Also, immediately outside the house or structure where the city deems necessary.
(Prior code § 10.17.320)

13.52.330 Water line location.
No water line shall be laid in any form or manner in the same ditch line as the sewer line. The side sewer must be installed so as not to interfere or be constructed within three feet of any water line used for human consumption.
(Prior code § 10.17.330)

13.52.340 Plumbing contractors.
No plumbing contractors shall make connections of side sewers to public sewers of the city without first being registered with the state of Washington pursuant to RCW 18.27.
(Prior code § 10.17.340)

13.52.350 Grafts to public sewers—Wye or tee not found.
If a wye or tee is not found at the measurement given by the city, the contractor shall prospect five feet in all directions from the measurement given and if not found, then notify the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.350)

13.52.360 Saddles.
Unless otherwise specified by the city, prefabricated saddles will be used for any graft to the public sewer. No graft will take place unless the city representative is present.
(Prior code § 10.17.360)

13.52.370 Payment for grafts.
The city shall allow a payment in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00), including Washington State sales tax, for any graft required where a wye or tee is not found in accordance with this section.
(Prior code § 10.17.370)

13.52.380 Discharge to sewer—Storm or other waters.
No person shall discharge, permit or cause to be discharged any storm drainage water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to or in any sanitary sewer.
(Prior code § 10.17.380)

13.52.390 Other substances.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any sanitary sewer:
A. High Temperature Wastes. Any liquor or vapor having a temperature higher than sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius.
B. Flammable or Explosive Wastes. Any gasoline, oils, paint, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
C. Obstructive Wastes. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the city sewage system.
D. Toxic or Poisonous Substance. Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the city sewage system.
E. pH Limitations. Any waters or wastes having a lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
F. Suspended Solids. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the sewage treatment plant, or is in excess of three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter.
G. Noxious Substance. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance, including the contents of septic tanks and cesspools, without written consent of the city.
H. Garbage. Any garbage that is not properly shredded garbage.
I. Paper and Plastic Products. Any paper and plastic products such as cups, dishes, napkins, and milk containers.
J. Greases. Any greases, (animal or vegetable) oils, or matter containing animal or vegetable grease or oil of any nature in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter.
K. B.O.D. Any matter containing a five-day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter.
(Ord. 6325, Amended, 07/10/2002. Prior code § 10.17.390)

13.52.400 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, when, in the opinion of the city, such are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Prior code § 10.17.400)

13.52.410 Violation—Cost liability.
Any person who violates any provision of Sections 13.52.380 through 13.52.400 shall be liable to the city for the damages and costs, if any, caused by such violation.
(Prior code § 10.17.410)

13.52.420 Regulations relating to sampling and analysis—Examination of water and sewage.
All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made above shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" and shall be determined at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side or stub sewer is connected.
(Prior code § 10.17.420)

13.52.430 Special regulations.
No person other than representatives of the city shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written side sewer permit from the city.
(Prior code § 10.17.430)

13.52.440 Prohibited connection.
No person shall connect any type drain, downspout, etc., other than sanitary plumbing fixtures.
(Prior code § 10.17.440)

13.52.450 Excavations.
No person shall leave unguarded any excavation made in connection with the construction or repair of any side sewer or private drain.
(Prior code § 10.17.450)

13.52.460 Structures, appurtenances and equipment.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface, alter, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewer system.
(Prior code § 10.17.460)

13.52.470 Unauthorized construction of sewers.
No person shall commence any sewer construction without the issuance of a permit or otherwise meeting the provisions of this code.
(Prior code § 10.17.470)

13.52.480 Industrial cost recovery.
Any industrial users of a sewer facility constructed with Environmental Protection Agency grant funds awarded after March 1, 1973, shall repay that portion of the grant amount allocatable to the treatment of its wastes. The method of repayment and procedures for handling the repayment shall be in accordance with Sections 35.905-6, 35.905-7, 35.905-8, 35.905-12, 35.928 and 35.935-13 of the Environmental Protection Agency Rules and Regulations for Water Pollution Control Construction Grants for waste treatment works as published in Volume 39, Number 29, of the Federal Register dated February 11, 1974.
(Prior code § 10.17.480)

13.52.490 Severability.
If any section or provision or part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or of any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
(Prior code § 10.17.490)

13.52.500 Cumulative penalty provisions.
Each day that any person, firm, association or corporation shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a separate offense.
(Prior code § 10.17.500)

13.52.510 Violations—Penalty.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each separate offense.
(Prior code § 10.17.510)

Chapter 13.56 WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS

Sections:
13.56.010    Definitions.
13.56.020    Application for service.
13.56.030    Application—Contract provisions.
13.56.040    Effective date of contract.
13.56.050    Connection with main—Premises abutting upon a street.
13.56.060    Connection with main—Premises not abutting upon a street.
13.56.070    Connection with main—Arrangement of service pipe.
13.56.090    Service pipes—Specifications—Maintenance.
13.56.100    Extension of water mains within the city limits.
13.56.110    Extension of water mains outside the city limits.
13.56.130    Public expenditures.
13.56.140    Fees and charges for service - Installation fee required.
13.56.142    System development charges.
13.56.144    Fire flow - Connections restricted.
13.56.150    Private service pipes—New and existing services.
13.56.160    Change in size or location of pipe—Renewal of abandoned service.
13.56.170    Laying of new main—Application for tap.
13.56.180    Failing to comply with Section 13.56.170.
13.56.190    Activation of service—Account set-up charge.
13.56.200    Disconnection of service—Reconnection—Service fee.
13.56.210    Unauthorized turn-on/shutoff at main or removal.
13.56.230    Liability for rates and charges—Lien against premises—Refusal of service.
13.56.240    Water for new construction and remodeling.
13.56.260    Disconnection of service to condemned premises.
13.56.290    Emergency water use restrictions.
13.56.310    Irrigation and use of water hoses.
13.56.340    Right of city to shut off water—Nonliability for damage.
13.56.350    Responsibility for damages resulting from leaks on private premises - right to shut off service or make repairs.
13.56.360    Leaks under a street—Excavation by water department—Repair of leak.
13.56.370    Wasting of water unlawful.
13.56.390    Fire protection services.
13.56.400    Tapping of fire service pipe—Penalty.
13.56.410    Inspection of premises supplied with water from city's mains.
13.56.430    Meters—Property of city—Damaging.
13.56.450    Failure to receive charges in mail.
13.56.470    Enforcement of chapter - assistance from other departments.
13.56.480    Unlawful to obstruct access to or injure fire hydrants.
13.56.490    Unlawful to tamper with fire hydrant, or valves belonging to city - emergence use auxiliary water supply restricted.
13.56.500    Unlawful to damage water deparmtnet property.
13.56.510    Unlawful to pollute city water supply.
13.56.515    Addition of fluoride—Administration.
13.56.520    Unlawful to connect with main or city water pipe without permission.
13.56.530    Remission of rates—Generally.
13.56.540    Payment of water service charges—Delinquencies - shut off notices.
13.56.550    Delinquent payments - Hearings - Adjustments and security deposits.
13.56.560    Uitilty service request notices - Prorated charges - Approved forms required.
13.56.570    Utility service request notices - vacant premises - occupied premises - security deposits.
13.56.580    Questions not covered by chapter.
13.56.600    Violation—Penalty.
13.56.610    Chapter part of contract—Suspension of action where injustice.
13.56.620    Cross-connection Control Program.

13.56.010 Definitions.
In construing the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions and interpretations shall apply:
A. “Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” as used in this chapter means the equivalent of one residential water service of 5/8” or 3/4” diameter, providing water service to a single family residence. One ERU is equal to two hundred six (206) gallons per day, at a nominal flow rate of not more than twenty (20.0) gallons per minute with a residual line pressure not less that that required by current Washington State standards, and a peak day demand of five hundred fifteen (515) gallons per day.
B. “Fire flow” as used in this chapter means the flow rate of the water supply, measured in gallons per minute, required by the local fire authority to be available for firefighting at the point of service pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city. “Fire flow duration” is the period of time that the fire flow is required to be available at the point of service.
C. “Person” as used in this chapter means natural persons, any individual receiver, partnership, firm, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, company, joint-stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise, and governmental units or agencies, including the United States or any instrumentality thereof.
D. “Superintendent” or "director" as used in this chapter means the Public Works Director, or any other employee authorized to act on behalf of the director.
E. Grammatical Interpretation. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. Words in one gender shall include all other genders. Words in the present tense shall include the past and future tenses and vice versa. Words and phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010; Ord. 6149, Amended, 02/12/1997. Prior code § 10.18.010)

13.56.020 Application for service.
A property owner desiring to connect with the domestic water supply of the city of Aberdeen shall present at the office of the water department a completed application for a service connection on a standard form to be furnished for that purpose together with the fees for installation of water service as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.030 Application—Contract provisions.
The standard application form required in AMC 13.56.020 shall contain a contract on the part of the person making the same to pay for the water applied for at the rate and in the manner specified in this chapter, and shall reserve to the city of Aberdeen the right to temporarily discontinue the service at any time without notice to the consumer and shall specify that said contract is subject to all the provisions of this chapter and of any ordinance of the city of Aberdeen relating to the domestic water system hereafter passed and shall provide that in case the supply of water is interrupted or fails by reason of accident or any other cause whatsoever, the city shall not be liable for damages for such interruption or failure, nor shall such failure or interruption for any reasonable period of time be held to constitute a breach of contract on the part of the city or in any way relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.040 Effective date of contract.
All contracts shall take effect from the day they are signed and rates shall be charged from the day the premises are connected with the city's water supply and the water is turned on.
(Prior code § 10.18.040)

13.56.050 Connection with main—Premises abutting upon a street.
Upon the presentation at the office of the superintendent of the treasurer's receipt for the installation fees and execution of the contract hereinbefore provided for, premises abutting a street with a city water main installed shall be connected with the city's water main by service pipe extending at right angles from the main to within ten (10) feet of the property line, which connection shall thereafter be maintained by and kept within the exclusive control of the city. All service pipe and connections from the city's meter shall be installed and maintained by the owner or agent of the property served. Any leak or waste of water on the property owner's side of the meter will be charged for at the rate provided for in this chapter, and the owner of services is responsible for all leaks or damages on account of leaks from the service pipes leading from the city's meter to the premises served.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.060 Connection with main—Premises not abutting upon a street.
Water service connections for premises not abutting a street in which there is a city water main shall be made by tapping the water main at the point nearest to the premises and extending the service pipe at right angles from the main to within ten (10) feet of the property line of the premises to be served and setting the meter. The city may, upon the payment of the actual cost thereof, extend the service to the premises of the applicant along and beneath any public street. but in no case shall such extension exceed one hundred feet in length. All service pipes and connections from the meter to the premises shall be installed and maintained by the owner or agent of the property served.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.070 Connection with main—Arrangement of service pipe.
The service pipe must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may be controlled by a separate meter, and one person must pay for all the water used through said service for his or her own use, or for the use of others to whom it may be accessible.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.090 Service pipes—Specifications—Maintenance.
All persons connecting to a city meter or laying their own private pipe shall be required to use only the pipe recognized and prescribed by the plumbing code adopted by the city of Aberdeen and all the pipes shall be laid not less than eighteen (18) inches below the surface of the ground; except, that in ungraded streets, where the grade is already established, said services and pipes shall be laid at least eighteen (18) inches below said established grade. The superintendent will maintain private service from city mains in streets which are being graded or regraded and will have such access on private property as shall be necessary to maintain such pipes during the work, and shall as soon as practicable upon the completion of such work, relay said pipes in street. Owners shall maintain their private pipes from the city meter to and into their property.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.100 Extension of water mains within the city limits.
When an applicant requests water service to property lying within the city limits but with no main in the adjacent street, a main, as approved by the current edition of the "Standard Specifications for Municipal Public Works Construction" as adopted by the city of Aberdeen, may be installed. Such installation shall be as follows:
A. Installation in city right-of-way. 
    1. The owner or owners of the property to be served shall bear the expense of the main extension. If the main extension is to be installed on city right-of-way, the city of Aberdeen shall have the option of performing the main extension with city crews or under contract let by the city. The superintendent of the water department shall estimate the expense of labor, equipment, materials and overhead and the estimated cost shall be paid to the city treasurer prior to the main installation. The estimate shall include the service connection feein AMC 13.56.140. If the estimated amount, including the service connection fee, does not cover the cost of the installation, the deficit shall be charged to the property for which the installation was made and shall be paid to the city treasurer within sixty (60) days after the determination of the deficit. If the estimated amount is in excess of the actual cost of the installation, any amount in excess of the service connection fee shall be returned to the owner or owners paying for the main extension.
    2. The superintendent of the water department is authorized to contract with the owner or owners of the property to be served to provide a means for recovering a portion of the cost of the main extension by means of a late-comer charge to abutting property owners who did not share in the costs of installation but who wish to connect into the service within ten years following installation of the water main. Any work contract shall be recorded in the office of the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
B. Installation on private property. 
    1. Any portion of a proposed main extension which is located on privately owned property may be installed to city specifications by a competent contractor at the expense of the owner. The owner shall reimburse the city for the cost of an inspector from the water department performing main installation inspections as deemed necessary by the superintendent.
    2. For any main constructed on private property, the city shall have the option of requiring that an easement for access to the water main extension be obtained prior to such construction. Said easement shall be a minimum of five feet each way from the centerline of the pipe. The grantor shall not construct any buildings or structures within the easement without first having obtained the approval of the superintendent of the water department.
C. Local Improvement Districts. The owners of property who desire an extension of the city water main may choose to have the main installed by the formation of a local improvement district ("L.I.D.") as prescribed by law.
D. Ownership of improvements - city may oversize main extenstions.
    1. The city shall own and maintain all water main extensions located upon city property or right-of-way.
    2. If the city's water distribution needs are best served by a main sized larger than the main required of the developer, the city shall pay the difference between the cost of the standard pipe and that of the required pipe size.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.110 Extension of water mains outside the city limits.
A. The superintendent of the water department may approve a request to extend the water main beyond the city limits; provided, that the supply to the proposed area is adequate to satisfy the anticipated demand without adversely affecting the supply to those customers tapped into the existing main. Any such proposal to extend the water main outside the city limits on a permanent basis shall be submitted to the boundary review board as provided in RCW 36.93.090.
B. Main extensions must conform to the "Standard Specifications for Municipal Public Works Construction" as adopted by the city of Aberdeen. The superintendent may require that a plan and profile of the proposed main extension be prepared by a licensed engineer.
C. The city shall have the option of installing said main extension with city personnel and charging the applicant for the expense of labor, equipment, materials and overhead, contracting for the installation with the payment for the installation to be made or reimbursed by the applicant, or permitting the applicant to have the main extended, pursuant to approved plans, by a competent contractor at the applicant's expense. If the extension is installed by a contractor, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of an inspector from the water department performing such main installation inspections as deemed necessary by the superintendent.
D. The superintendent of the water department is authorized to contract with the applicant or others bearing the cost of a main extension to provide for a means of recovering a portion of the costs of the main extension by means of a late-comer charge to abutting property owners who did not share in the costs of installation but who wish to connect into the service within ten years following installation of the water main. Any such contract shall be recorded in the office of the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010. Prior code § 10.18.094)

13.56.130 Public expenditures.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the city from expending public funds to maintain or improve its existing water distribution system or to prohibit the city from spending public funds for such main extensions as may be deemed necessary for planned improvements of the city's water distribution system.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.140 Fees and charges for service - Installation fee required.
A. The Public Works Director shall determins, subject to city council approval and adoption by resolution, standard service fees, rates, and charges for applications, installations, repairs, extensions of service, and other service charges as necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. If the installation fee or service charge is based on the actual cost of labor and materials for a specific service connection the director shall have the authority to determine the final charge.
B. An installation fee shall be paid to the finance department by the person applying for such installation before the work of connecting the main with the property is begun; provided, that whenever the installation fee is based on the cost of labor and materials as determines by the director and the estimated cost is not sufficient to cover the total expense for labor and material, the deficit shall be charged to the property for which such installation was made and to the owner thereof. If the estimated cost is in excess of the actual costs of installation, any amounts in excess of the standard service connection fee shall be returned to the person applying for the installation. All delinquent and unpaid charges for installations shall become a lien upon the premises supplied and be collected in the same manner as other delinquent and unpaid charges for water.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010; Ord. 6308, Amended, 11/07/2001)

13.56.142 System development charges.
A. General. 
    1. In addition to the fees for installation of water service as provided in this chapter, the utility shall collect system development charges (SDC) from property owners that directly benefit from utility-built or privately built water service facilities, except property owners who previously paid their fair share through an LID, ULID, or late-comer charge. Facilities that may be covered in a SDC include, but are not limited to, lines built from the water main to the property line, fire hydrant assemblies, pump stations, reservoirs and distribution and transmission mains.
    2. The SDC is the property owner's equitable share of the established costs of the facilities he/she benefits from. The equitable share may include interest charges applied from the date of construction acceptance of the facility until the property connects, or for a period not to exceed 10 years, whichever is less, at a rate commensurate with the rate of interest applicable at the time of construction of the facility to which the property owner is seeking to connect but not to exceed 10 percent per year; provided, that the aggregate amount of interest shall not exceed the equitable share of the cost of the facility allocated to such property owner.
B. Computation of SDC. 
    1. The SDC authorized by RCW 35.92.025 shall be levied in an amount determined by the director of public works and approved by the city council.
    2. The costs of the facilities shall be allocated to benefiting property owners based on equivalent residential units (ERU) unless the superintendent determines that an allocation based on front footage or other reasonably based methodology better assures equitable sharing of cost by all properties benefiting from the facilities.
    3. SDC that have been paid as a result of prior development activities or through participation in an LID or ULID will not be re-assessed.
C. Payment of SDC. 
    1. SDC shall be paid:
        a. Before a property is allowed to connect to the public water system.
        b. At the time of redevelopment of the property, if SDC apply that have not yet been paid such as charges for new facilities that directly benefit the property.
    2. The utility may enter into contracts with the owners of existing single-family residences and with the owners of redevelopment projects that meet criteria specified by the utility for payment of SDC over time instead of as a lump sum. The utility will charge interest at a rate set by the finance director on any outstanding debt covered by a payment contract. A contract shall be payable in full at the time of closing upon sale of the property. Such installment contract shall describe the property served, shall be acknowledged by the property owner and shall be recorded by the superintendent with the Grays Harbor County auditor at the expense of the property owner. Delinquent payments under such installment contract shall be a lien upon the described property as provided in RCW 35.21.290 and the water service to such property may be cut off in accordance with RCW 35.21.300 until the delinquent installments are paid. Upon full payment of the contract, the superintendent on behalf of the city shall execute and deliver to the property owner a release of such lien.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.144 Fire flow - Connections restricted.
No connection to the city water system shall be allowed, or building permit issued, for new construction, improvements, developments, redevelopments or modifications to existing buildings or portions of buildings that place additional demand on the water system after if the fire flow and flow duration requirements placed upon the water system as a result of such connection would exceed the systems ability to meet the requirements established by the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010; Ord. 6149, Added, 02/12/1997)

13.56.150 Private service pipes—New and existing services.
Before the water will be turned on to any premises connected with the city's mains, the service pipes upon such premises must be made to conform to Chapter 15.32 AMC (Uniform Plumbing Code). Every existing service or branch service that is not in compliance with Chapter 15.21 AMC must be brought into compliance at the owner's expense as soon as the defect is noted.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.160 Change in size or location of pipe—Renewal of abandoned service.
When new buildings are to be erected on the site of the old ones and it is desired to increase the size or change the location of the old service connection, or where a service connection to any premises is abandoned or allowed to be shut off for a period of one year, the superintendent may cut out or remove such service connection, after which, should a service connection be required to said premises, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making an application and paying for a new tap and service in the regular manner. But any change made in tap shall be made from nearest point on property line.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.170 Laying of new main—Application for tap.
When a new main is laid in any street or alley, owners of premises on said street or alley, or within one-half block on side streets, who are being supplied with city water from a private main or other city main or connection to a private service shall make application for tap and shall connect up with a separate service connection to the main as provided for in Section 13.56.050.
(Prior code § 10.18.150)

13.56.180 Failing to comply with Section 13.56.170.
Any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or receiving service from a private water main not complying with Section 13.56.170 within ninety (90) days shall be notified to remove or disconnect such service or water main where it extends along or across any street or alley within the city of Aberdeen. If the service or main is not removed or disconnected within ten (10) days after such notice is served, the city may remove or disconnect such service or main without further notice to the parties affected by such action.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.190 Activation of service—Account set-up charge.
Before the water will be turned on to any premises connected with the city's mains, or any closed account reactivated or new account opened, the owner, or an agent authorized in writing by the owner to open an account in the owner's name, must apply in writing at the water department office and pay an account set-up charge together with all delinquent water service charges which have become a lien against the premises under AMC 13.56.230. The property owner shall have the right to have water bills mailed to a tenant, or agent, but this shall not relieve the property from liability for water charges incurred.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.200 Disconnection of service—Reconnection—Service fee.
A. Except as authorized in subsection C, below, it is unlawful for any owner of any premises connected with the city's water supply to disconnect the water on said premises unless he or she first files in the office of the superintendent, on a printed form to be furnished for that purpose, a written request that the service of water to said premises be discontinued and pays all arrearages on water rates for said premises. When water has been shut off from any premises upon the application of the owner thereof, or for nonpayment of water charges, or for any other cause, it is unlawful for any person again to connect such premises with water without first applying for an account pursuant to Section 13.56.190.
B. Where the owner or occupant requests a service call to turn the water service on or off in order to make repairs or replacements of the service pipe between the city shut-off valve and the building supplied, a service repair fee shall be charged for service calls.
C. Owners of premises may install a private premise isolation valve as approved by the superintendent for the purpose of turning the water service on or off without making a service call or incurring a service repair fee. If a service call is required to assist in the operation of a private premise isolation valve a service repair fee will be charged.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.210 Unauthorized turn-on/shutoff at main or removal.
When a water service has been shut off or disconnected by the city for any cause, and the service is re-connected or turned back on by the owner or occupant, or for the benefit of the owner or occupant, no remission of rates will be made on account of its having been shut off. In cases where a meter reading is not available the director shall estimate the monthly charge from the date the city shut-off or disconnected the service. In addition to the charges for water an "unauthorized activation fee" shall be charged to the account. The director, in order to prevent further unauthorized connections at the premises served, may shut off the water at the main, or remove a portion of the service connection in the street. If the owner of the property was responsibile for, or directly benefited from, the unlawful activation the actual cost of cutting out and reinstating the water supply shall be charged against the account for the premises.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.230 Liability for rates and charges—Lien against premises—Refusal of service.
A. The city shall have a lien against the premises to which water services were furnished for four months charges therefor due or to become due, but not for any charges more than four months past due; provided, that the owner of the premises or the owner of a delinquent mortgage thereon may give written notice to the superintendent to cut off service to such premises accompanied by payment or tender of payment of the then delinquent and unpaid charges for such service against the premises together with a cut-off charge, whereupon the city shall have no lien against the premises for charges for such service thereafter furnished, nor shall the owner of the premises or the owner of a delinquent mortgage thereon be held for the payment thereof.
B. In case any charges for water become a lien against any premises, the water shall be cut off until such charges are paid. No change of ownership or occupancy shall affect the application of this section.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.240 Water for new construction and remodeling.
Water for new construction and remodeling will only be furnished upon the application of the owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner to apply for service. All water for new construction or remodeling shall be charged against the property upon which it is used and the owner thereof, and all delinquent and unpaid charges shall become a lien upon the premises supplied and be collected in the same manner as other delinquent and unpaid charges for water. Water for new construction shall be furnished for up to six months, and water for remodeling for up to two months, without monthly billing statements after which time the account will either be activated, together with other utility services, and all charges for water used during the construction or remodeling period will be brought current or the service will be shut off. The Director may for good cause authorize extensions of the six month or two month periods, upon payment of water charges only, where building permits are still active and other city utility services are not being utilized.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.260 Disconnection of service to condemned premises.
The Building Official and county health officer shall report in writing to the director all buildings or premises condemned or closed by their orders, such report to contain the official house number, street name, the name of the owner of such building or premises, and the date the premises were ordered to be vacated. The director shall shut off or disconnect water service to the premises as required by the order of the Building Official or health officer. Water service necessary to repair the premises or comply with an abatement order may be provided pursuant to AMC 13.56.240.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.290 Emergency water use restrictions.
A. Director may restrict water use. The use of water for any purpose other than domestic consumption and sanitation may be restricted or prohibited in times of emergency or water shortage as determined by the director.
B. Public notice. The director shall issue water use restrictions in writing setting forth the types of uses or means of distribution prohibited or restricted, the time of day or geographic areas affected, and any other restrictions necessary to preserve the city's domestic water supply. The restrictions shall be published in the official city newspaper before they take effect. In the event an emergency prevents prior publication of restrictions, the restrictions shall take effect immediately upon posting and shall be published as soon as practicable.
C. Penalties. Any person violating a water use restriction imposed under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any criminal penalty, the director may shut-off or disconnect water service to the premises if necessary to prevent repeated violations. The account for any water service shut-off or disconnected shall be charged a service fee for both the shut-off and any subsequent reactivation.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.310 Irrigation and use of water hoses.
A. It is unlawful for any person to use water for sprinkling or irrigating lawns, gardens, flower beds, plants, trees, shrubs, or parking strips, or for washing cars, hosing windows, woodwork, porches, steps or walks, through any hose greater than one (1) inch in diameter or nozzle with a flow rating greater than XXX gallons per minute, or through any leaky or defective hose nozzle, or through more than one set of hose or through a hose with a nozzle detached, or through such hose with or without such nozzle attached.
B. It is unlawful for any person wilfully to place any automatic sprinkling device or wilfully place or hold any hose in such position or manner that water there from falls on any person while on any public street or sidewalk.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.340 Right of city to shut off water—Nonliability for damage.
The city reserves the right at any time, without notice, to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates, or any other reason, and the city shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting of boilers, supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of any pipes, or fixtures, stoppages or interruption of water supply, or any other damage, resulting from the shutting off of the water.
(Prior code § 10.18.330)

13.56.350 Responsibility for damages resulting from leaks on private premises - right to shut off service or make repairs.
The service pipes, connections and other apparatus within any private premises must be kept in good repair and protected from freezing at the expense of the owner or lessee, who will be responsible for all damages resulting from leaks and breaks. In case of neglect to promptly repair any service or fixtures, or make any changes or alterations required in this chapter, the superintendent shall have authority when deemed necessary to shut-off the water service or to go on the premises and make or cause to be made such changes, alterations or repairs, and charge the same against the premises and the owner thereof.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.360 Leaks under a street—Excavation by water department—Repair of leak.
Where there is a leak under the street, and it is doubtful whether the water comes from a break in the city main, or from a private service pipe, the water department will make an excavation to determine which it is from. If the leak is found to be from the main, the water department will make all repairs, free of charge; but if it is from the service pipe, the owner of the property or agent will be notified and must immediately take charge of the excavation, repair the leak, and replace the street, and be responsible for all damages which may result. In case the owner or agent does not make repairs at once, the water department will proceed, and all bills for labor and material will become a charge against said property and shall be collected from the owner or agent at the end of the month. In case the bill is not paid, the enforcement of payment thereof will be performed in the same manner as for the payment of bills for water rentals.
(Prior code § 10.18.350)

13.56.370 Wasting of water unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes, closets, faucets, or other fixtures, or to use water closets without self-closing valves, or allow any pipes of faucets to run open to prevent the service from freezing or for any other reason, or to use the water for purposes other than those named in the application upon which rates for water are based, or for any other purpose than that for which his contract provides, or to use it in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Prior code § 10.18.360)

13.56.390 Fire protection services.
A. Connections with the city mains for standpipe and sprinkler service to be used for protection in case of fire, will be made upon application thereof as provided in Section 13.56.020 of this chapter. Such connections must be made entirely separate from the regular service taps, the complete installation to be made under the supervision of the water department and paid for by the applicant.
B. To cover the cost of carrying a supply of water under pressure in such service, cost of inspection and possibility of leakage and waste, an annual charge will be made at the rates to be provided in the rules of the water department.
C. Every valve or outlet must be sealed. Seals must be broken only in case of fire and in such case prompt notification must be made to the director, and the valve will be resealed. A broken seal fee will be charged to the premises served for each sealed valve opened without an immediate notification to the water department.
D. The premises upon which any such fire protection service is installed shall be opened to the inspection of any authorized representative of the water department at all times, and the owner or tenant shall give such representative all reasonable facilities for making the inspection, and any information he may require. The owner or tenant can test the apparatus at any time by notifying the superintendent of water that such a test is desired, and a time will be fixed for the test to be made; no water shall be used for commercial purposes from fire hydrants or service pipes for fire hydrants. All service for fire protection and sprinkler systems shall be kept separate and disconnected from water pipes used for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010. Prior code § 10.18.380)

13.56.400 Tapping of fire service pipe—Penalty.
Any property owner or lessee on whose premises a fire protection service is installed, who shall tap or allow to be tapped, any fire service pipe on his or her premises, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior code § 10.18.390)

13.56.410 Inspection of premises supplied with water from city's mains.
The superintendent shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable hours all parts of buildings or premises supplied with water from the city's mains for the purpose of making assessments, inspecting the condition of pipes and fixtures, noting the amount of water used, and the manner in which it is used.
(Prior code § 10.18.400)

13.56.430 Meters—Property of city—Damaging.
A. All meters shall be and remain the property of the city. The charge for flat or metered fire service shall be a ready-to-serve charge, and charge for water consumed.
B. In all cases where meters are lost, injured or broken by carelessness or negligence of owners or occupants of premises, they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the superintendent and the cost charged against the owner or occupant, and in case of nonpayment, water shall be shut off and will not be turned on until such charge and the charge for turning on the water are paid. In event of the meter getting out of order by failing to register properly, the consumer shall be charged on an estimate made by the superintendent on the average monthly consumption during the last three months that the same was in good order, or from what he may consider to be the most reliable data at his command.
(Prior code § 10.18.440)

13.56.450 Failure to receive charges in mail.
Failure to receive mail will not be recognized as a valid excuse for failure to pay rates when due. Change in ownership of property and change in mailing addresses must be filed in writing at the office of the superintendent.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.470 Enforcement of chapter - assistance from other departments.
The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the Cross-Connection Control Program adopted pursuant to AMC 13.56.620, and all other ordinances relating to the operation of the city's water utility. It shall be the duty of the employees of the police, fire, engineering, streets and sewer departments to give vigilant aid to the director in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and to this end they shall report all violations thereof which come to their knowledge to the director. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to report immediately to the driector in case of fire in premises having metered service for fire protection purposes that the fire has occurred therein.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.480 Unlawful to obstruct access to or injure fire hydrants.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt, or other material, or to open or operate any fire hydrant, or draw or attempt to draw water therefrom, or to wilfully or carelessly injure the same.
(Prior code § 10.18.490)

13.56.490 Unlawful to tamper with fire hydrant, or valves belonging to city - emergence use auxiliary water supply restricted.
A. It is unlawful for any person, except when duly authorized by the superintendent, or who shall be a member of the fire department, to open, operate, close, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything with any fire hydrant, or valve belonging to the city.
B. Any person requiring the use of any hydrant or valve belonging to the city for auxiliary water supply must make written application for the same in advance to the superintendent. The superintendent shall require the applicant to execute a contract containing the appropriate backflow prevention measures under the city;s Cross-Connection Control Program for the particular use intented and requiring payment of all fees and charges for equipment and water use. The superintendent may require that tanker trucks and other auxiliary supply vessels use a designated hydrant filling station maintained by the city. All hydrant use shall be metered. The superintendent may require a deposit in advance for supplying such water.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.500 Unlawful to damage water deparmtnet property.
It is unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the superintendent, to disturb, interfere with or damage any water department facility or equipment, including any water main, water pipe, machinery, tools, meters, or any other appliances, buildings, improvements, lawns, grass plots, flowers, vines, bushes or trees belonging to, connected with or under the control of the municipal water supply system of the city of Aberdeen.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.510 Unlawful to pollute city water supply.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, or suffer to be deposited, in any spring, well, stream, river, reservoir, or lake, the water of which is, or may be, used for drinking purposes, or on any property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city of Aberdeen as a water shed or drainage basin for the water system of the city of Aberdeen, or any part or portion thereof, any matter or thing whatsoever, dangerous or deleterious to health, or any matter or thing which may or could, pollute the waters of such spring, well, stream, river, reservoir, lake or water system.
(Prior code § 10.18.520)

13.56.515 Addition of fluoride—Administration.
A source of fluoridation approved by the state of Washington Department of Health shall be added to the city of Aberdeen water supply under the rules and regulations of said department, such addition to be administered by the superintendent.
(Ord. 6191, Added, 07/15/1998)

13.56.520 Unlawful to connect with main or city water pipe without permission.
It is unlawful for any person to make connections with any fixtures or connect any pipe with any water main or water pipe belonging to the municipal water supply system, without first complying with Section 13.56.020.
(Prior code § 10.18.530)

13.56.530 Remission of rates—Generally.
Remission of rates shall only be made on recommendation of the public works committee and adopted by the city council; provided, that a consumer whose meter bill is excessive over bills of the preceding three months, and the consumer declares that his or her use of water was not in excess of previous months, the superintendent shall investigate such premises; if he finds leaky pipes and said leaks are so concealed that the consumer would not ordinarily in the occupation of the premises discover said leaks, then and in that event, the superintendent may grant said consumer credit for a part of the water so used. In the adjustment of an excessive bill caused by a leaky water pipe, or other common causes, the superintendent shall, by considering the past three months use of water, so make an adjustment that the city and the owner each shall stand one-half of the loss by leakage over and above the ordinary use of water; provided, that all pipes and fixtures on the premises shall have been immediately repaired, upon the consumer discovering, or being notified of said leak. In the event of a broken pipe caused by freezing, floods, slides, or other unforseen cause, adjustments may be made by the superintendent in conformance with foregoing paragraph, when in his judgment, proper precautions were taken to protect said water pipes from such damages.
(Prior code § 10.18.540)

13.56.540 Payment of water service charges—Delinquencies - shut off notices.
A. All fixed rates, flat rates and ready-to-serve rates for water service by the city shall be billed and payable monthly.
B. All metered water accounts shall be billed and payable monthly. Metered accounts shall be charged the minimum meter rate, together with a charge for water used in excess of the minimum rate during the preceding period. Meter readings shall be made monthly.
C. All water charges shall be paid at the finance department during regular business hours. In the event the water charges are not received within twenty-one (21) days of date of billing, the same shall be delinquent. When the twenty-first day falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the date of delinquency shall be the next following business day. In the event of any delinquency, the City shall have all remedies as provided in this chapter or by any other applicable law, including, without limitation, liens and/or shutting off the service. A delinquency charge will be assessed against the account, regardless of whether the water has been shut off or not. Whenever water service is shut off by reason of delinquency a servoce restoration charge shall be made in advance to have water service restored.
D. Before any water service is shut off for delinquency, the director shall provide written notice of nonpayment at least 10 days prior to actual shut off of service. The written notice shall be mailed to the premises' occupant and owner or owner's agent, if the owner provides written instructions to mail notices to an agent. The notice shall include the following information:
    1. That payment for service is overdue, the total amoutn due, and that the statutory lien may be imposed;
    2. That service will be shut off unless payment in full is made to the City within 10 days; that tenants in possession will not be required to pay delinquencies for previous occupants who moved out before the currect occupants moved in;
    3. The address and telephone number to contact for billing information or to request a hearing;
    4. That service will not be shut off while a hearing is pending;
    5. That the City will charge a shut-off and turn-on fee before service is resumes following a shut-off of service.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010; Ord. 6252, Amended, 06/28/2000)

13.56.550 Delinquent payments - Hearings - Adjustments and security deposits.
The director, or the director's designee, shall conduct any hearings requested to contest delinquencies, shut-off notices, or security deposit requirements. If the director determines that the secuity deposit required was not justified by a tenant's own credit worthiness or the delinquency was due to billing errors, the intervention of strangers, sickness, or other meritorious causes, the director may correct any erros in the amount of the security deposit or billing and issue a credit memorandum receipt in lieu of the delinquency charge and shall state on the credit memorandum receipt the cause or causes for issuance.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.560 Uitilty service request notices - Prorated charges - Approved forms required.
A. All utility service request notices to activate or discontinue services shall be made in writing upon a form provided by the water department for that purpose and shall be filed with the Finance Department during regular business hours. The director may accept requests to discontinue service by mail when the writing substantially complies with the approved form, is signed by the owner listed on the account, and contains the street address of the premises. It is the responsibility of the owner or designated agent to confirm that service rrequest deposited in the mail were actually received by the city.
B. When a utility service request to activate or discontinue services is received by the city, monthly charges for water, and all other city utility services billed through the water account shall be prorated. The effective date for prorating will be the business day that the notice is received by the city.
C. Premises shall not be supplied with water, except for new construction or remodeling, until the correct house number is in place near the entrance of the building.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.570 Utility service request notices - vacant premises - occupied premises - security deposits.
A. The owner of any vacant or occupied premises may at any time sign a utility service request notice to activate water service and other mandatory city utilities billed through the water account to the premises upon a form provided for that purpose at the office of the water department.
B. The owner of any vacant premises may at any time discontinue services by filing a service request notice. Upon the filing of the request and the payment of all service and shut-off charges, the owner shall be relieved of further responsibility regarding water charges accrued against the premises and the water service shall be shut off.
C. The owner of any dwelling unit occupied by someone other than the owner may at any time file a service request notice to discontinue services for occupied premises on a form provided for that purpose by the water department. The owner shall provide the names, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers, if known, of the persons occupying the dwelling unit. Upon the filing of the request and the payment of all service and shut-off charges, the owner shall be relieved of further responsibility regarding water charges accrued against the premises. The water service to occupied dwelling units shall not be shut off on the owner’s request until at least ten days notice has been posted on the premises informing the occupants that: [1] the owner has signed a shut off order; [2] the occupants may maintain water service by paying all current charges from the date of the shut-off order; [3] the amount of the current charges due; [4] whether or not a security deposit will be required; [5] the address and telephone number to contact for billing questions or to request a hearing; and [6] service will not be shut-off while a hearing is pending.
D. The director may require security deposits, as approved by the city council, as a condition of authorizing continued water service to occupied dwelling units after the owner of the premises has signed a shut-off order. The security deposit shall be based on the occupant’s own creditworthiness and shall be uniformly applied to all tenants where the owner is delinquent or has signed a shut-off notice.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.580 Questions not covered by chapter.
The superintendent, with the approval of the Public Works committee shall have the authority to decide any question which may arise and which is not fully covered by any of the provisions contained in this chapter, and their decision in such cases shall be final.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.600 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.610 Chapter part of contract—Suspension of action where injustice.
A. A copy of this chapter may be obtained without charge by all owners of property and consumers of water. The provisions of the chapter shall be considered a part of the contract made between the city and every owner and consumer.
B. When it appears to the direcotr that a strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would work a gross injustice upon a utility customer, the director is authorized to suspend action in such case until it is referred to the public works committee and acted upon as provided in AMC 13.56.580.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

13.56.620 Cross-connection Control Program.
A. Adoption of state regulations – Director authorized to adopt further regulations. Rules and regulations of the Washington State Department of Health regarding public water supplies, entitled “Cross-Connection Control,” WAC 246-290-490, as they presently exist and as they may, from time to time, be amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. The Public Works Director is authorized and directed to adopt and enforce a Cross-Connection Control Program (CCP) regulating the provision of water services. The CCP shall be consistent with state regulations and this chapter. The CCP shall be published on the city’s web page and copies shall be furnished without charge upon request. It shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with the regulations adopted by the director and published in the CCP.
B. Backflow prevention assemblies to be installed. In addition to situations requiring backflow prevention assemblies as set forth subsection A, above, the city reserves the right, as a condition of water service, to require any party seeking water service to install a backflow prevention assembly when the city, or the city’s designated cross-connection control specialist, determines a need to protect the city’s water system and/or facilities. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and maintained by, and at the expense of, the customer.
C. Inspection of backflow prevention assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies installed shall be inspected and tested:
    1. At the time of initial installation;
    2. Annually after initial installation;
    3. After the device is repaired;
    4. After the device is moved, relocated, or reinstated; and
    5. More often if tests indicate repeated failures
    The city shall provide 30-day advance notification to the customer of the required annual test of the backflow prevention assembly. Failure of the city to provide notification shall not affect the customer’s duty to obtain testing under this section. The customer shall have such test performed by a Backflow Assembly Tester certified by the Washington State of Health, and the results shall be delivered to the city on a form prescribed by the city. If such test is not performed within the time required herein, the city may initiate proceedings for termination of water service.
D. Repair, overhaul or replacement. The customer shall be responsible for the repair, overhaul or replacement of backflow prevention assemblies as required by the city whenever they are found to be defective within a time period as required by the city.
(Ord. 6497, Amended, 03/24/2010)

Chapter 13.60 WATER—RATES AND CHARGES

Sections:
13.60.010    Rates.
13.60.020    Charges for temporary connections.
13.60.030    Ready-to-serve charge of different size services for fire protection.
13.60.040    Rates for users outside corporate limits.
13.60.050    Industrial water for commercial purposes.
13.60.060    Computation of rates per meter.

13.60.010 Rates.
The following rates, consisting of a fixed-rate minimum plus a tiered metered rate for additional consumption, shall be charged for the use of city water within the corporate limits of the city:
+-----------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
|        Fixed-rate minimum - in hundred cubic feet         | Monthly Rate |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Single-Family/Duplex residential - 0 - 3.99               | 25.78        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Single-Family/Duplex residential - 4.00 - 12.99 (A duplex | 31.58        |
| with two individual meters shall be billed as two single  |              |
| family residences)                                        |              |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
| Commercial (for 5/8 & 3/4 inch meters) - 0 - 10.99        | 33.12        |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+--------------+
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| Consumption in hundred cubic feet | Additional charge per hundred |
|                                   |          cubic feet           |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 11.00 - 12.99 (commercial only)   | 3.78                          |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 13.00 - 30.99                     | 3.78                          |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 31.00 - 60.99                     | 3.27                          |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 61.00 - 100.99                    | 2.57                          |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| 101 - up                          | 2.07                          |
+-----------------------------------+-------------------------------+
B. The fixed-rate minimum charge for commercial accounts, multiple family dwellings, mobile home parks, and housing projects with meter sizes larger than three-fourths-inch diameter shall be determined by applying the above additional consumption charges to the following minimum consumption levels:
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| Minimum Consumption (in hundreds of cubic feet) | Meter size (in inches) |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 12                                              | 1                      |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 26                                              | 1 1/2                  |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 48                                              | 2                      |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 105                                             | 3                      |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 190                                             | 4                      |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 440                                             | 6                      |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
| 750                                             | 8 and larger.          |
+-------------------------------------------------+------------------------+
(Ord. 6555, Amended, 01/08/2014; Ord. 6536, Amended, 12/12/2012; Ord. 6422, Amended, 12/13/2006; Ord. 6351, Repealed & Replaced, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6271, Reenacted, 11/22/2000; Ord. 6232, Amended, 11/24/1999; Ord. 6208, Amended, 12/16/1998; Ord. 6168, Amended, 11/19/1997; Ord. 6139, Amended, 10/23/1996)

13.60.020 Charges for temporary connections.
Temporary connections for circuses, carnivals, cisterns, tanks,or similar uses shall be charged a minimum fixed-rate of two-hundred dollars ($200.00) and the additional consumption metered charges in Section 13.60.010.
(Ord. 6351, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6271, Reenacted, 11/22/2000; Ord. 6232, Amended, 11/24/1999; Ord. 6208, Amended, 12/16/1998; Ord. 6168, Amended, 11/19/1997; Ord. 6139, Amended, 10/23/1996)

13.60.030 Ready-to-serve charge of different size services for fire protection.
The monthly charge for all fire protection ready-to-serve services shall be as follows:
+-----------------------------------+--------+
| Four inches and small in diameter | 25.00  |
+-----------------------------------+--------+
| Six and eight inches in diameter  | 50.00  |
+-----------------------------------+--------+
| Ten inches and larger in diameter | 100.00 |
+-----------------------------------+--------+
(Ord. 6351, Amended, 02/25/2004)

13.60.040 Rates for users outside corporate limits.
Beginning March 1, 2004, the rate charged for users of domestic water outside the corporate limits of the city shall be twenty-five (25%) higher than the rates scheduled in Section 13.60.010; provided, however, that existing contract rights shall not be affected hereby.
(Ord. 6351, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6232, Amended, 11/24/1999; Ord. 6208, Amended, 12/16/1998; Ord. 6168, Amended, 11/19/1997; Ord. 6139, Amended, 10/23/1996)

13.60.050 Industrial water for commercial purposes.
The rates for water charged for users of industrial water for commercial purposes shall be individually contracted for with the city.
(Ord. 6351, Amended, 02/25/2004; Ord. 6168, Amended, 11/19/1997)

13.60.060 Computation of rates per meter.
The rates by meter established by this chapter shall be computed separately on the basis of the reading on each individual metered service regardless of the number of meters any particular user may have.
(Ord. 6351, Amended, 02/25/2004)

Chapter 13.64 LOW INCOME SENIOR CITIZENS—RATE REMISSION

Sections:
13.64.010    Senior citizens—Reduced rate purpose and applicability.
13.64.020    Eligibility.
13.64.030    Discounts.
13.64.040    Applications.
13.64.050    Maintenance of eligibility.
13.64.060    Severability.
13.64.070    Penalty.

13.64.010 Senior citizens—Reduced rate purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement RCW 74.38.070 by providing for reduced water and sewer utility service rates for eligible customers who are low-income senior citizens, by means of a one billing period remission or partial remission of rates. These provisions shall supplement the relevant chapters providing for water and sewer rates.
(Prior code § 10.24.010)

13.64.020 Eligibility.
A. A utility customer is eligible for the low-income senior citizen’s reduced utility rate if the customer meets the following criteria:
    1. The utility customer or his or her spouse must be sixty-five (65) years of age or older, as of December 1st of the year in which the application is submitted;
    2. The total gross income or anticipated gross income from all sources for all persons residing in the household from December 1st of the preceding year to November 30th of the year the application is submitted, does not exceed the statewide monthly need standards for cash assistance as established by WAC 388-478-0015, as now or hereafter amended.
    3. The utility customer has been a utility customer of the city of Aberdeen since January 1st of the applicable year.
    4. The utility payments are fully paid up to date;
    5. The living unit has an individual utility account with the city.
B. The rate reduction discount shall be applied only to the primary residence occupied by the person who meets the preceding criteria.
(Ord. 6600 § 1, Amended, 11/09/2016; Ord. 6205, Amended, 11/18/1998; Ord. 6133, Amended, 08/21/1996. Prior code § 10.24.020)

13.64.030 Discounts.
Discounts for eligible utility customers shall be made by means of a credit applied to the first billing after December 1st of the year in which the application is submitted. The credit shall be at the following rates:
A. The flat rate fee for water and sewer service for two (2) months if the gross household income is fifty (50) percent or less of the applicable amount set forth in Section 13.64.020(A)(2);
B. The flat rate for water and sewer for one (1) month if the gross household income is more than fifty (50) percent and does not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the applicable amount set forth in Section 13.64.020(A)(2).
(Ord. 6600 § 2, Amended, 11/09/2016. Prior code § 10.24.030)

13.64.040 Applications.
The public works system shall prescribe forms for applications under this section. With the consent of the city council, the public works system may contract with another agency or agencies for the monitoring of eligibility. Applications will be received only during the months of October and November, and applications shall be only for the current year.
(Prior code § 10.24.040)

13.64.050 Maintenance of eligibility.
A customer shall immediately notify the public works system of any change in her or his eligibility which affects entitlement for a discount under this chapter. No customer shall be entitled to a discount under this chapter until that customer's application has been approved by the city. The public works system may request updated eligibility reports of customers receiving the low-income senior citizen's discount and shall remove from the eligibility list all customers who no longer qualify or who fail to respond.
(Prior code § 10.24.050)

13.64.060 Severability.
It is the intent of the Aberdeen City Council that if any provision of this chapter is held to be unlawful or unconstitutional, either on its face or in its application, all provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(Prior code § 10.24.060)

13.64.070 Penalty.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to obtain or to attempt to obtain a low-income senior citizen's discount or credit by providing false information to the city or by failing to provide the city with updated information affecting eligibility.
(Prior code § 10.24.070)

Chapter 13.70 STORM AND SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:
13.70.010    Purpose.
13.70.020    Definitions.
13.70.030    Utility established.
13.70.040    Transfer of property.
13.70.050    Storm and surface water fund created.
13.70.060    Setting of fees and charges.
13.70.070    Applicability.
13.70.080    Review and approval of storm and surface water drainage plans.
13.70.090    Exemptions.
13.70.100    Variances.
13.70.110    Permits – Plan approval required.
13.70.120    Plan approval – Conditions.
13.70.130    Low impact development (LID).
13.70.140    Design criteria.
13.70.150    Maintenance agreement.
13.70.160    Inspection.
13.70.170    Preventive maintenance.
13.70.180    Penalties.
13.70.190    Cross connections prohibited.
13.70.200    Illicit discharges prohibited – Certain discharges allowed – Conditions.
13.70.210    Easements.
13.70.220    Appeals – Filing deadlines.

13.70.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with increased storm and surface water runoff. Proper management of storm and surface water runoff and implementation of low impact development (LID) practices will minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel erosion and sedimentation, assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, reduce local flooding, and maintain, post-development, as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics, while complying with the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (SWMMWW) and the city’s National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit as issued, and as may be amended, by the Washington State Department of Ecology. This chapter also establishes a storm and surface water system as a utility service of the city.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this chapter:
A. “Adverse impact” means any deleterious effect on water or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses, which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity or stability, or which unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.
B. “Agricultural land management practices” means those methods and procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
C. “Applicant” means any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of a project.
D. “Aquifer” means a porous water-bearing geologic formation generally restricted to materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water.
E. “City engineer” means the city of Aberdeen public works director or his or her designee.
F. “Clearing” means the removal of trees and brush from the land, but shall not include the ordinary mowing of grass.
G. “Detention structure” means a permanent structure designed to store runoff for discharge at rates approximating what would have occurred under predevelopment conditions.
H. “Develop land” or “development” means to change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional construction or alteration.
I. “Developer” means a person, group or company engaged in land or property development or proposed development.
J. “Director” or “public works director” means the city of Aberdeen public works director or his or her designee.
K. “Drainage area” means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane which is enclosed by a ridge line.
L. “Engineer” means a civil engineer or civil engineering firm that has been retained or employed by the city to perform engineering services.
M. “Easement” means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for specific purpose(s), and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
N. “Exemption” means those land development activities that are not subject to the storm and surface water management requirements contained in this chapter.
O. “Flow attenuation” means detaining or retaining runoff to reduce the peak discharge.
P. “Grading” means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof.
Q. “Infiltration” means the passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
R. “Off-site storm and surface water management” means the design and construction of a facility necessary to control storm and surface water from more than one (1) development.
S. “On-site storm and surface water management” means the design and construction of systems necessary to control storm and surface water within an immediate development.
T. “Retention structure” means a permanent structure that provides for the storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water or infiltration.
U. “Sediment” means soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
V. “Site” means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one (1) ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project.
W. “Stabilization” means the prevention of soil movement by any of various vegetative and/or structural means.
X. “Storm and surface water management” means:
    1. For quantitative control, a system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by manmade changes to the land; and
    2. For qualitative control, a system of vegetative, structural and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff; and
    3. For “low impact development (LID),” a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design. LID best management practices (BMPs) include, but are not limited to, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse.
Y. “Storm drainage plan” means a set of drawings or other documents, submitted by a person as a prerequisite to obtaining a storm drainage permit, which contain all of the information and specifications pertaining to storm and surface water management.
Z. “Stripping” means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage, or removal of topsoil.
AA. “Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington” means the stormwater manual published by the Washington State Department of Ecology and adopted by the city.
BB. “Variance” means the modification of the minimum storm and surface water management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter.
CC. “Watercourse” means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, swale, conduit, culvert, drain, or ravine, in and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water.
DD. “Watershed” means the total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
EE. “Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit” means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater permit issued to the city by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
FF. “Wetlands” means an area that has saturated soils or periodic high ground water levels and vegetation adapted to wet conditions and periodic flooding.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6526, Amended, 01/25/2012; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.030 Utility established.
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, there is created and established a storm and surface water drainage utility for the city of Aberdeen pursuant to Chapters 35.67, 35.92, 90.03, and 90.54 RCW, and by Article 11, Section 11, of the constitution of the state of Washington. The primary purpose of this utility shall be the planning, design, construction, maintenance, administration, and operation of all city storm and surface water facilities and for overseeing the design, construction, and maintenance of improvements on private property where these may affect storm and surface water management. The utility shall be administered by the public works director. The city council is authorized to make funds available to the utility by appropriation, borrowing, or by other means in accordance with laws of Washington state for the establishment, maintenance, and operation of this utility.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.040 Transfer of property.
All properties, property rights, and interests of every kind or nature owned or held by the city, however acquired, insofar as they relate to or concern storm or surface water facilities, are hereby transferred to the storm and surface water utility, including, by way of example and not limitation, all properties, rights and interest acquired by adverse possession or by prescription in and to the drainage and storage of storm or surface waters over and under lands, watercourses, streams, ponds, and estuaries to the full extent of inundation caused by the largest storm or flood condition.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.050 Storm and surface water fund created.
A. Pursuant to state law, the city hereby declares its intention to designate the city’s storm and surface water system as a utility and enterprise activity of the city to be supported all or in part by the imposition of user charges on all parcels of property within the city which discharge stormwater to the city’s storm drainage facilities or are otherwise served by the city’s storm drainage facilities.
B. The city hereby establishes a special fund within the city’s fiscal system to be known as “the storm and surface water fund,” hereinafter referred to as “the fund.”
C. All revenues from storm drainage user charges and other storm drainage related fees and charges as may be adopted by resolution shall be deposited to the fund.
D. Expenditures from the fund shall be limited to those expenditures for the improvement, repair, operation, maintenance, and administration of the storm drainage facility as defined by the public works director of the city of Aberdeen. The fund may also transfer funds to the general fund of the city that represent the reasonable and proportionate share of the cost of general city government support of the utility not covered by direct payments from the fund.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.060 Setting of fees and charges.
A. The city council shall by resolution establish a system of user charges for all parcels in the city.
B. To the extent practicable, user charges shall be based on each parcel’s expected rate and volume of stormwater runoff from a parcel.
C. The city council may by resolution establish a charge for the connection of any parcel to the city’s storm drainage facilities to reflect that parcel’s fair share of the cost of the existing city storm drainage facilities serving the parcel.
D. The public works director shall establish appropriate fees for the review and inspection of storm drainage facilities proposed and constructed by private development.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.070 Applicability.
It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements in their interpretation and application and shall be liberally construed to serve the purposes of this chapter. When any provision of any other chapter of the city regulations conflicts with this chapter, that which provides more environmental protection shall apply unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.080 Review and approval of storm and surface water drainage plans.
A storm and surface water drainage plan shall be submitted to the city engineer by the developer for review and approval for any proposed development, unless otherwise exempted. The developer is solely responsible for determining the stormwater requirements applicable to the proposed development for proposing review to the city. These requirements are defined in Volume I of the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, and also found in city provided stormwater guidance forms. The square footage and improvement value thresholds outlined in Volume I of the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington shall be cumulative and include all projects permitted on or after January 1, 2012. The storm and surface water drainage plan shall be accompanied by supporting computations, drawings and sufficient information describing the manner, location and type of measures in which storm and surface water runoff will be managed from the entire development. The storm and surface water drainage plan, stormwater facility design, and any supplemental information supplied by the developer shall conform to the design standards set forth in the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington. The developer solely is responsible for submitting a storm and surface water management plan which meets the requirements provided by this chapter. No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional uses without having provided for required storm and surface water management measures that control or manage runoff from such developments.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.090 Exemptions.
A. The following practices are exempt from the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of providing storm and surface water management as specified in the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit:
    1. Forest Practices. Forest practices regulated under WAC Title 222, except for Class IV general forest practices that are conversions from timberland to other uses, are exempt from the provisions of the minimum requirements.
    2. Commercial Agriculture. Commercial agriculture practices involving working the land for production are generally exempt. However, the conversion from timberland to agriculture and the construction of impervious surfaces are not exempt.
    3. Oil and Gas Field Activities or Operations. Construction of drilling sites, waste management pits, and access roads, as well as construction of transportation and treatment infrastructure such as pipelines, natural gas treatment plants, natural gas pipeline compressor stations, and crude oil pumping stations are exempt. Operators are encouraged to implement and maintain best management practices to minimize erosion and control sediment during and after construction activities to help ensure protection of surface water quality during storm events.
    4. Pavement Maintenance . The following pavement maintenance practices are exempt: pothole and square cut patching; overlaying existing asphalt or concrete pavement with asphalt or concrete without expanding the area of coverage; shoulder grading; reshaping/regrading drainage systems; crack sealing; resurfacing with in-kind material without expanding the road prism; pavement preservation activities that do not expand the road prism; and vegetation maintenance.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.100 Variances.
The city engineer may grant a written variance from any requirement of this chapter if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. A written request for variance shall be provided to the city engineer and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The city shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient specific reasons justifying the variance are provided by the person developing land.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.110 Permits – Plan approval required.
A site development permit, building permit, or other development permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot unless a storm and surface water drainage plan has been approved by the city engineer. The approved plan shall become part of the permit and be enforced as an element of any development permit issued by the city.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.120 Plan approval – Conditions.
In granting the plan approval, the city engineer may impose such conditions thereto as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the preservation of public health and safety. Any site development permit, building permit, or other development permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked, after written notice is given to the permittee, for any violations of the approved storm and surface water drainage plan.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.130 Low impact development (LID).
A. The city’s preferred approach to site development includes low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs) as an alternative to conventional stormwater management systems that rely on closed conveyance. LID is intended to manage stormwater runoff close to the source of generation and to mimic the predeveloped hydrologic condition of a site. Beginning June 30, 2018, the city will require the incorporation of low impact development best management practices, for new development and redevelopment, in accordance with the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (SWMMWW) and its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit as issued, and as may be amended, by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
B. LID is accomplished through minimizing the impervious surface coverage, retaining on-site natural features and vegetation, and managing runoff through dispersion, infiltration, evapotranspiration, or a combination of these approaches. Use of LID BMPs may reduce or eliminate the need for conventional detention facilities but does not remove the obligation to comply with the minimum requirements of the Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.
C. A variety of BMPs to minimize impervious surfaces and to manage stormwater have been developed and tested for use in Western Washington. These BMPs and the overall LID approach are described in the SWMMWW and additional guidance is provided in the latest version of the LID Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.
D. The menu of LID BMPs identified in the SWMMWW are accepted by the city for use in stormwater site plans to address the minimum requirements for flow control and runoff treatment in this chapter, subject to the specifications, performance standards, and design criteria in the SWMMWW and review and approval under this chapter.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6526, Amended, 01/25/2012; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.140 Design criteria.
Storm and surface water systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications as set forth in the adopted Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.150 Maintenance agreement.
Prior to issuance of a storm and surface water utility permit, the city shall require the applicant to execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the private storm and surface water drainage system. The maintenance agreement shall be recorded by the city. Such agreement shall provide for access to the system at reasonable times for regular inspection by the city or its authorized representative to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any provisions established. The agreements shall include the right of the city to access the system to take such action as necessary to protect the public safety and health in any instance where the owner fails to make the appropriate correction. Such agreement may contain provisions for regular or special assessments.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.160 Inspection.
A. The developer will submit to the city a proposed construction schedule ten (10) days prior to commencing construction. The city engineer shall conduct inspections and file reports for periodic inspections necessary during construction of storm and surface water management systems to ensure compliance with the approved plans. The developer shall notify the city upon completion of the project when a final inspection will be conducted.
B. Any portion of the work which does not comply with city regulations will be promptly corrected by the developer, after written notice from the city. The notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time within which corrections will be made.
C. A final inspection shall be conducted by the city upon completion of the elements of the storm and surface water drainage plan to determine if the completed work is constructed in accordance with the approved plan and this chapter. The developer shall supply an “as-built” certification by a registered professional engineer licensed in the state of Washington to certify that the facility has been constructed as shown in the “as-built” plans and meets approved plans and specifications. The city will provide the developer with a written notification of the results of the final inspection.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.170 Preventive maintenance.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the developer or property owner to maintain all infiltration systems, retention, detention or other storm and surface water drainage structures as contained in the storm and surface water utility permit and in accordance with the latest maintenance standards set forth in the SWMMWW.
B. The city shall annually inspect all infiltration systems, retention, detention or other storm and surface water drainage structures.
C. If the inspection indicates improper maintenance, unsafe conditions, or danger to public health or safety the city shall so inform the developer or property owner of those conditions as well as a schedule for remediation. The cost of such remediation is the cost of the developer or property owner. In any instance where the developer or property owner fails to make the appropriate correction within the timeline specified by the city engineer, the city will take such action as necessary to protect the public health and safety. Any cost incurred by the city shall be recovered from the developer or property owner.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.180 Penalties.
A. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition to, or as an alternative to any criminal prosecution or other penalty or billable cost of abatement or inspection as provided by ordinance or statute, any responsible person who violates a provision of this chapter, or order of the director issued pursuant to this chapter, may be assessed a civil penalty under Chapter 1.12.
C. In addition to imposition of a civil penalty, the director shall have the authority to order any responsible person to stop work if the work does not conform to the permit requirements and the severity is determined to be sufficient to warrant such action. The stop work order shall be issued in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.12 for notices and orders. Failure to comply with the terms of a stop work order shall result in enforcement actions including, but not limited to, the issuance of a civil penalty.
D. In addition, the city may institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter, or to correct violations of this chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
E. Any person who, through an act of commission or omission, aids or abets in the violation shall be considered to have committed a violation.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.190 Cross connections prohibited.
The installation or maintenance of any cross connection, meaning a connection between any storm and surface water drainage system and any sanitary sewer system, is prohibited. Any such cross connections now existing, or hereafter installed, are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by the director in the manner provided by Chapter 8.08.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.200 Illicit discharges prohibited – Certain discharges allowed – Conditions.
A. The stormwater system of the city of Aberdeen, natural and artificial, may only be used to convey stormwater runoff and discharges meeting the permit conditions within a current National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit approved by the Washington State Department of Ecology. Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, no person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under its control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge into the stormwater system any materials other than stormwater.
B. The following discharges into the stormwater system are permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
    1. Discharges from Potable Water Sources, Including Waterline Flushing, Hyperchlorinated Waterline Flushing, Fire Hydrant System Flushing and Pipeline Hydrostatic Test Water.  Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of one-tenth (0.1) ppm or less, pH adjusted, if necessary (to meet water quality standards), and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system. As an option to dechlorinating, planned discharges from potable water sources may be discharged directly to the municipal sanitary sewer system in a manner approved by the director. Planned discharges of waterline and hydrant system flushing need not be dechlorinated at the point of discharge if the discharge methods, location, or dilution will result in a pH concentration less than one-tenth (0.1) ppm at the point the water would enter a natural drainage channel.
    2. Discharges from Lawn Watering and Other Irrigation Runoff. Reasonable steps shall be taken to minimize runoff including limiting duration and overspray.
    3. Dechlorinated Swimming Pool Discharges. The discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of one-tenth (0.1) ppm or less, pH adjusted, and reoxygenized if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system and the property owner shall obtain permission from the director. Swimming pool cleaning waste water and filter backwash shall not be discharged to the stormwater system.
    4. Street and Sidewalk Wash Water, Water Used to Control Dust, and Routine External Building Wash Down that Does Not Use Detergents.  To avoid washing pollutants into the stormwater system, the discharge must minimize the amount of street wash and dust control water used. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street.
    5. Other Nonstormwater Discharges. The discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of the stormwater pollution prevention plan for the discharges as reviewed and approved by the city.
    6. Any Discharges from a Construction Site. Discharges must be in conformance with the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed by the city.
    7. Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) Discharges.  This discharge must be in conformance with a current National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit, approved by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
C. The following categories of nonstormwater discharges are specifically allowed:
    1. Diverted stream flows;
    2. Rising ground waters;
    3. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR Section35.2005(b)(20));
    4. Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
    5. Foundation drains;
    6. Air conditioning condensation;
    7. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is intermixed with urban stormwater;
    8. Springs;
    9. Water from crawl space pumps;
    10. Footing drains;
    11. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
    12. Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit;
    13. Discharges from emergency firefighting activities in accordance with the city of Aberdeen Stormwater NPDES Phase II Permit, Section S2, Authorized Discharges. The city’s Stormwater NPDES Phase II Permit is available to view in the office of the director.
D. Except as provided in this section, no person shall use the stormwater system, directly or indirectly, to dispose of any solid or liquid matter other than stormwater. No person shall make or allow any connection to the stormwater system which could result in the discharge of polluting matter. Connections to the stormwater system from the interiors of structures are prohibited. Connections to the stormwater system for any purpose other than to convey stormwater or ground water are prohibited and shall be eliminated.
E. Stormwater Discharge into the Sanitary System Is Prohibited – Exceptions. 
    1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer, unless otherwise approved by the director based on lack of feasible alternatives or unless the discharge meets the condition outlined in Section 13.52.390.
    2. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of stormwater surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, unless such connection is otherwise approved in writing by the director based on lack of feasible alternatives or other appropriate factors.
F. Stormwater shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Storm drainage from hard-surfaced or graded areas, such as parking lots, service station yards, and storage yards, shall enter the public storm sewer system or other outlet approved by the director and as required by this chapter and as such facilities are available. Such storm drainage shall not be connected to or allowed to enter a sanitary sewer, unless otherwise approved in writing by the director based on lack of feasible alternatives or other appropriate factors.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.210 Easements.
All public storm drainage systems shall be required to be located within a recorded public storm drainage easement or public right-of-way. An unobstructed ingress/egress maintenance easement shall be provided for city access to said storm drainage facilities. The minimum width of the required drainage easement shall be adequate to encompass all facilities and include room for access and maintenance, as determined by the city.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

13.70.220 Appeals – Filing deadlines.
A. Any billing statement, charge, or other fee assessed under this chapter may be appealed to the director. The appeal may be decided informally, without a hearing, or in the sole discretion of the director an informal hearing may be held. The director’s decision shall be in writing. The director’s decision shall be the final determination unless a written notice of appeal is filed with the finance director within fourteen (14) days of the director’s decision. Appeals from the director’s decision shall be heard by the city council. The city council’s decision on appeal shall be the final determination of the city.
B. Any appeal from the refusal to approve a storm and surface water drainage plan shall be considered in the same manner as an appeal from the denial of the development permit being applied for.
C. Any civil enforcement action taken under this chapter, that does not fall within subsection (A) or (B) of this section, may be appealed to the director in the same manner as provided for appeals under Chapter 1.12.
(5/23/2018 amend; Ord. 6503, Added, 08/25/2010)

Chapter 13.80 AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES UTILITY

Sections:
13.80.010    Utility continued.
13.80.020    Definitions.
13.80.030    Purpose.
13.80.040    Utility operation.
13.80.050    Regulations.
13.80.060    License required.
13.80.070    License - exhibition required.
13.80.080    Fund created - revenues - authorized expenditures.
13.80.090    Utility rate setting.
13.80.100    Payment.
13.80.110    Rates for ambulance calls - direct billing - insurance coverage - assignment.
13.80.120    Allocation of direct billing revenue.
13.80.130    Charity policy for low-income non-residents.
13.80.140    Compliance with Medicare and Medicaid Requirements.
13.80.150    Violations - criminal prosecution - civil penalties.

13.80.010 Utility continued.
Pursuant to the authority of RCW 35.21.766, 35.22.570, and 35.27.370(15), as now existing or hereafter amended, and the police power of the City of Aberdeen to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare, the emergency dispatch and ambulance utility established by the city in Ordinance 5985(1991) as Chapter 3.64 AMC, as amended, is hereby reauthorized, ratified and continued as a public utility of the city. All funds in the emergency dispatch and ambulance utility fund created by AMC 3.64.010 shall be transferred to the fund created by this ordinance.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.020 Definitions.
For purposes, of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
A. "Ambulance" means a ground vehicle designed and used to transport the ill and injured and to provide personnel, facilities, and equipment to treat patients before and during transportation.
B. "Ambulance Service" or "Ambulance Operator" means an agency, public or private, that operates one or more ambulances, responding to a 911 or aid call for service within the city, including advanced life support, basic life support and transport services.
C. "Dispatch" means the Grays Harbor E911 Dispatch Center.
D. "Emergency Medical Care" or "Emergency Medical Service" means medical treatment and care which may be rendered at the scene of any medical emergency or while transporting any patient in an ambulance to an appropriate medical facility, including ambulance transportation between medical facilities.
E. "Operating an Ambulance" means the use of an ambulance in any of the following manners:
    1. An ambulance stationed within the city.
    2. An ambulance dispatched from within or without the Aberdeen city limits which repeatedly or customarily makes trips for hire to pick up the sick or injured from within the city.
F. "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or organization of any kind, including a government agency.
G. "Response Time" means the time from the ambulance service being notified by dispatch to arrival of the ambulance on scene.
H. “Service Fee” means the monthly fee levied by the Utility upon persons within the boundaries of the city.
I. “System” means the entire system of ambulance services provided by the Utility or over which the Utility has regulatory control by virtue of contract, franchise, or other service agreement or arrangement legally recognized by the city.
J. “Unit” means either “dwelling unit” as defined by Title 17 AMC, where appropriate, or the unit of occupancy for each utility user classification. The unit of occupancy for assisted living and nursing home facilities shall be beds rented or leased on an individual basis.
K. “Utility” means the City of Aberdeen Ambulance and Emergency Medical Services Utility, including without limitation all equipment, employees, agents, supplies, overhead and other associated costs incurred to deliver all regulatory and ambulance services.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.030 Purpose.
The purpose of the Utility is to regulate users and providers of all ambulance services; to generate revenue to assist in paying for the regulatory scheme authorized by this chapter; to ensure 24-hour emergency medical and Advanced Life Support service within the city; to assist in paying for the particular benefits conferred upon residents and other occupants within the city; and to mitigate the burdens on the system by the different users of the system.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.040 Utility operation.
The Utility shall be operated by the Fire Department which shall have the authority to collect service fees and spend fee revenue as authorized by the city council.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.050 Regulations.
The Fire Chief, or the Chief’s designee, is hereby authorized to
promulgate any and all regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter including that all public and private ambulance providers retain highly trained, qualified and experienced personnel; maintain appropriate certifications and qualifications, insure appropriate fleet management and equipment maintenance; satisfy minimum emergency vehicle specifications; insure response times that protect the public health, welfare and benefit of all Aberdeen residents, businesses and other ambulance customers; deliver a level of care service consistent with or exceeding industry standards; comply with transport protocols; provide procedures for customer inquiries and complaints and insure coordination with Grays Harbor E911 dispatch and other public safety communications.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.060 License required.
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, an ambulance in the city without first securing from the Finance Director a business license in accordance with Title 5 AMC.
(Ord. 6422, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.070 License - exhibition required.
Each ambulance licensed pursuant to the terms of this Chapter shall contain the business license or a reasonable facsimile thereof, prominently displayed in the interior of the ambulance in a position where the same may be seen and read by any person.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.080 Fund created - revenues - authorized expenditures.
There is created in the office of the Finance Director a special fund for the operation of the Utility and all charges collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited and placed in said fund and shall be disbursed as the city council of the city of Aberdeen may from time to time direct. Expenditures from the fund shall be made only for the establishment, maintenance, operation and capital needs of the Utility.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.090 Utility rate setting.
A. Monthly service fee formula. A monthly service fee for the operation of the Utility shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council in conformity with RCW 35.21.766, as now or hereafter amended. The amount of the fee shall be based upon cost of regulating ambulance service and the cost of providing Utility services as determined by a cost-of-service study pursuant to RCW 35.21.766(3). Those costs, after transport charges and the general fund contribution, shall be divided among Aberdeen residents and occupants based on a combined demand and availability calculation consistent with accepted principles of utility rate setting. The rate attributable to costs for availability of the Utility shall be uniformly applied across user classifications within the Utility. The rate attributable to costs for demand services of the Utility shall be established and billed to each utility user classification based on each user classification’s burden on the Utility. The fee charged by the Utility shall reflect a combination of the availability cost and the demand cost. The resulting fee shall be assessed to identifiable use classifications. Fees will not exceed the revenue requirements to cover the costs of the Utility, as authorized by the city council by adoption of an annual budget and subsequent amendments.
B. Classifications. The monthly service fee shall be collected from each of the following utility user classifications:
    1. Single Family;
    2. Multi-family;
    3. Commercial/Retail;
    4. Industrial;
    5. Assisted Living/Nursing Homes;
    6. Housing Authority;
    7. Other Governments;
    8. City of Aberdeen.
    The owner or occupant of each unit in such classifications shall be responsible for payment of this utility fee for the availability and use of ambulance services.
C. Service fee exemptions - reductions. 
    1. All vacant, unoccupied parcels are exempt from the Utility fee.
    2. Persons who are Medicaid eligible and who reside in a nursing home, assisted living facility, retirement home or adult family home are exempt from the Utility fee.
    3. Utility customers shall be eligible for the city’s Low Income Senior Citizens Discount pursuant to chapter 13.64 AMC to the same extent as water and sewer utility customers.
    4. Any change in use of a parcel or any other change in circumstance that
    eliminates application of an exemption from the service fee shall immediately make the affected property subject to applicable service fees. The service fee shall become due and payable as of the date of the change in use and shall continue until the parcel again meets exemption requirements.
    5. Monthly rates shall not be prorated. Initial and final charges may be prorated
    in accordance with the city’s standard utility prorating practices.
    6. Any customer seeking an exemption from payment of the service fee and/or
    conversion from covered to exempt status, must file a written petition with the Finance Director seeking a determination as to whether a specific parcel satisfies the exemption requirements set forth in this section. The Finance Director’s determination may be appealed to the city council.
    7. The combined rates charged shall reflect an exemption for persons who are Medicaid eligible and who reside in a nursing facility, boarding home, adult family home, or receive in-home services.
    8. The combined rates charged may reflect an exemption or reduction for designated classes consistent with Article VIII, Section 7 of the state Constitution.
    9. The amounts of exemption or reduction shall be a general expense of the Utility, and designated as an availability cost, to be spread uniformly across the Utility user classifications.
D. Periodic service fee review. The Finance Director, or the Director’s designee, shall periodically perform financial review and analysis of the Utility’s revenues, expenses, indebtedness, fees and accounting, and recommend budgets, fee adjustments and financial policy. Based on such review, the Director shall recommend changes, amendments or additions for adoption by the city council.
E. Limitation on total revenue. The total revenue generated by the rates and charges shall not exceed the total costs necessary to regulate, operate, and maintain an ambulance utility.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.100 Payment.
The monthly service charge for the utility shall be collected in the same manner as city utility bills are currently or hereafter collected. The Finance Director shall apply any partial payments on utility bills first to the payment of charges for solid waste and recyclable collection with the balance to be applied toward the payment of remaining current utility charges, in such order as the director shall see fit, but lastly to charges for water service.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.110 Rates for ambulance calls - direct billing - insurance coverage - assignment.
All fees and charges for individual service calls of ambulances operated by the Utility shall be set by resolution and shall be in addition to the monthly service charges under AMC 13.80.090. Each person who is (1) a city resident or (2) is the owner of a business that is assessed a monthly utility charge under AMC 13.80.090 shall not be billed beyond their insurance coverage for emergency medical services or ambulance transfers within the city limits and any co-payments and deductibles shall be deemed to be satisfied by payment of the monthly utility charge, provided the resident or business owner: (1) supplies the city with all requested information and documentation including, but not limited to, insurance information and medical records relative to billing for the ambulance service; and (2) assigns to the city the patient’s right to receive payment from all applicable third-party payers. For the purpose of this section, a city resident refers to someone who has no fixed or established place of residence outside the city, utilizes the dwelling unit inside the city as a fixed abode, and is not a guest, visitor, or other temporary inhabitant. A student regularly enrolled in an educational institution outside the city, but who would normally and regularly be a city resident but for attendance at such educational institution, shall be deemed to reside within the city.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.120 Allocation of direct billing revenue.
All revenue collected under AMC 13.80.110 shall be allocated to demand-related costs of the Utility.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.130 Charity policy for low-income non-residents.
The Fire Chief may waive or reduce direct billing charges not covered by third-party payers if payment would create a financial hardship. The Fire Chief may consider current federal poverty guidelines for the state of Washington and other relevant factors in determining whether a financial hardship exists.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.140 Compliance with Medicare and Medicaid Requirements.
This Chapter shall be construed and implemented to be consistent with applicable Medicare and Medicaid requirements. If any regulation or procedure adopted under this Chapter for the purposes of establishing, implementing, imposing or collecting charges for ambulance service is found or determined to be in conflict with Medicare or Medicaid requirements, the conflicting part of this Chapter shall be inoperative to the extent of the conflict and such finding or determination shall not affect the operation of the remainder of this Chapter.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

13.80.150 Violations - criminal prosecution - civil penalties.
A. Criminal violations. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or regulation adopted by the Fire Chief under AMC 13.80.050 is a misdemeanor.
B. Civil violations. In addition or as an alternative to criminal prosecution, the Fire Chief may issue a civil infraction under chapter 1.20 AMC for willful failure to pay a service fee imposed under this chapter. A penalty equal to $100 or three times the value of any unpaid service fee(s), whichever is greater, may be imposed; provided, however, that no penalty shall be assessed for an unpaid service fee until the city has provided 30 days’ notice to the occupant of such outstanding obligation and the occupant fails to cure such unpaid service fee(s) within the 30-day period.
(Ord. 6424, Added, 12/13/2006)

Title 14 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

Chapters:
14.04        Environmental Policy—General Requirements
14.08        Categorical Exemptions and Threshold Determinations
14.12        Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
14.14        Stormwater Quality
14.16        Commenting
14.20        Using Existing Environmental Documents
14.24        SEPA and Agency Decisions
14.28        Categorical Exemptions
14.32        Agency Compliance
14.50        Shoreline Master Program
14.100       Critical Area Protection

Chapter 14.04 ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY—GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
Article 1.  Authority
    14.04.010    Authority.
Article 2.  General Requirements
    14.04.020    Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
    14.04.030    Additional definitions.
    14.04.040    Designation of responsible official.
    14.04.050    Lead agency determination and responsibilities.
    14.04.060    Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.
    14.04.070    Additional considerations in time limits applicable to the SEPA process.
    14.04.080    Additional timing considerations.
Article 3.  Definitions
    14.04.090    Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
Article 4.  Forms
    14.04.100    Adoption by reference.
Article 5.  Effective Date and Severability
    14.04.110    Effective date.
    14.04.120    Severability.

Article 1. Authority

14.04.010 Authority.
The city of Aberdeen adopts this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules, WAC 197-11-904. This chapter contains this city's SEPA procedures and policies. The SEPA rules, WAC Chapter 197-11, must be used in conjunction with this chapter.
(Prior code § 1.92.010)

Article 2. General Requirements

14.04.020 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
This article contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The city adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-040 | Definitions.                                |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-050 | Lead Agency.                                |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-055 | Timing of the SEPA Process.                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-060 | Content of Environmental Review.            |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-070 | Limitations on Actions During SEPA Process. |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-080 | Incomplete or Unavailable Information.      |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-090 | Supporting Documents.                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-100 | Information Required of Applicants.         |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.020)

14.04.030 Additional definitions.
In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:
Agricultural Land. "Agricultural land" is primarily devoted to the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, vegetable, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, and Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax that has long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.
    1. "Prime farmland soil" means land that has the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops and is available for these uses (the land could be cropland pastureland, rangeland, forest land, or other land but not urban built-up land or water). It has the soil quality growing season and moisture supply needed to economically produce sustained high yields of crops when treated and managed, including water management, according to acceptable farming methods. In general, prime farmlands have an adequate and dependable water supply from precipitation and/or irrigation, a favorable temperature and growing season, acceptable alkalinity or acidity, acceptable salt and sodium content, and few or no rocks. They are permeable to water and air. Prime farmlands are not excessively eroded or saturated with water for long periods of time, and either do not flood frequently during the growing season or are protected from flooding.
    2. "Unique farmland soil" means land other than prime farmland that is used for the production of specific high value food and fiber crops. It has the special combination of soil quality, location, growing season, and moisture supply needed to economically produce sustained high quality and/or high yields of a specific crop when treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods.
    3. "Additional farmland of local importance" means land, in addition to prime and unique farmlands, that is of local importance for the production of food, fiber, forage and oilseed crops. Generally, additional farmlands of local importance include those that are nearly prime farmland and that economically produce high yields of crops when treated and managed according to acceptable farming methods. Some may produce as high a yield as prime farmlands if conditions are favorable. Additional farmland of local importance may also include areas of commercial, aquaculture and mariculture which include sea vegetable farming, commercial clam and oyster grounds, salmon net pen sites and oyster and mussel raft lease areas provided they function only as aquaculture or mariculture operations.
    Note: See Part 605.05, National Soils Handbook, United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
"City" means the city of Aberdeen.
"Critical areas" include the following areas and ecosystems:
    1. Wetlands;
    2. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water;
    3. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
    4. Frequently flooded areas; and
    5. Geologically hazardous areas.
"Department" means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city established by charter or ordinance.
"Early notice" means the city's response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant's proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS) procedures).
"Erosion hazard areas" means those areas containing soils which, according to the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Soil Classification system, may experience severe to very severe erosion.
"Forest land" means land primarily useful for growing trees, including Christmas trees subject to the excise tax imposed under RCW 84.33.100— 84.33.140, for commercial purposes, and that has long-term commercial significance for growing trees commercially.
"Frequently flooded areas" means lands in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. These areas include, but are not limited to, streams, rivers, lakes, coastal areas, wetlands, and the like.
"Geologically hazardous areas" means areas that, because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events, are not suited to siting commercial, residential or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.
"Habitats of local importance" include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a given species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. These might include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These might also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alteration, such as cliffs, talus, and wetlands.
"Landslide hazard areas" means areas potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors.
"Long-term commercial significance" includes the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of the land for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land's proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense uses of land.
"Mine hazard areas" means those areas directly underlain by, adjacent to, or affected by mine workings such as adits, tunnels, drifts, or air shafts.
"Mineral resource lands" means lands primarily devoted to the extraction of minerals or that have known or potential long-term commercial significance for the extraction of minerals.
"Minerals" include gravel, sand, and valuable metallic substances.
"Public facilities" include streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, parks and recreational facilities and schools.
"Public services" include fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, recreation, environmental protection, and other governmental services.
"Recharge areas for aquifers" means areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for portable water are areas where an aquifer that is a source of drinking water is vulnerable to contamination that would affect the certifiable potability of the water.
"Resource lands" means agricultural, forest and mineral resource lands which have long-term commercial significance.
"SEPA Rules" means WAC Chapter 197-11 adopted by the Department of Ecology.
"Seismic hazard areas" means areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction.
"Species of local importance" means those species that are of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation or that are game species.
"Urban growth" refers to growth that makes intensive use of land for the location of buildings, structures and impermeable surfaces to such a degree as to be incompatible with the primary use of such land for the production of food, other agricultural products or fiber of the extraction of mineral resources. When allowed to spread over wide areas, urban growth typically requires urban governmental services. "Characterized by urban growth" refers to land having urban growth located on it, or to land located in relationship to an area with urban growth on it as to be appropriate for urban growth.
"Volcanic hazard areas" include areas subject to pyroclastic flows, lava flows, and inundation by debris flows mudflows, or related flooding resulting from volcanic activity.
"Wetland" or "wetlands" mean areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. However, wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands, if permitted by the county or city.
(Prior code § 1.92.030)

14.04.040 Designation of responsible official.
A. For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the director of planning and economic development department.
B. For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the "lead agency" or "responsible official" by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in Section 14.04.020.
C. The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (WAC Chapter 197-11) and make them available in accordance with RCW Chapter 42.17 and city procedures.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.040)

14.04.050 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.
A. The department in the city receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the department is aware that another department or agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.
B. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal, the department receiving the application shall refer it to the responsible official who shall supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an EIS is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the EIS.
C. When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of the City shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No city department shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the city may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.
D. If the city or of any or its departments receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the determination, or the city must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the fifteen-day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the city may be initiated by the responsible official.
E. Departments of the city are authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible official and any department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement approve the agreement.
F. Any department making a lead agency determination for a private project shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal.
(Prior code § 1.92.050)

14.04.060 Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.
For any proposal for a private project where the city would be the lead agency and for which one or more state agencies have jurisdiction, the city's responsible official may elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a state agency. The state agency with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in WAC 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency and the city shall be an agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the city's responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate state agency with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the city shall also give notice of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal.
(Prior code § 1.92.060)

14.04.070 Additional considerations in time limits applicable to the SEPA process.
The following times limits (expressed in calendar days) apply when the city processes licenses for all private projects and those governmental proposals submitted to the city by other agencies:
A. Threshold Determinations. 
    1. The city should complete threshold determinations that can be based solely upon review of the environmental checklist for the proposal within ninety (90) days of the date an applicant's adequate application and completed checklist are submitted. The applicant may request an additional thirty (30) days for the threshold determination.
    2. When the responsible official requires further information from the applicant or consultation with other agencies with jurisdiction:
        a. The city should request such further information within fifteen (15) days of receiving an adequate application and completed environmental checklist;
        b. The city shall wait no longer than thirty (30) days for a consulted agency to respond;
        c. The responsible official should complete the threshold determination within ninety (90) days of receiving the requested information from the applicant or the consulted agency.
    3. When the city must initiate further studies, including field investigations, to obtain the information to make the threshold determination, the city should complete the studies within ninety (90) days of receiving an adequate application and a completed checklist.
    4. The city shall complete threshold determinations on actions where the applicant recommends in writing that an EIS be prepared, because of the probable significant adverse environmental impact(s) described in the application, within ninety (90) days of receiving an adequate application and completed checklist.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.070)

14.04.080 Additional timing considerations.
A. For nonexempt proposals, the DNS or Draft EIS for the proposal shall accompany the city's staff recommendation to any appropriate advisory body, such as the planning commission.
B. If the city's only action on a proposal is a decision on a building permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the city conduct environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and specifications.
(Prior code § 1.92.080)

Article 3. Definitions

14.04.090 Purpose of this article and adoption by reference.
This article contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 WAC, as now existing or hereinafter amended, by reference:
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                         |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-700 | Definitions.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-702 | Act.                                    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-704 | Action.                                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-706 | Addendum.                               |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-708 | Adoption.                               |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-710 | Affected Tribe.                         |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-712 | Affecting.                              |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-714 | Agency.                                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-716 | Applicant.                              |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-718 | Built Environment.                      |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-720 | Categorical Exemptions.                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-721 | Closed record appeal.                   |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-722 | Consolidated Appeal.                    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-724 | Consulted Agency.                       |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-726 | Cost-Benefit Analysis.                  |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-728 | County/City.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-730 | Decision Maker.                         |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-732 | Department.                             |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-734 | Determination of Nonsignificance (DNS). |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-736 | Determination of Significance (DS).     |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-738 | EIS.                                    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-740 | Environment.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-742 | Environmental Checklist.                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-744 | Environmental Document.                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-746 | Environmental Review.                   |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-750 | Expanded Scoping.                       |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-752 | Impacts.                                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-754 | Incorporation by Reference.             |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-756 | Lands Covered by Water.                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-758 | Lead Agency.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-760 | License.                                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-762 | Local Agency.                           |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-764 | Major Action.                           |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-766 | Mitigated DNS.                          |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-768 | Mitigation.                             |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-770 | Natural Environment,                    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-772 | NEPA.                                   |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-774 | Nonproject.                             |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-775 | Open record hearing.                    |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-776 | Phased Review.                          |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-778 | Preparation.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-780 | Private Project.                        |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-782 | Probable.                               |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-784 | Proposal.                               |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-786 | Reasonable Alternative.                 |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-788 | Responsible Official.                   |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-790 | SEPA.                                   |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-792 | Scope.                                  |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-793 | Scoping.                                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-794 | Significant.                            |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-796 | State Agency.                           |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-797 | Threshold Determination.                |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
| 197-11-799 | Underlying Governmental Action.         |
+------------+-----------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.240)

Article 4. Forms

14.04.100 Adoption by reference.
The city adopts the following forms and sections by reference:
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                                        |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-960 | Environmental Checklist,                               |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-965 | Adoption Notice.                                       |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-970 | Determination of Nonsignificance (DNS).                |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-980 | Determination of Significance and Scoping Notice (DS). |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-985 | Notice of Assumption of Lead Agency Status.            |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-990 | Notice of Action.                                      |
+------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.310)

Article 5. Effective Date and Severability

14.04.110 Effective date.
The effective date of this title is October 1, 1984.
(Prior code § 1.92.290)

14.04.120 Severability.
If any provision of this title or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this title, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected.
(Prior code § 1.92.300)

Chapter 14.08 CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS AND THRESHOLD DETERMINATIONS

Sections:
14.08.010    Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
14.08.020    Flexible thresholds for categorical exemptions.
14.08.030    Use of exemptions.
14.08.040    Environmental checklist.
14.08.050    Mitigated DNS.

14.08.010 Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
This chapter contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a "probable significant, adverse environmental impact" requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This chapter also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this part:
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                                   |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-300 | Purpose of this Part.                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-305 | Categorical Exemptions.                           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-310 | Threshold Determination Required.                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-315 | Environmental Checklist.                          |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-330 | Threshold Determination Process.                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-335 | Additional Information.                           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-340 | Determination of Nonsignificance (DNS).           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-350 | Mitigated DNS.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-360 | Determination of Significance (DS)/ Initiation of |
|            | Scoping.                                          |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-390 | Effect of Threshold Determination.                |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.090)

14.08.020 Flexible thresholds for categorical exemptions.
A. The city establishes the following exempt levels for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(b) based on local conditions:
    1. For residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(I)(b)(i): Up to twenty (20) dwelling units.
    2. For agricultural structures in WAC 197-11-800(I)(b)(ii): Up to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
    3. For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage buildings in WAC 197-11-800(I)(b)(iii): Up to twelve thousand (12,000) square feet and up to forty (40) parking spaces.
    4. For parking lots in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iv): Up to forty (40) parking spaces.
    5. For landfills and excavations in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(v): Up to five hundred (500) cubic yards.
B. Whenever the city establishes new exempt levels under this section, it shall send them to the Department of Ecology under WAC 197-11-800(I)(c).
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.100)

14.08.030 Use of exemptions.
A. Each department within the city that receives an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department initiating the proposal, shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The department's determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this title apply to the proposal. The city shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.
B. In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the department shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the department shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the department's consideration is exempt.
C. If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this title, except that:
    1. The city shall not give authorization for:
        a. Any nonexempt action,
        b. Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact, or
        c. Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;
    2. A department may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and
    3. A department may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.
(Prior code § 1.92.110)

14.08.040 Environmental checklist.
A. A completed environmental checklist, in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate, or other approval not specifically exempted in this title; except, a checklist is not needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency.
B. For private proposals, the city will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For city proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal.
C. The city may require that it, and not the private applicant, will complete all or part of the environmental checklist for a private proposal, if either of the following occurs:
    1. The city has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the private applicant; or
    2. The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration.
(Prior code § 1.92.120)

14.08.050 Mitigated DNS.
A. As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.
B. An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:
    1. Follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency; and
    2. Precede the city's actual threshold determination for the proposal
C. The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within fourteen (14) days. The response shall:
    1. Be written;
    2. State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that cause the city to consider a DS; and
    3. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.
D. As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.
E. When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the city shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within ninety (90) days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal:
    1. If the city indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city shall issue and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2).
    2. If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the city shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.
    3. The applicant's proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to "control noise" or "prevent stormwater runoff" are inadequate, whereas proposals to "muffle machinery to X decibel" or "construct 200-foot stormwater retention pond at Y location" are adequate.
    4. Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.
F. A mitigated DNS is issued under WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a fourteen-day comment period and public notice.
G. Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the city.
H. If the city's tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal the city should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).
I. The city is written response under subsection (E)(2) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.130)

Chapter 14.12 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS)

Sections:
14.12.010    Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
14.12.020    Preparation of EIS—Additional considerations.
14.12.030    Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.

14.12.010 Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
This chapter contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by this part:
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-400 | Purpose of EIS.                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-402 | General Requirements.                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-405 | EIS types.                                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-406 | EIS timing.                                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-408 | Scoping.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-410 | Expanded Scoping. (Optional).               |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-420 | EIS Preparation.                            |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-425 | Style and Size.                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-430 | Format.                                     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-435 | Cover Letter or Memo.                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-440 | EIS Contents.                               |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-442 | Contents of EIS on Nonproject Proposals.    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-443 | EIS Contents When Prior Nonproject EIS.     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-444 | Elements of the Environment.                |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-448 | Relationship of EIS to Other Consideration. |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-450 | Cost-benefit Analysis.                      |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-455 | Issuance of DEIS.                           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-460 | Issuance of FEIS.                           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.140)

14.12.020 Preparation of EIS—Additional considerations.
A. Preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EISs (SEIS) is the responsibility of the department of planning and economic development under the direction of the responsible official. Before the city issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this title and Chapter 197-11 WAC.
B. The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the city or the applicant, If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the city will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official shall also notify the applicant of the city's procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.
C. The city may require an applicant to provide information the city does not possess, including specific investigations. Except for information the city may require under another ordinance or statute, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this title or that is being requested from another agency.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.150)

14.12.030 Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.
The following additional elements are part of the environment for the purpose of EIS content, but do not add to the criteria for threshold determinations or perform any other function or purpose under this title:
A. Economy;
B. Social policy analysis;
C. Cost-benefit analysis
(Prior code § 1.92.160)

Chapter 14.14 STORMWATER QUALITY

Sections:
14.14.010    Purpose of this chapter.
14.14.020    Regulatory authority.
14.14.030    Stormwater quality.

14.14.010 Purpose of this chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to define and standardize stormwater quality in the city of Aberdeen. The city shall adhere to all federal and state regulations regarding stormwater management and water quality protection.
(Ord. 6644 § 3, Added, 03/27/2019)

14.14.020 Regulatory authority.
The city of Aberdeen is required to obtain coverage under the Western Washington Phase II municipal stormwater permit through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System and State waste discharge general permit for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewers in Western Washington. This permit is in compliance with the provisions of the State of Washington Water Pollution Control Law, Chapter 90.48 RCW, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the Clean Water Act), Title 33 U.S.C., §  1251 et seq.
Under the Federal Clean Water Act, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States. The NPDES stormwater program requires the implementation of stormwater programs. Phase II of the NPDES rules extends coverage to operators of regulated small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) serving less than one hundred thousand (100,000). The Washington State Department of Ecology develops and administers National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) municipal stormwater permits in Washington State.
The Phase II permit authorizes the discharge of stormwater to surface waters and to groundwaters of the state from municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) owned or operated by the permittee (city of Aberdeen). The city is required to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) and use all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment (AKART) to prevent and control pollution of waters of the state of Washington.
(Ord. 6644 § 3, Added, 03/27/2019)

14.14.030 Stormwater quality.
Stormwater is rain and snow melt that runs off rooftops, paved streets, highways, and parking lots. As it runs off, it picks up pollution like oil, fertilizers, pesticides, soil, trash, and animal manure. Most stormwater flows untreated into streams, lakes, and marine waters. According to the Department of Ecology, stormwater runoff is the leading threat to Washington’s urban waters, streambeds, banks, and habitats. As the population grows in Aberdeen, urban development increases. This results in more developed land and an increase in stormwater runoff and pollution to waters of the state. Unmanaged stormwater runoff can damage fish habitat, contribute to flooding, contaminate swimming areas, pollute shellfish beds, contaminate groundwater, and degrade water quality.
The city works to improve the quality of stormwater runoff by requiring developers and property owners to utilize effective stormwater management principles and proven best management practices (BMPs) when proposing development projects. The goal of these requirements comes in the form of the following:
A. Manage stormwater as close to the source as possible.
B. Mimic natural processes on site that result in infiltration or evapotranspiration.
C. Preserve and/or recreate natural vegetation.
D. Minimize effective impervious surfaces.
E. Slow down stormwater transportation by promoting natural movement of water within an ecosystem.
The principles above are all part of a land development technique commonly known as low impact development (LID). Proper management of stormwater runoff and implementation of LID practices minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel erosion and sedimentation, assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, reduce local flooding, and maintain, post-development, as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics. Applied on a broad scale, LID can maintain or restore a watershed’s hydrologic and ecological functions.
The city of Aberdeen has developed a permitting process that emphasizes proper stormwater management and ensures compliance with state and federal regulations. Refer to Chapter 13.70 for provisions related to storm and surface water management and permitting.
(Ord. 6644 § 3, Added, 03/27/2019)

Chapter 14.16 COMMENTING

Sections:
14.16.010    Adoption by reference.
14.16.020    Public notice.
14.16.030    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.

14.16.010 Adoption by reference.
This chapter contains rules for consulting, commenting, and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this chapter:
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                                   |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-500 | Purpose of this Part.                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-502 | Inviting Comment.                                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-504 | Availability and Cost of Environmental Documents. |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-508 | SEPA Register.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-510 | Public Notice.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-535 | Public Hearings and Meetings.                     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-545 | Effect of No Comment.                             |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-550 | Specificity of Comments.                          |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-560 | FEIS Response to Comments.                        |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-570 | Consulted Agency Costs to Assist Lead Agency.     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.170)

14.16.020 Public notice.
A. Whenever the city issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) or a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the city shall give public notice as follows:
    1. If public notice is required for a nonexempt licenser the notice shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and when comments are due.
    2. If no public notice is required for the permit or approval, the city shall give notice of the DNS or DS by publishing notice in agency newsletters and/or sending notice to agency mailing lists (either general lists or lists for specific proposals for subject areas).
    3. Whenever the city issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the city shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.
B. Whenever the city issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5) or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given by:
    1. Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt license;
    2. Notifying the news media;
    3. Publishing notice in agency newsletters and/or sending notice to agency mailing lists (general lists or specific lists for proposals or subject areas).
C. Whenever possible, the city shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the city is nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.
D. The city may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the proposal at the applicant's expense.
(Prior code § 1.92.180)

14.16.030 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.
A. The department of planning and economic development shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.
B. This department shall be responsible for the city's compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the city.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.190)

Chapter 14.20 USING EXISTING ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS

Sections:
14.20.010    Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.

14.20.010 Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
This chapter contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the city's own environmental compliance. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                                         |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-600 | When to Use Existing Environmental Documents.           |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-610 | Use of NEPA Documents.                                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-620 | Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement—Procedures. |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-625 | Addenda—Procedures.                                     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-630 | Adoption—Procedures.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-635 | Incorporation by Reference—Procedures.                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-640 | Combining Documents.                                    |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.200)

Chapter 14.24 SEPA AND AGENCY DECISIONS

Sections:
14.24.010    Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
14.24.020    Substantive authority.
14.24.030    Notice/statute of limitations.

14.24.010 Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
This chapter contains rules (and policies) for SEPA's substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This chapter also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The city adopts the following sections by reference:
+------------+---------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-650 | Purpose of this Part.                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-655 | Implementation.                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-660 | Substantive Authority and Mitigation. |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-680 | Appeals.                              |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
(Prior code § 1.92.210)

14.24.020 Substantive authority.
A. The policies and goals set forth in this title are supplementary to those in the existing authorization of the city of Aberdeen.
B. The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:
    1. Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this title; and
    2. Such conditions are in writing; and
    3. The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and
    4. The city has considered whether other local, state, or federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and
    5. Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (D) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.
C. The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:
    1. A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this title; and
    2. A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and
    3. The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (D) of this section and identified in writing in the decision document.
D. The city designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the city's exercise of authority pursuant to this section:
    1. The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:
        a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;
        b. Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;
        c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;
        d. Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;
        e. Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;
        f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities; and
        g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depictable resources.
    2. The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.
    3. The city adopts by reference the policies in the following documents: comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, building codes, shoreline management plan, storm drainage, sewer, parks, street plan, dilapidated structures ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and platting laws and ordinances.
    4. The city establishes the following additional policies in order to achieve the environmental goals of the Aberdeen community:
        Earth. To encourage land development practices that result in a minimal disturbance to the city's vegetation and soils;
        To encourage building and site planning practices that are consistent with the city's natural topographical features;
        To insure prompt development, restoration and effective erosion control of property after land clearing through the use of phase development, replanting, hydroseeding, and other appropriate engineering techniques;
        To prohibit development in areas when such development would create or be subject to imminent danger of landslides.
        Air. To secure and maintain such levels of air quality as will protect human health and safety and to the greatest degree practicable, prevent injury to plant and animal life and to property, foster the comfort and convenience of inhabitants, promote the economic and social development of the city, and facilitate the enjoyment of the natural attractions of the city of Aberdeen.
        Water. To minimize surface water and ground water runoff and diversion and to prevent erosion and reduce the risk of slides;
        To encourage sound development guidelines and construction procedures which respect and preserve the city's water courses; to minimize water quality degradation and control the sedimentation of creeks, streams, ponds, lakes, and other water bodies; to preserve and enhance the suitability of waters for contact recreation and fishing; to preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the waters;
        To maintain and protect groundwater resources, to minimize adverse effects of alterations in groundwater quantities, locations, and flow patterns.
        Flora and Fauna. To protect the unique flora and fauna within the city of Aberdeen;
        To preserve and enhance the city's physical and aesthetic character by preventing indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and ground cover on undeveloped and partially developed property;
        To encourage the retention of trees and other vegetation for visual buffers and soil retention;
        To minimize devaluation of property values due to unnecessary destruction of trees and ground cover;
        To encourage building and site planning practices that are consistent with the city's vegetational features while at the same time recognizing that certain factors such as condition (e.g., disease, danger of falling, etc.) proximity to existing and proposed structures and improvements, interference with utility services, protection of scenic views, and the realization of a reasonable enjoyment of property may require the removal of certain trees and ground cover.
        Noise. To minimize the exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise; to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce; the use, value, and enjoyment of property; sleep and repose; and the quality of the environment.
        Light and Glare. To minimize excessive light and glare.
        Land Use. To implement and further the city's comprehensive plans, including the land use plan, transportation plan, open space, parks and recreation plan, and other plans formally adopted by the city of Aberdeen;
        To encourage orderly growth in undeveloped areas of the city by maximizing the efficiency of utilities and roads and other capital improvements.
        Natural Resources. To encourage the wise use of nonrenewable natural resources. To encourage efficient use of renewable resources.
        Risk of Upset. To require proposals involving the potential risk of an explosion or the release of hazardous substances to include specific measures which will ensure the public health, safety and welfare.
        Housing. To encourage the provision and maintenance of adequate housing for the residents of Aberdeen, for all income levels;
        To evaluate impacts of new nonresidential development which would reduce existing housing stock or reduce land available for residential development.
        Transportation/Circulation. To approve street designs which are beneficial to the public in consideration of vehicular and pedestrian safety, efficiency of service, influence on the amenities and liveability of the community, and economy of both construction and the use of land;
        To encourage increased traffic volumes only in areas with sufficient capacity to provide safe and efficient traffic flow or where adequate traffic improvements will be provided in conjunction with the development. To require adequate vehicular and pedestrian access to new developments, and minimize pedestrian vehicular conflict points;
        To approve local street systems which are designed to minimize through traffic movements, to discourage excessive speeds, to minimize the need for circuitous travel; and which are designed for a relatively uniform low volume of traffic;
        To facilitate, to the extent possible, maximum efficiency and safety to the through street systems;
        To require adequate off-street parking to be determined by proposed land use, zoning, potential future use, and contributing factors;
        To encourage projects which would have the potential to increase the use of public transportation systems, and reduce the unnecessary use of energy resources and the generation of pollutants.
        Public Services. To encourage and approve development only where adequate public services, including fire and police protection, are available or will be made available to serve the proposal.
        Energy. To incorporate energy conservation features as feasible and practicable into all city projects and promote energy conservation throughout the community.
        Utilities. To encourage and approve development only where adequate utilities, including water, sewer, power, communications and drainage facilities are available or will be made available in conjunction with the proposal.
        Human Health. To restrict or prohibit uses which will expose the public to unsanitary conditions or disease;
        To restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
        To require that uses vulnerable to floods including public facilities which serve uses, shall be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
        To meet the minimum requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and state of Washington Flood Control Program.
        Aesthetics. To encourage development which maintains and improves the existing aesthetic character of the community;
        To maximize protection of existing scenic vistas and scenic corridors.
        Recreation. To protect the existing open space areas for future generations and promote their expansion.
        Archeological/Historical. To consider historical and archeological importance of all buildings and sites prior to any change in use or development.
        Economics. To encourage a reasonable balance between economic and environmental concerns.
        Other Policies. To minimize the reduction of available natural light due to the casting of shadows by new development;
        To encourage planned residential development to preserve and maintain sensitive environmental areas which could be negatively impacted by traditional development techniques.
        Aquifer Recharge Areas. Development proposals, particularly those on or near possible aquifer recharge areas, should be evaluated as to their potential for groundwater contamination. New or expanding existing uses that have the potential to generate leachates that affect groundwater quality should be permitted only if adequate protection measures are employed in site design.
        Frequently Flooded Areas. Development and nonproject actions should be reviewed as to their compliance under current regulatory provisions preventing damage to property due to frequent flooding.
        Projects that utilize fill beyond exempted levels shall be reviewed for their propensity to increase flooding on adjacent properties. If it is held that such flooding is possible, suitable mitigation measures are to be used to protect adjacent property owners.
        In addition, the effect of development on other critical areas that contribute to flood control, such as wetlands and fish and wildlife habitat areas, should be reviewed and appropriately mitigated.
        Geologically Hazardous Areas. In addition to existing city ordinances regulating development in geologically hazardous areas, the following strategies should be employed:
            (1) Proposals on slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent should seek to preserve as much natural vegetation as practical to reduce the risk of erosion or slides.
            (2) In those areas considered prone to landslides or extreme erosion, specific geotechnical reports are to be prepared that evaluate hazard(s) present and how they will be mitigated.
            (3) Project design should address the effects of such components as street construction, storm water collection and disposal, lot size and dimensions and restoration of disturbed lands.
        Wetlands. Development proposals on or adjacent to wetlands (as identified in The Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands) shall be evaluated in accordance with the following criteria:
            (1) The capacity of the wetland in controlling or containing general flooding and storm water runoff.
            (2) The importance of the wetland in contributing to fish and wildlife habitat.
            (3) The recreational and aesthetic value of the wetland to the community.
            (4) The economic benefit to the community derived from a development proposal that may diminish the quality or size of a wetland.
            No wetland shall be managed based upon consideration of only one of the above factors; rather, the cumulative effect of all of the above values must be weighed in any development review decision. The National Wetlands Inventory Map will be used as a reference in determining the presence of wetlands on or near a project site.
            (5) Except for permits and variances issued pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of the Municipal Code, when any proposal or action not requiring a decision of the city is conditioned or denied on the basis of SEPA by a nonelected official, the decision shall be appealable to the city council. Such appeal may be perfected by the proponent or any aggrieved party by giving notice to the responsible official within ten days of the decision being appealed. Review by the city council shall be on a de novo basis.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.220)

14.24.030 Notice/statute of limitations.
A. The city, applicant, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.
B. The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the city clerk, applicant or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080.
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.19.230)

Chapter 14.28 CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS

Sections:
14.28.010    Adoption by reference.

14.28.010 Adoption by reference.
The city adopts by reference the following rules for categorical exemptions, as supplemented in this title, including WAC 173-806-080 (Use of exemptions):
+------------+---------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                       |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-800 | Categorical Exemptions.               |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-880 | Emergencies.                          |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
| 197-11-890 | Petitioning DOE to Change Exemptions. |
+------------+---------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.250)

Chapter 14.32 AGENCY COMPLIANCE

Sections:
14.32.010    Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
14.32.030    Fees.

14.32.010 Purpose of this chapter and adoption by reference.
This chapter contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating environmentally sensitive areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-806-050 through 173-806-053 and this chapter:
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
|    WAC     |                                                       |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-900 | Purpose of this Part.                                 |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-902 | Agency SEPA Policies.                                 |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-906 | Content and consistency of agency procedures.         |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-916 | Application to Ongoing Actions.                       |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-920 | Agencies with Environmental Expertise.                |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-922 | Lead Agency Rules.                                    |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-924 | Determining the Lead Agency.                          |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-926 | Lead Agency for Governmental Proposals.               |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-928 | Lead Agency for Public and Private Proposals.         |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-930 | Lead Agency for Private Projects with One Agency with |
|            | Jurisdiction.                                         |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-932 | Lead Agency for Private Projects Requiring Licenses   |
|            | from more than one Agency, when one of the Agencies   |
|            | is a County/City.                                     |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-934 | Lead Agency for Private Projects Requiring Licenses   |
|            | from a Local Agency, not a County/City, and one or    |
|            | more State Agencies.                                  |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-936 | Lead Agency for Private Projects Requiring Licenses   |
|            | from more than one State Agency.                      |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-938 | Lead Agencies for Specific Proposals.                 |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-940 | Transfer of Lead Agency Status to a State Agency.     |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-942 | Agreements on Lead Agency Status.                     |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-944 | Agreements on Division of Lead Agency Duties.         |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-946 | DOE Resolution of Lead Agency Disputes.               |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| 197-11-948 | Assumption of Lead Agency Status.                     |
+------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.260)

14.32.030 Fees.
The city shall require the following fees for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this title:
A. The city council shall establish by resolution any fees or charges for threshold determinations, applications, notices, reviews, permits, administrative actions, or appeals authorized under this chapter. Applicants shall pay the appropriate fees or charges in effect at the time a completed application or environmental checklist is submitted to the reviewing department. No application or environmental checklist shall be reviewed or approved unless the appropriate fees and charges have been paid. The time periods provided by this title for making a threshold determination shall not begin to run until payment of the fee.
B. Environmental Impact Statement. 
    1. When the city is the lead agency for a proposal requiring an EIS and the responsible official determines that the EIS shall be prepared by employees of the city, the city may charge and collect a reasonable fee from any applicant to cover costs incurred by the city in preparing the EIS. The responsible official shall advise the applicant(s) of the projected costs for the EIS prior to actual preparation; the applicant shall post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs.
    2. The responsible official may determine that the city will contract directly with a consultant for preparation of an EIS, or a portion of the EIS, for activities initiated by some persons or entity other than the city and may bill such costs and expenses directly to the applicant. The city may require the applicant to post bond or otherwise ensure payment of such costs. Such consultants shall be selected by mutual agreement of the city and applicant after a call for proposals.
    3. If a proposal is modified so that an EIS is no longer required, the responsible official shall refund any fees collected under (1) or (2) of this subsection which remain after incurred costs are paid.
C. The city may collect a reasonable fee from an applicant to cover the cost of meeting the public notice requirements of this ordinance relating to the applicant's proposal.
D. The city shall not collect a fee for performing its duties as a consulted agency.
E. The city may charge any person for copies of any document prepared under this ordinance, and for mailing the document, in a manner provided by RCW Chapter 42.17.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005; Ord. 6198, Amended, 10/07/1998. Prior code § 1.92.280)

Chapter 14.50 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM

Sections:
Article 1.  Introduction
    14.50.010    Requirements of the Shoreline Management Act.
    14.50.020    Authority.
    14.50.030    Purpose and intent.
    14.50.040    Shoreline Master Program Development.
    14.50.050    Applicability.
    14.50.060    Shoreline jurisdiction.
    14.50.060.01 Extent of shoreline jurisdiction.
    14.50.060.02 Shorelines of statewide significance.
    14.50.060.03 Official shoreline maps.
    14.50.070    Relationship to other codes, ordinances, and plans.
    14.50.080    Liberal construction.
    14.50.090    Severability.
    14.50.100    Title.
    14.50.110    Effective date.
Article 2.  Shoreline Management Goals
    14.50.200    Shoreline Master Program Goals.
    14.50.210    Economic development goal.
    14.50.220    Public access goal.
    14.50.230    Recreation goal.
    14.50.240    Circulation goal.
    14.50.250    Shoreline use goal.
    14.50.260    Conservation goal.
    14.50.270    Historic, cultural, scientific and educational goal.
    14.50.280    Flood hazard preservation goal.
    14.50.290    Restoration goal.
Article 3.  Shoreline Environment Designations
    14.50.300    Shoreline environment designation system.
    14.50.300.01 Aquatic.
    14.50.300.02 High intensity.
    14.50.300.03 Residential.
    14.50.300.04 Urban conservancy.
    14.50.310    Interpretation of shoreline environment designation boundaries.
    14.50.310.01 Shoreline environment designation maps.
    14.50.310.02 Determining shoreline environment designation boundaries.
Article 4.  General Policies and Regulations
    14.50.400    Introduction.
    14.50.410    Archaeological and historic resources.
    14.50.410.01 Policies.
    14.50.410.02 Regulations.
    14.50.420    Environmental impacts and mitigation.
    14.50.420.01 Policy.
    14.50.420.02 Regulations.
    14.50.430    Critical areas and shoreline vegetation conservation.
    14.50.430.01 Policies.
    14.50.430.02 Regulations.
    14.50.440    Flood hazard management.
    14.50.440.01 Policies.
    14.50.440.02 Regulations.
    14.50.450    Public access.
    14.50.450.01 Policies.
    14.50.450.02 Regulations.
    14.50.460    Water quality.
    14.50.460.01 Policies.
    14.50.460.02 Regulations.
Article 5.  Specific Shoreline Use Policies and Regulations
    14.50.500    Introduction.
    14.50.510    General shoreline use.
    14.50.510.01 Policies.
    14.50.510.02 Regulations.
    14.50.520    Allowed shoreline uses.
    14.50.530    Development standards.
    14.50.530.01 Density and lot coverage.
    14.50.530.02 Shoreline height standards.
    14.50.540    Agriculture.
    14.50.540.01 Policies.
    14.50.540.02 Regulations.
    14.50.550    Aquaculture.
    14.50.550.01 Policies.
    14.50.550.02 Regulations.
    14.50.560    Boating and water access facilities.
    14.50.560.01 Policies.
    14.50.560.02 Regulations.
    14.50.570    Commercial development.
    14.50.570.01 Policies.
    14.50.570.02 Regulations.
    14.50.580    Forest practices.
    14.50.580.01 Policies.
    14.50.580.02 Regulations.
    14.50.590    Industrial and port development.
    14.50.590.01 Policies.
    14.50.590.02 Regulations.
    14.50.591    Mining.
    14.50.591.01 Policies.
    14.50.591.02 Regulations.
    14.50.592    Parking.
    14.50.592.01 Policies.
    14.50.592.02 Regulations.
    14.50.593    Recreational development.
    14.50.593.01 Policies.
    14.50.593.02 Regulations.
    14.50.594    Residential development.
    14.50.594.01 Policies.
    14.50.594.02 Regulations.
    14.50.595    Signs.
    14.50.595.01 Policies.
    14.50.595.02 Regulations.
    14.50.596    Transportation facilities.
    14.50.596.01 Policies.
    14.50.596.02 Regulations.
    14.50.597    Utilities.
    14.50.597.01 Policies.
    14.50.597.02 Regulations.
Article 6.  Shoreline Modification Policies and Regulations
    14.50.600    Introduction.
    14.50.600.01 Shoreline modification table.
    14.50.610    General shoreline modification provisions.
    14.50.610.01 Policies.
    14.50.610.02 Regulations.
    14.50.620    Clearing, grading, and fill.
    14.50.620.01 Policies.
    14.50.620.02 Regulations.
    14.50.630    Dredging and dredge material disposal.
    14.50.630.01 Policies.
    14.50.630.02 Regulations.
    14.50.640    In-water structures.
    14.50.640.01 Policies.
    14.50.640.02 Regulations.
    14.50.650    Restoration.
    14.50.650.01 Policies.
    14.50.650.02 Regulations.
    14.50.660    Shoreline stabilization.
    14.50.660.01 Policies.
    14.50.660.02 Regulations.
Article 7.  Shoreline Administration
    14.50.700    Introduction.
    14.50.710    Permit processing – General.
    14.50.710.01 Shoreline administrator.
    14.50.710.02 Provisions applicable to all shoreline permits.
    14.50.710.03 Application requirements.
    14.50.720    Application – Notices.
    14.50.730    Shoreline permits and approvals.
    14.50.730.01 Shoreline substantial development permits.
    14.50.730.02 Shoreline conditional use permits.
    14.50.730.03 Shoreline variances.
    14.50.730.04 Shoreline letters of exemption.
    14.50.740    Public hearing and decision.
    14.50.740.01 Burden of proof for development conformance.
    14.50.740.02 Public hearing process.
    14.50.740.03 Notice of decision.
    14.50.740.04 Development start.
    14.50.740.05 Appeals of decisions.
    14.50.750    Time requirements and revisions.
    14.50.750.01 Time requirements for shoreline permits.
    14.50.750.02 Revisions of shoreline permits.
    14.50.760    Nonconforming development.
    14.50.770    Enforcement and penalties.
    14.50.770.01 Enforcement.
    14.50.770.02 Penalty.
    14.50.770.03 Public and private redress.
    14.50.770.04 Delinquent permit penalty.
    14.50.780    Shoreline Master Program – Administration.
    14.50.780.01 General administration.
    14.50.780.02 Shoreline Master Program Review.
    14.50.780.03 Annexation of a shoreline of the state.
Article 8.  Definitions
    14.50.800    Unlisted words or phrases.
    14.50.810    Definitions.
    14.50.820    Abbreviations.
Article 9.  Appendices
    14.50.900    Appendix 1: Shoreline environment designation maps.
    14.50.910    Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations.
    14.50.912    Wetlands critical areas – Designation.
    14.50.913    Wetland identification and delineation.
    14.50.914    Wetland buffers – Dimensions.
    14.50.915    Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.
    14.50.916    Wetland critical areas and wetland buffers – Regulated activities.
    14.50.917    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Water bodies – Performance standards – Specific activities.
    14.50.918    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Water bodies – Buffers.
    14.50.919    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Additional requirements for critical saltwater habitats.
Prior legislation: Prior code § 11.08.010, 1958 § 11.08.020, 1958 § 11.08.030, 1958 § 11.08.040, 1958 § 11.08.050, 1958 § 11.08.060, 1958 § 11.08.070, 1958 § 11.08.090, 1958 § 11.08.080, 1958 § 11.08.100, 1958 § 11.08.110, 1958 § 11.08.120, 1958 § 11.08.130, 1958 § 11.08.140, 1958 § 11.08.150, 1958 § 11.08.160, 1958 § 11.08.170, 1958 § 11.08.180, 1958 § 11.08.190, 1958 § 11.08.200, 1958 § 11.08.210, 1958 § 11.08.230, 1958 § 11.08.240, 1958 § 11.08.250, 1958 § 11.08.260; Ords. 6367, 6382, 6592 §§ 10, 27, 6598.

Article 1. Introduction

14.50.010 Requirements of the Shoreline Management Act.
The State Legislature passed Washington’s Shoreline Management Act (SMA) (Chapter 90.58 RCW) in 1971 and citizens of the state approved the SMA through referendum in 1972 “…to prevent the inherent harm in an uncoordinated and piecemeal development of the state’s shorelines.” The SMA requires that the city of Aberdeen plan for the use of shorelines of the state within its municipal boundaries. The SMA and Chapter 173-26 WAC established broad policies that give preference to shoreline uses that:
•Encourage water-dependent uses: “…uses shall be preferred which are consistent with control of pollution and prevention of damage to the natural environment, or are unique to or dependent upon use of the states’ shorelines…”
•Protect shoreline natural resources: including “…the land and its vegetation and wildlife, and the waters of the state and their aquatic life…”
•Promote public access: “…the public’s opportunity to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of natural shorelines of the state shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible consistent with the overall best interest of the state and people generally.”
The SMA recognizes that “…shorelines are among the most valuable and fragile…” of the state’s resources. The city recognizes and protects private property rights in shoreline jurisdiction, while aiming to preserve the quality of these unique resources for all state residents.
The primary purpose of the SMA is to manage and protect the state’s shoreline resources by planning for reasonable and appropriate uses. In order to protect the public interest in preserving these shorelines, the SMA establishes a coordinated planning program between the city and the state to address development and uses occurring in the state’s shorelines.
Under the SMA, the Shoreline Master Program (SMP) was created and implemented based on a cooperative program of shoreline management between the city and the state. With citizen contributions collected through the city’s shoreline planning process, the city developed this SMP and it will implement and administer it through shoreline permits and reviews. The Washington State Department of Ecology (Ecology) provided funding for the update and reviews and approves the city’s SMP and certain local shoreline permit decisions.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.020 Authority.
The Shoreline Management Act of 1971, Chapter 90.58 RCW, is the authority for the enactment and administration of the SMP. The community development director or an individual designated by the director shall be the administrator of the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.030 Purpose and intent.
The four (4) purposes of the SMP are to:
A. Carry out the responsibilities imposed on the city by the SMA;
B. Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, by providing a guide and regulation for the future development of the shoreline resources of the city;
C. Further, by adoption, the policies of the SMA and the goals of the SMP; and
D. Comply with the state SMP guidelines (Chapter 173-26 WAC), including a particular focus on regulations and mitigation standards to ensure that development under the SMP will not cause a net loss of ecological functions.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.040 Shoreline Master Program Development.
The cities of Aberdeen, Cosmopolis, and Hoquiam obtained grant number G1400451 from Ecology in 2013 to conduct a comprehensive SMP update. The cities worked collaboratively through the SMP update process. The first step in the update process involved an inventory of the cities’ shoreline jurisdiction. Numerous rivers, streams, and lakes and their associated wetlands, floodways and floodplains comprise the cities’ shoreline jurisdiction. Combined, there are seven thousand four hundred sixty-seven (7,467) acres and eighty-five (85) miles of shoreline associated with streams, lakes and marine water bodies meeting the definition of shorelines of the state within the cities. There are one thousand eight hundred sixty-eight (1,868) acres and thirty-nine (39) miles of shoreline in Aberdeen.
The public participation plan guided public interaction throughout the development of the SMP. A citizen advisory committee (CAC) reviewed SMP documents, particularly proposed shoreline environment designations, policies, regulations and provided feedback in a series of public meetings.
The shoreline inventory and characterization described existing biological and physical conditions for the sixteen (16) shoreline reaches covering the cities. These reaches were analyzed and characterized to create a baseline from which future development actions in shoreline jurisdiction will be measured. A technical advisory committee (TAC) reviewed and commented on the shoreline inventory and characterization.
The public discussed the findings of the shoreline inventory and characterization and proposed shoreline environment designations at a community meeting. Shoreline environment designations were assigned for shoreline jurisdiction in the cities. Then goals, policies and regulations for each shoreline environment designation and for all activities subject to the SMA were developed to maintain the baseline condition. The CAC and the public reviewed these documents.
In the cumulative impacts analysis and the no net loss report, the cities analyzed whether the updated SMP, implemented over time, yields no net loss of ecological functions when considering reasonably foreseeable development in shoreline jurisdiction relative to the baseline established by the shoreline inventory and characterization.
The cities developed the restoration plan to address voluntary, nonregulatory actions the cities would take to improve the shoreline jurisdiction above the baseline condition. Ideally, the SMP, in combination with other city and regional efforts, will ultimately produce a net improvement in ecological functions of the shoreline.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.050 Applicability.
A. The SMP shall not apply retroactively to existing, legally established structures, uses, and developments in place at the time of Ecology adoption of the SMP.
B. All proposed uses, activities, and development occurring within shoreline jurisdiction must conform to the SMA and the SMP whether or not a permit or other form of authorization is required, except when specifically exempted by statute.
C. In addition to the requirements of the SMA, permit review, implementation, and enforcement procedures affecting private property must be conducted in a manner consistent with all relevant constitutional and other legal limitations on the regulation of private property.
D. Federal agencies are subject to this SMP and Chapter 90.58 RCW, as provided by the Coastal Zone Management Act (Title 16 U.S.C. § 1451 et seq.) and WAC 173-27-060(1).
E. As recognized by RCW 90.58.350, the provisions of the SMP do not affect treaty rights of affected tribes.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.060 Shoreline jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.060.01 Extent of shoreline jurisdiction.
The SMA defines the extent of the geographic area in the city subject to the SMP, referred to in the SMP as the city’s shoreline jurisdiction. According to RCW 90.58.030, the SMP applies to the following shorelines of the state within the city:
A. The area between the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) and the western boundary of the state from Cape Disappointment on the south to Cape Flattery on the north, including harbors, bays, estuaries and inlets.
B. Segments of streams or rivers where the mean annual flow is more than twenty (20) cubic feet per second.
C. Lakes and reservoirs twenty (20) acres and greater in area.
D. Shorelands adjacent to these water bodies. These include:
    1. Lands extending landward for two hundred (200) feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the OHWM;
    2. Adopted Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred (200) feet from such adopted FEMA floodways; and
    3. All wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes and tidal waters subject to the SMA.
The following water bodies are subject to the city’s SMP: Grays Harbor, the Chehalis River, Lake Aberdeen, the Wishkah River, Wedekind Creek, the Wynoochee River, Charley Creek, tidal portions of Fry Creek and Newskah Creek.
The city, as recommended by the CAC and approved by the city council, did not choose to include additional areas in shoreline jurisdiction during the SMP planning process. These additional areas included the following:
•The area beyond the minimum shorelands along stream corridors as defined in the SMA.
•The “…land necessary for buffers for critical areas as defined in Chapter 36.70A RCW that occur within shorelines of the state.”
The extent of shoreline jurisdiction in the city is depicted on the official shoreline maps included in SMP Appendix 1: Shoreline Environment Designation Maps (Section 14.50.900). The maps only approximately represent the lateral extent of shoreline jurisdiction. The actual lateral extent of shoreline jurisdiction shall be determined on a case-by-case basis established by the location of the OHWM, the floodway, which is defined as the adopted FEMA floodways, adopted floodplains and the presence of associated wetlands. In circumstances where shoreline jurisdiction does not include an entire parcel, only that portion of the parcel and any use, activity or development on that portion of the parcel within shoreline jurisdiction is subject to the SMP.
The actual location of the OHWM, floodway, floodplain and wetland boundaries shall be determined at the time a development is proposed.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.060.02 Shorelines of statewide significance.
A. Adoption of Policy. In implementing the objectives for shorelines of statewide significance, the city based its decisions in preparing the SMP on the following policies in order of priority, with one (1) being the highest and seven (7) being the lowest:
    1. Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest.
    2. Preserve the natural character of shoreline jurisdiction.
    3. Support actions that result in long-term benefits over short-term benefits.
    4. Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline.
    5. Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shoreline.
    6. Increase recreational opportunities for the public in shoreline jurisdiction.
    7. Provide for any other element as defined in RCW 90.58.100 deemed appropriate or necessary.
Uses that are not consistent with these policies should not be permitted on shorelines of statewide significance.
B. Designation of Shorelines of Statewide Significance. Specific water bodies are classified as shorelines of statewide significance in RCW 90.58.030(2)(f):
    1. Lakes, whether natural, artificial, or a combination thereof, with a surface acreage of one thousand (1,000) acres or more measured at the OHWM;
    2. Natural rivers or segments thereof downstream of a point where the mean annual flow is measured at one thousand (1,000) cubic feet per second or more; and
    3. The area between the OHWM and the western boundary of the state from Cape Disappointment on the south to Cape Flattery on the north, including harbors, bays, estuaries and inlets.
In the city, the Grays Harbor Estuary, the Chehalis River, the Wynoochee River and their associated shorelands are defined as shorelines of statewide significance. These shorelines are considered resources for all people of the state; thus, preference is given to uses that favor long-range goals and support the overall public interest.
C. Policies for Shorelines of Statewide Significance. The statewide interest should be recognized and protected over the local interest in shorelines of statewide significance. To ensure that statewide interests are protected over local interests, the city shall review all development proposals within shorelines of statewide significance for consistency with RCW 90.58.030 and the following policies:
    1. Encourage redevelopment of shorelines where it restores or enhances shoreline ecological functions and processes impaired by prior development activities.
    2. The city should consult with Ecology, the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, the Shoalwater Bay Tribe, the Quinault Indian Tribe and other resources agencies for development proposals that could affect anadromous fisheries.
    3. Where commercial timber cutting takes place pursuant to Section 14.50.580 and RCW 90.58.150, reforestation should take place as soon as feasible.
    4. Activities that use shoreline resources on a sustained yield or nonconsuming basis and that are compatible with other appropriate uses should be given priority over uses not meeting these criteria.
    5. The range of options for shoreline use should be preserved to the maximum possible extent for succeeding generations. Development that consumes valuable, scarce or irreplaceable natural resources should not be permitted if alternative sites are available.
    6. Potential short-term economic gains or convenience should be measured against potential long-term and/or costly impairment of natural features.
    7. Protection or enhancement of aesthetic values should be actively promoted in design review of new or expanding development.
    8. Resources and ecological systems of shorelines of statewide significance and those limited shorelines containing unique, scarce, and/or sensitive resources should be protected to the maximum extent feasible.
    9. Erosion and sedimentation from development sites should be controlled to minimize adverse impacts on ecosystem processes. If site conditions preclude effective erosion and sediment control, excavations, land clearing or other activities likely to result in significant erosion should be severely limited.
    10. Public access development in extremely sensitive areas should be restricted or prohibited. All forms of recreation or access development should be designed to protect the resource base upon which such uses in general depend.
    11. Public and private developments should be encouraged to provide trails, viewpoints, water access points and shoreline related recreation opportunities whenever feasible. Such development is recognized as a high priority use.
    12. Development not requiring a waterside or shoreline location should be located inland so that lawful public enjoyment of shorelines is enhanced.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.060.03 Official shoreline maps.
The community development department shall keep the official shoreline maps for the city. Unofficial copies of the official maps may be included or distributed with copies of the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.070 Relationship to other codes, ordinances, and plans.
All applicable local, state and federal laws shall apply to properties in shoreline jurisdiction. Should a conflict occur between the provisions of the SMP or between the SMP and the laws, regulations, codes or rules promulgated by any other authority having jurisdiction within the city, the most restrictive requirement shall be applied, except when constrained by state or federal law or where specifically provided otherwise in the SMP.
While the city is not subject to all of the requirements of the Washington State Growth Management Act (GMA), the city will strive to ensure that there is consistency between the SMP’s shoreline environment designation provisions and the city’s comprehensive plan elements and development regulations.
The critical areas regulations in effect on April 12, 2017, which are codified in the city’s critical areas ordinance (CAO), Chapter 14.100, Critical Area Protection, are integral and applicable to the SMP and are hereby adopted by reference. All uses and development occurring within critical areas or their buffers within shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with these regulations except as modified by Appendix 2: Table A2-1 in Section 14.50.910(B).
Ocean uses and activities conducted within the city’s and the state of Washington’s jurisdiction shall comply with Chapter 43.143 RCW (Ocean Resources Management Act) and WAC 173-26-360 (Ocean Management). Nothing in this section is intended to expand or modify the applicability of Chapter 43.143 RCW, WAC 173-26-360, or any subsections thereof to ocean uses and activities not otherwise governed by those laws, administrative rules or their subsections.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.080 Liberal construction.
As provided for in RCW 90.58.900, the SMP is exempted from the rule of strict construction and it shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.090 Severability.
As provided for in RCW 90.58.910, should any section or provision of the SMP be declared invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the SMP as a whole.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.100 Title.
This document shall be known and may be cited as the City of Aberdeen Shoreline Master Program or SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.110 Effective date.
The SMP is hereby adopted on April 12, 2017. The SMP and all amendments thereto shall become effective fourteen (14) days from the date of Ecology’s written notice of final action to the city.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 2. Shoreline Management Goals

14.50.200 Shoreline Master Program Goals.
The state SMP guidelines, found in WAC 173-26-186(3), require that all relevant policy goals must be addressed in the planning policies of the SMP. This section contains goals that express the long-term vision of the city for its shorelines. Goals provide the basis for the more detailed SMP shoreline use environments, policies, regulations and administrative procedures in subsequent chapters.
Nine (9) goals relating to shorelines management have been identified: economic development; public access; recreation; circulation; shoreline use; conservation; historic, cultural, scientific and educational; flood hazard preservation; and restoration. Each of these is described below.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.210 Economic development goal.
 Goal ED-1. Provide an area for the location and design of industries, projects of statewide significance, transportation facilities, port facilities, tourist facilities, commerce and other developments that are particularly dependent on their location on or use of shorelines of the state.
Maintain and enhance our shoreline related industry by securing an adequate amount of shorelands of an appropriate nature for these industries while creating and maintaining an industrial and economic environment, which can coexist harmoniously with the natural and human environments.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.220 Public access goal.
 Goal PA-1. Increase and enhance public access to publicly owned shoreline areas consistent with private rights, public safety and the natural shoreline character.
Maintain and improve our existing public access facilities, seek more facilities and devices to increase opportunities for public access to our region’s waters. Further, public access should be as safe as feasible, cause no ill effect on other shorelines uses or features, or ill effect on the waters themselves or infringement upon private property rights. Yet fragile areas should not be destroyed through overuse, rather that the volume of access be only that which the waters and shorelines can withstand.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.230 Recreation goal.
 Goal REC-1. Provide for the preservation and enlargement of recreational opportunities, including, but not limited to: parks, tidelands, beaches and recreational areas.
Seek and provide proper recreational opportunities for the local citizenry, to see that the at-home recreational needs are met. Further, maintain and enhance our tourism resources, to stabilize these resources and to guide resource development such that the very development is not fatal to the original resource.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.240 Circulation goal.
 Goal CIR-1. Provide for multi-modal circulation opportunities by planning for the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals and other public utilities and facilities, all correlated with the shoreline use element.
Create and maintain a multi-modal circulatory network capable of delivering people, goods, services and emergency services at the highest level of convenience, safety, reliability and economy. The secondary effects of multi-modal circulatory system development must be accounted for in the planning of such systems to avoid undesirable side effects. Circulation planning must be compatible with land use planning.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.250 Shoreline use goal.
 Goal SU-1. Identify areas associated with the general distribution, location, and extent of the use on shorelines and adjacent land areas for housing, business, industry, transportation, agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public buildings and grounds and other categories of public and private uses of the land.
Promote the best feasible pattern of land and water uses, assure a minimum of conflict between uses, assure that individual uses are placed on sites appropriate to such uses, assure that lands and waters of specific characteristics are available to uses which need such special types of lands and waters, see that all of the uses needed by the region have a place and generally devise a pattern beneficial to the natural and human environments.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.260 Conservation goal.
 Goal CONS-1. Preserve natural resources, including but not limited to: scenic vistas, aesthetics and vital estuarine areas for fisheries and wildlife protection.
Identify the resources of the region including fish, wildlife, timber, estuaries, shorelines, beaches, scenic areas, fragile ecological areas, land, water and air. Further, identify standards which will guarantee a continuing supply of these resources in sufficient quality and quantity to meet all of the region’s foreseeable needs with an excess to absorb accidental losses or economic slumps, which might occur.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.270 Historic, cultural, scientific and educational goal.
 Goal HCSE-1. Provide for the protection and restoration of buildings, sites and areas having historic, cultural, scientific or educational values.
Within the limitations of feasibility and private property rights, areas and structures of historic, cultural, scientific and educational value should be preserved and maintained. Minority and special interest viewpoints regarding such preservation may be entertained by means of the substantial development application permit system.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.280 Flood hazard preservation goal.
 Goal FHP-1. Recognize statewide interests over individual interests in the prevention and minimization of flood damages.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.290 Restoration goal.
 Goal REST-1. Encourage restoration of previously degraded areas so that they may be renewed or restored to a natural or useful condition.
Encourage development in areas which have been previously impacted with development so that such areas may be renewed, restored and refurbished by compatible new development. Utilize governmental activity as a catalyst and stimulant to trigger the desired redevelopment of deteriorated public facilities within target areas.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 3. Shoreline Environment Designations

14.50.300 Shoreline environment designation system.
The SMA’s requirements for shoreline environment designations are found in WAC 173-26-211. The city classified and mapped its shoreline jurisdiction into shoreline environment designations based on the following four (4) criteria found in the state SMP guidelines (WAC 173-26-211(2)(a)):
A. Existing Land Use Patterns. What land uses have developed in each of the shoreline areas to date, as documented in the shoreline inventory and characterization report and the SMP map folio.
B. Biological and Physical Character of the Shoreline. The range of ecological characteristics and functions identified for each of the shoreline reaches documented in the shoreline inventory and characterization report.
C. The Goals and Aspirations of the City as Expressed through Its Comprehensive Plan. A city’s comprehensive plan provides guidance through its goals and policies, land use designations, various elements such as land use, housing, transportation, capital facilities and economic development, as well as implementing development codes, parks and recreation plans, sub-area plans and other plans.
D. Specific Criteria for Each Shoreline Environment Designation. The specific criteria for the aquatic, high intensity, shoreline residential and urban conservancy shoreline environment designations are found in WAC 173-26-211(5). The city may establish different shoreline environment designations, provided they are consistent with the purposes and policies of the state SMP guidelines.
Based on these four (4) criteria, this chapter establishes the shoreline environment designations used in the city for shoreline jurisdiction defined in Section 14.50.060. The locations of the shoreline environment designations are illustrated in Section 14.50.900, Appendix 1: Shoreline environment designation maps, and each shoreline environment designation is described in this chapter by a statement of purpose, followed by designation criteria, and management policies specific to that shoreline environment designation.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.300.01 Aquatic.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the aquatic shoreline environment designation is to protect, restore and manage the unique characteristics and resources of shoreline jurisdiction waterward of the OHWM.
B. Designation Criteria. Assign the aquatic shoreline environment designation to lands waterward of the OHWM.
C. Management Policies. Development within the aquatic shoreline environment designation shall be consistent with the following policies:
    1. Allow new over-water structures only for water-dependent uses, public access or ecological restoration.
    2. Limit the size of new over-water structures to the minimum necessary to support the structure’s intended use.
    3. Encourage multiple uses of over-water facilities to reduce the impacts of development and increase effective use of water resources in shoreline jurisdiction.
    4. Minimize interference with surface navigation, consider impacts to public views and allow for the safe, unobstructed passage of fish and wildlife, particularly those species dependent on migration, in the location and design of all developments and uses.
    5. Design and manage shoreline uses and modifications to prevent degradation of water quality and alteration of natural hydrographic conditions.
    6. Prohibit uses that adversely affect the ecological functions of critical freshwater habitats except where necessary to achieve the objectives of RCW 90.58.020 and then only when the impacts are mitigated.
    7. Reserve space in shoreline jurisdiction for shoreline preferred uses, including existing shellfish protection districts if applicable, while considering upland and in-water uses, water quality, navigation, presence of aquatic vegetation, existing critical habitats, aesthetics, public access and views.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.300.02 High intensity.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the high intensity shoreline environment designation is to provide for high intensity water-oriented commercial, industrial and port, mixed-use, transportation and navigation uses while protecting existing ecological functions and restoring ecological functions in shoreline jurisdiction that have been degraded.
B. Designation Criteria. 
    1. Assign the high intensity shoreline environment designation to the areas of shoreline jurisdiction that currently support high intensity uses related to commerce, industry, public facilities, transportation or navigation or are suitable for high intensity water-oriented uses. The areas of shoreline jurisdiction assigned this designation should have the following characteristics:
        a. Can support high intensity uses without degradation to existing shoreline function;
        b. Designated by the city’s Comprehensive Plan and zoning for high intensity, commercial, industrial, public, transportation, navigation or mixed-use development; and
        c. Have few biophysical limitations to development such as floodways, floodplains, steep slopes or landslide hazard areas.
    2. Allow for non-water-related uses within this designation where water-dependent uses are not possible, such as where there is a developed roadway between the OHWM and the proposed use.
C. Management Policies. Development within the high intensity shoreline environment designation shall be consistent with the following policies:
    1. Prioritize uses on sites with physical access to the water in the following order of preference:
        a. Water-dependent;
        b. Water-related;
        c. Water-enjoyment.
    2. Allow for non-water-related uses within this designation where:
        a. Water-dependent uses are not feasible, because a lake, river or stream is unnavigable;
        b. There is a developed roadway between the OHWM and the proposed use; or
        c. The site is physically separated from the shoreline by another property.
    3. Allow the development of new non-water-oriented uses as either part of mixed-use development or when the applicant can demonstrate that the use will not conflict with or limit future opportunities for water-oriented uses.
    4. Design new development located in shoreline jurisdiction to result in no net loss of ecological function.
    5. Restore and remediate shoreline areas within new development sites consistent with state and federal laws.
    6. Require visual and physical access where feasible with physical access prioritized over visual access.
    7. Seek to achieve the full use of existing urban lands in shoreline jurisdiction before expanding intensive development, subject to long-range projections of regional economic need and allowances to support future expansion of water-dependent and water-related uses.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.300.03 Residential.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the residential shoreline environment designation is to accommodate residential development and accessory structures and uses that are consistent with the SMP. An additional purpose is to provide appropriate public access and recreational development.
B. Designation Criteria. The residential shoreline environment designation is assigned to the shoreline areas that are predominantly residential or are planned and platted for residential development. These areas contain the following characteristics:
    1. They contain existing residential development or are proposed primarily for residential development in the Comprehensive Plan and zoning code; and
    2. They do not contain significant environmental hazards or sensitive areas.
C. Management Policies. Development within the residential shoreline environment designation shall be consistent with the following policies:
    1. Preserve ecological functions by establishing development standards for height, shoreline buffers, shoreline building setbacks, shoreline stabilization, critical area protection and water quality protection to assure no net loss of ecological functions in shoreline jurisdiction.
    2. Provide public access and joint use for community recreational facilities, where feasible and applicable for multifamily developments, residential developments containing more than four (4) lots and recreational developments.
    3. Ensure access, utilities, and public services are available and adequate to serve existing needs or planned future development.
    4. Limit commercial development to water-oriented uses or home occupations that are not water-oriented, consistent with local regulations.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.300.04 Urban conservancy.
A. Purpose. The urban conservancy shoreline environment designation is intended to provide for ecological protection and rehabilitation in relatively undeveloped areas in shoreline jurisdiction, while allowing agricultural use, water-oriented and non-water-oriented recreational development, low intensity residential development and limited development suitable to lands characterized by ecological and flood hazard constraints.
B. Designation Criteria. The urban conservancy shoreline environment designation is assigned to shoreline jurisdictions that:
    1. Are appropriate and planned for low intensity agricultural, recreational and residential development that is compatible with maintaining or restoring the ecological functions of the area in shoreline jurisdiction and that are not generally suitable for water-dependent uses;
    2. Are suitable for water-related or water-enjoyment uses;
    3. Possess development limitations, due to the presence of critical environmental features including:
        a. Erosion hazard areas;
        b. Wetlands;
        c. Flood hazard areas; or
        d. Habitat areas;
    4. Have the potential for development that is compatible with ecological restoration;
    5. Retain important ecological functions, even though partially developed; or
    6. Are undesignated areas.
C. Management Policies. Development within the urban conservancy shoreline environment designation shall be consistent with the following policies:
    1. Allow uses that preserve the natural character of the shoreline environment, promote preservation of open space, floodway, floodplain or critical areas directly or over the long term as the primary allowed uses. Allow uses that result in restoration of ecological functions if the use is otherwise compatible with the purpose of the environment and setting.
    2. Implement public access and public recreation objectives whenever feasible and significant ecological impacts can be mitigated.
    3. Give preferred water-oriented uses priority instead of non-water-oriented uses. Water-dependent and recreational development should be given highest priority.
    4. Water-dependent and water-enjoyment recreation facilities that do not deplete the resource over time, such as boating and water access facilities, angling and wildlife viewing trails, are preferred uses, provided significant adverse impacts to the shoreline are mitigated.
    5. Agriculture, forest practices and low-intensity residential development when consistent with provisions of the SMP are preferred uses.
    6. Ensure that standards for new development for shoreline stabilization measures, vegetation conservation, water quality and shoreline modifications do not result in a net loss of ecological functions or degrade other shoreline values.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.310 Interpretation of shoreline environment designation boundaries.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.310.01 Shoreline environment designation maps.
Shoreline environment designation maps are found in Section 14.50.900, Appendix 1: Shoreline environment designation maps, and are based upon the best data available at the time of the update. As shoreline areas change over time, these maps may no longer clearly identify the location and boundaries of the shoreline environment designations. If the need arises to determine the exact boundaries of a shoreline environment designation, the process outlined in Section 14.50.310.02 should be used.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.310.02 Determining shoreline environment designation boundaries.
A. If the exact location of a shoreline environment designation boundary line is unclear, the following rules shall apply:
    1. Boundaries that are shown as approximately following lot, tract or section lines shall be so construed.
    2. Boundaries that are shown as approximately following roads or railways shall be respectively construed to follow the nearest right-of-way edge.
    3. Boundaries that are shown as approximately parallel to or extensions of features described in subsection (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, shall be construed to be parallel to or extensions of features in subsection (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section when determining boundaries.
B. Where boundary line adjustments or other modifications not indicated on the official shoreline maps are proposed, the shoreline environment designations shall be redesignated through the amendment process found in Section 14.50.780.
C. In the event of a shoreline environment designation mapping error, the shoreline administrator shall utilize the criteria contained in RCW 90.58.030(2), Chapter 173-22 WAC and the common boundary criteria contained in subsection (A) of this section to establish the appropriate shoreline environment designation through the SMP amendment process found in Section 14.50.780.
D. All shoreline areas waterward of the OHWM shall be designated aquatic. All shoreline areas landward of the OHWM shall be designated a shoreline environment designation other than aquatic.
E. Only one (1) shoreline environment designation shall apply to a given shoreland area. In the case of parallel designations, designations shall be divided along an identified linear feature or clearly described boundary.
F. Unmapped portions of shoreline jurisdiction shall be assigned automatically an urban conservancy shoreline environment designation until that portion of shoreline jurisdiction can be redesignated through the SMP amendment process found in Section 14.50.780.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 4. General Policies and Regulations

14.50.400 Introduction.
The following general policies and regulations apply to all developments, uses or activities in any shoreline environment designation in shoreline jurisdiction. The intent of the general policies and regulations is to protect environmental resources, reduce the likelihood of harm to life or property from hazardous conditions and promote access to shorelines.
Each section below contains a description of its purpose, followed by policies and regulations. Policies are statements of principles that guide and determine present and future decisions. Regulations are rules that govern developments, uses or activities.
The policies and regulations contained in this chapter are derived from the SMA and the state SMP guidelines. The policies and regulations supplement other adopted ordinances and rules and they are intended to ensure that no net loss occurs. Where there is discrepancy between regulations, those regulations that provide greater protection to shoreline jurisdiction shall apply in accordance with Section 14.50.070.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.410 Archaeological and historic resources.
The purpose of this section is to prevent destruction or damage to sites containing irreplaceable archaeological or historic resources within shoreline jurisdiction. The policies and regulations apply to areas of known or potential archaeological and historic resources as recorded by the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP), the city, affected tribes, as well as sites that are uncovered during site development.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.410.01 Policies.
A. Encourage consultation with professional archaeologists and historians to identify areas containing potentially valuable archaeological or historic resources and establish procedures for protecting and, if necessary, salvaging the resource. Appropriate agencies to consult include, but are not limited to, the DAHP, the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, the Shoalwater Bay Tribe and the Quinault Indian Tribe.
B. Condition shoreline permits to allow for site inspection and evaluation and ensure proper salvage of archaeological and historic resources in areas known to contain such resources.
C. Preserve archaeological or historic sites permanently for scientific study and public observation whenever feasible.
D. Prevent the destruction of or damage to a site that has been inadvertently uncovered and has historic, cultural, scientific or educational value as identified by the appropriate authorities, including affected tribes and the DAHP.
E. Design and operate the proposed development to be compatible with the continued protection of the site, where development or demolition activity is proposed adjacent to an identified archaeological or historic site.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.410.02 Regulations.
A. Permits issued in areas documented to contain archaeological resources shall require a site inspection or evaluation by a professional archaeologist in coordination with affected tribes and DAHP prior to ground disturbance as part of the permitted activity. Failure to complete a site survey shall be considered a violation of the shoreline permit.
B. Where a professional archaeologist has identified an area or site as having significant value or where an area or site is listed in local, state or federal historical registers, the shoreline administrator may condition the development approval to preserve the features. Potential conditions may include measures to preserve or retrieve the resources, modify the site development plan to reduce impacts or mitigate the impacts as authorized through the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) or other local, state, or federal laws.
C. The applicant shall stop work immediately and contact the city, the DAHP and affected tribes if any archaeological resources are uncovered during work within shoreline jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.420 Environmental impacts and mitigation.
This section addresses the requirements for no net loss of ecological functions in shoreline jurisdiction by requiring mitigation for shoreline impacts. These provisions apply throughout shoreline jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.420.01 Policy.
Avoid or mitigate impacts to shoreline jurisdiction to ensure the standards of no net loss to function are met.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.420.02 Regulations.
A. The environmental impacts of development proposals shall be analyzed and include measures to mitigate environmental impacts not otherwise avoided or minimized by compliance with the SMP and other applicable regulations.
B. Where required, mitigation measures shall be applied in the following sequence of steps listed in order of priority:
    1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
    2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
    3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment;
    4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;
    5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing or providing substitute resources or environments; and
    6. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.
C. In determining appropriate mitigation measures applicable to development in shoreline jurisdiction, lower priority measures should be applied only where higher priority measures are determined to be infeasible or inapplicable.
D. Mitigation shall not be required that exceeds what is necessary to assure the development will result in no net loss of ecological functions in shoreline jurisdiction.
E. When compensatory measures are appropriate pursuant to the mitigation priority sequence above, preferential consideration shall be given to measures that replace the impacted functions directly and in the immediate vicinity of the impact. However, alternative compensatory mitigation measures that have been identified within a watershed plan and address limiting factors or other critical resource conservation needs in shoreline jurisdiction may be authorized. Authorization of compensatory mitigation measures may require appropriate safeguards, terms, or conditions as necessary to ensure no net loss of ecological functions.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.430 Critical areas and shoreline vegetation conservation.
This section is intended to protect the ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes performed by critical areas, buffers and vegetation in shoreline jurisdiction. Within the SMP, buffers for estuaries, rivers, lakes and streams that are shorelines of the state are considered “shoreline buffers” while the buffers for all other critical areas regulated under Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, are called “critical areas buffers.” Native vegetation conservation is emphasized within both of the areas. Native vegetation supports many ecological functions or processes in shoreline and critical area buffers and retaining the vegetation will help the city to meet the SMA goal of no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
Provisions for shoreline vegetation conservation within this section include regulations regarding plant clearing, vegetation restoration and the control of invasive weeds and nonnative species. These provisions apply to any activity, development or use in shoreline jurisdiction unless otherwise stated, whether or not that activity requires a shoreline permit. Such activities include clearing, grading, grubbing and trimming of vegetation. Provisions also apply to vegetation protection and enhancement activities, but exclude agricultural activities and activities covered under the Washington State Forest Practices Act (FPA), unless otherwise stated.
SMP Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations codified in Chapter 14.100 applies to the management of critical areas in shoreline jurisdiction in the city except as modified by Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Table A2-1. Critical areas include wetlands, frequently flooded areas, landslide hazard areas, erosion hazard areas, seismic hazard areas and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.430.01 Policies.
A. Ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions through the effective integration of the SMP with existing municipal critical areas regulations.
B. Include critical areas objectives in the protection and restoration of degraded ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes.
C. Balance the various facets of the SMP in critical area regulations, including public access, water-dependent uses, aesthetic considerations and the maintenance of shoreline ecological functions.
D. Protect and restore ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes provided by native vegetation along shorelines.
E. Explore opportunities to eliminate nonnative vegetation and invasive species and encourage the planting and enhancement of native vegetation within shoreline jurisdiction.
F. Prohibit speculative vegetation removal within shoreline jurisdiction.
G. Replant cleared and disturbed sites promptly after completion of any clearance or construction with native vegetation in those locations where there was previously native vegetation or with other species in those areas previously vegetated with nonnative or ornamental species.
H. Allow the selective pruning of trees for safety and view protection.
I. Conduct removal of invasive aquatic vegetation in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts to native plant communities and wildlife habitats and appropriately handles and disposes of weed materials and attached sediments.
J. Permit clearing of vegetation associated with dike or levee maintenance as necessary to provide protection from flood hazards.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.430.02 Regulations.
A. General Regulations. 
    1. Whether or not a shoreline permit or written statement of exemption is required, the provisions of this section shall apply to all uses, alterations or developments within shoreline jurisdiction or shoreline buffers. All shoreline uses and activities shall be located, designed, constructed and managed to protect the ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes provided by critical areas and shoreline vegetation.
    2. The critical areas regulations found in Chapter 14.100, except as modified by Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, are integral and applicable to the SMP. All uses and development occurring within critical areas or their buffers within shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with these regulations.
    3. If there are any conflicts or unclear distinctions between the provisions of Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, and this section, the requirements most consistent with the SMA and most protective of the resource shall apply, as determined by the shoreline administrator.
    4. Within shoreline jurisdiction, critical area review, approval, notice and appeal periods/processes shall be integrated with the associated shoreline permit or exemption found in Article 7, Shoreline administration.
    5. Within shoreline jurisdiction, applicants seeking relief from the provisions of Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, shall apply for a shoreline variance under Section 14.50.730.03.
    6. The provisions of Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, do not extend shoreline jurisdiction beyond the limits specified in Section 14.50.060, Shoreline jurisdiction.
B. Shoreline Buffer Table. 
    1. The required critical area buffers for WDFW Type S waters shall be considered shoreline buffers, as established by Table 4-1, Shoreline Buffers.
    2. The buffers for all other critical areas shall be established in accordance with the standards found in Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations. If buffers for two (2) contiguous critical areas overlap, such as buffers for shorelines and wetlands, the wider buffer applies.
    3. New uses and development that are not water-dependent, water-related, water-enjoyment or accessory to water-dependent, water-related or water-enjoyment uses or development or that do not facilitate public access to waters of the state generally will not be authorized in shoreline buffers, except those uses and activities allowed in subsection (D)(1) of this section.
    4. Table 4-1: Shoreline Buffers establishes shoreline buffers by shoreline environment designation.
    5. Shoreline buffers are measured landward from the OHWM in a horizontal direction perpendicular to the OHWM.
    6. “N/A” in Table 4-1: Shoreline Buffers means the requirement is not applicable.
    7. Subcategories for types of uses or activities include the following terms:
        a. “Water-dependent” means a use that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water due to the intrinsic nature of its operations, such as a port or sewer outfall.
        b. “Water-related” means a use that is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location, such as a fish processing plant or a sewer treatment plant.
        c. “Water-enjoyment” means a recreational use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use. Examples include public trails, golf courses, parks, etc.
        d. “Non-water-oriented” means those uses that are not water-dependent, water-related or water-enjoyment, such as: a grocery store, etc.
    8. The minimum shoreline buffer from the OHWM for a particular use is determined by finding the use and the most appropriate subcategory row and then finding the intersection with the appropriate shoreline environment designation column.
    9. Building setbacks of fifteen (15) feet are required from the landward edge of the shoreline buffer. Building setbacks are used to protect the shoreline buffer from disturbance during construction and from the impacts related to use of a structure.
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
|          Shoreline Buffer          | High Intensity |  Shoreline  | Urban Conservancy | Aquatic |
|         from the OHWM (1)          |                | Residential |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Agriculture (New Agricultural Activities Only)                                                  |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | N/A            | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | N/A            | 75 feet     | 75 feet           | N/A     |
| mixed-use structures and           |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | N/A            | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Aquaculture                                                                                     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | 75 feet        | 75 feet     | 75 feet           | N/A     |
| mixed-use structures and           |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Boating and Water Access Facilities                                                             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | 75 feet        | 75 feet     | 75 feet           | N/A     |
| mixed-use structures and           |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Commercial Development                                                                          |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | 75 feet        | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| mixed-use structures and           |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Forest practices (2)               | N/A            | N/A         | 150 feet          | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Industrial and Port Development                                                                 |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | 75 feet        | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| mixed-use structures and           |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Mining                             | 150 feet       | N/A         | N/A               | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Parking (accessory to a permitted  | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| use only)                          |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Recreational Development (3)                                                                    |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related and water-enjoyment  | 75 feet        | 75 feet     | 75 feet           | N/A     |
| structures and uses                |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| and uses                           |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Residential development            | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Signs (freestanding structures)    | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Transportation Facilities                                                                       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Bridges and trestles               | 0 feet         | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| New transportation facilities      | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| related to permitted shoreline     |                |             |                   |         |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Expansion or relocation of         | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
| existing transportation facilities |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Utilities (Primary)                                                                             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-dependent structures         | 0 feet         | 0 feet      | 0 feet            | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Water-related structures           | 75 feet        | 75 feet     | 75 feet           | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Non-water-oriented structures      | 150 feet       | 150 feet    | 150 feet          | N/A     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
(1)Reductions in the shoreline buffer from the OHWM may be authorized according to the standards in subsection (C) of this section.
(2)Where the FPA applies, the stricter of the SMP or FPA buffer shall be used.
(3)Passive, water-oriented recreational uses are allowed within shoreline buffers; provided, the use does not include the construction of structures. Wildlife viewing structures, permeable trails or raised boardwalks may be allowed on a limited basis within riparian and wetland buffers in accordance with the mitigation sequence found in Section 14.50.420 and the mitigation requirements found in Chapter 14.100.
C. Standard Shoreline Buffer Width Reduction Options. Standard shoreline buffers may be reduced consistent with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and the mitigation requirements found in Chapter 14.100, using the following procedures. Only one (1) buffer width reduction option may be utilized for a development proposal:
    1. Shoreline Buffer Averaging. 
        a. The width of a standard shoreline buffer may be averaged, thereby reducing the width of a portion of the shoreline buffer and increasing the width of another portion of the shoreline buffer.
        b. A mitigation plan shall be prepared by the applicant as outlined in Section 14.100.072. The applicant will need to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the shoreline administrator that the following criteria are addressed:
            (1) The water body and associated shoreline buffer have significant differences in characteristics depending on location that affect their habitat functions;
            (2) The shoreline buffer is increased adjacent to the higher functioning area of habitat or more sensitive portion of the water body and decreased adjacent to the lower functioning or less sensitive portion;
            (3) The shoreline buffer averaging does not reduce the ecological functions or values of the water body and associated shoreline buffer or the shoreline buffer averaging, in conjunction with vegetation enhancement, increases ecological functions or values;
            (4) The total area of the shoreline buffer after averaging is equal to the area of the required shoreline buffer without averaging and all increases in shoreline buffer dimension for averaging are generally parallel to the OHWM;
            (5) The shoreline buffer at its narrowest point is never less than seventy-five (75) percent of the required width;
            (6) The slopes adjacent to the water body within the shoreline buffer area are stable and the gradient does not exceed thirty (30) percent; and
            (7) The applicant implements all feasible measures to reduce the adverse effects of adjacent land uses and ensure no net loss of ecological functions.
    2. Common Line Provisions. 
        a. To accommodate adequate shoreline views comparable to adjacent existing residences, the shoreline administrator may reduce the standard shoreline buffer for a new single-family residence consistent with the following criteria:
            (1) The proposed residence must be located in the shoreline residential shoreline environment designation and within one hundred fifty (150) feet of an adjacent legally established single-family residential primary structure that encroaches on the shoreline buffer. Accessory structures such as sheds or garages shall not be used to determine a common line shoreline buffer.
            (2) For the purpose of this reduction, the nearest corners of the foundations of the adjacent residences are those closest to the side-yard property line of the proposed residence.
            (3) Existing Residences on Both Sides. Where there are existing residences adjacent on both sides of the proposed residence, the common line shoreline buffer shall be determined as the greater of either:
                aA common line drawn between the nearest corners of the foundations of each adjacent residence; or
                bA common line calculated by the average of both adjacent residences’ existing setbacks from the OHWM.
            (4) Existing Residence on One (1) Side. Where there is only one (1) existing residence adjacent to the proposed residence, the common line shoreline buffer shall be determined as the greater of either:
                aA common line drawn between nearest corner of the foundation for the adjacent residence and the nearest point of the standard shoreline buffer on the adjacent vacant lot; or
                bA common line calculated by the average of the adjacent residence’s setback from the OHWM and the standard shoreline buffer for the adjacent vacant lot.
            [IMAGE: <14.50.430.02.C.2.a.4.b_001.png>]
            [IMAGE: <14.50.430.02.C.2.a.4.b_002.png>]
        b. If the conditions in subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section are met, the applicant may prepare a mitigation plan as outlined in Section 14.100.072 and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the shoreline administrator that:
            (1) A mitigation plan in accordance with Section 14.100.072 demonstrates that enhancing the shoreline buffer by removing invasive plants, planting native vegetation, installing habitat features, or other means will result in a shoreline buffer of a reduced width that functions at a higher level than the existing standard shoreline buffer; or
            (2) Conditions unique to the site, including legally existing uses, developments established prior to the effective date of the SMP or naturally existing topographic barriers, exist between the proposed development and the OHWM, which substantially prevent or impair delivery of most natural functions from the subject upland property to the water body.
    3. Reduction for Road or Railroads in Buffer (Applicable to Shoreline Buffers Only). 
        a. Where one (1) of the following crosses a standard shoreline buffer:
            (1) A legally established road or railroad, excluding a private driveway;
            (2) The expansion of existing roads and railroads; or
            (3) Construction of new roads or railroads related to cargo handling and freight mobility (whether included as a portion of a large development or submitted as an individual project).
        b. The shoreline administrator may reduce the standard shoreline buffer width to the waterward edge of the improved road or railroad. This reduction may only be granted if a qualified professional documents that the part of the standard shoreline buffer on the upland side of the road or railroad:
            (1) Does not provide additional protection for the water body; and
            (2) Does not provide significant biological, geological or hydrological functions for the waterward portion of the shoreline buffer adjacent to the OHWM of the water body.
    4. Shoreline Buffer Width Reduction. 
        a. The width of a standard shoreline buffer may be reduced up to twenty-five (25) percent administratively if shoreline buffer averaging (subsection (C)(1) of this section), common line provisions (subsection (C)(2) of this section) or reduction for road or railroads in buffer (subsection (C)(3) of this section) are infeasible.
        b. If the conditions in subsection (C)(4)(a) of this section are met, the applicant may prepare a mitigation plan as outlined in Section 14.100.072 and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the shoreline administrator that:
            (1) A mitigation plan in accordance with Section 14.100.072 demonstrates that enhancing the shoreline buffer by removing invasive plants, planting native vegetation, installing habitat features or other means will result in a shoreline buffer of a reduced width that functions at a higher level than the existing standard shoreline buffer; or
            (2) Conditions unique to the site, including legally existing uses, developments established prior to the effective date of the SMP or naturally existing topographic barriers, exist between the proposed development and the OHWM, which substantially prevent or impair delivery of most natural functions from the subject upland property to the water body.
D. General Buffer Regulations. 
    1. Shoreline Buffers. The following new uses and activities are allowed within shoreline buffers without a shoreline variance, when located, constructed, and maintained in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts on shoreline ecological functions, and when otherwise in compliance with this SMP:
        a. Accessory Uses. Uses and development accessory to water-dependent uses shall be located outside the shoreline buffer unless at least one (1) of the following criteria is met:
            (1) A location in the shoreline buffer is necessary for operation of the primary water-dependent use or development, such as a road to a boat launch facility; or
            (2) The accessory use is on legally established public lands and is primarily related to access, enjoyment and use of the water; and the use does not conflict with or limit opportunities for other water-oriented uses.
        b. Essential Public Facilities. Essential public facilities, as defined by RCW 36.70A.200, may be located and expanded in the shoreline buffer if the use cannot be reasonably accommodated or accomplished outside of the standard or reduced shoreline buffer.
            (1) Proposals for essential public facilities must demonstrate that alternative sites that meet facility requirements are not available.
            (2) These uses must be designed and located to minimize intrusion into the shoreline buffer and shall be consistent with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and Chapter 14.100.
            (3) Impacts to the shoreline buffer shall be fully mitigated.
        c. Water-Oriented Education, Scientific Research and Passive Recreational Uses. These uses may include, but are not limited to, fishing, bird watching, hiking, hunting, boating, horseback riding, skiing, swimming, canoeing and bicycling. Such uses are allowed within shoreline buffers provided the use does not include construction, except as follows: wildlife viewing structures and permeable trails or raised boardwalks may be allowed on a limited basis within riparian and wetland buffers in accordance with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and Chapter 14.100.
        d. Site Investigative Work Necessary for Land Use Application Submittals Such as Surveys, Soil Logs, Drainage Tests and Other Related Work, Including Monitoring of Restoration or Mitigation Sites. In every case, shoreline buffer impacts should be avoided or minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored.
        e. Shoreline modifications in conformance with the applicable provisions found in Article 6, Shoreline Modification Policies and Regulations.
    2. Critical Areas Buffers. The uses and activities allowed within critical areas buffers in Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations, may be allowed without a shoreline variance, when located, constructed and maintained in a manner that minimizes adverse impacts on shoreline ecological functions and in compliance with the SMP.
E. Vegetation Conservation Standards. 
    1. Shoreline buffers protect the ecological functions of the shoreline, help to reduce the impacts of land uses on the water body or aquatic resource and provide a transition between aquatic and upland areas.
    2. Authorized uses shall be designed to avoid removing existing native vegetation to the maximum extent feasible within shoreline and critical areas buffers consistent with safe construction practices and other provisions of this section. Any impacts to existing native vegetation must follow the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and comply with Chapter 14.100 as modified by Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations and subsection (A) of this section.
    3. Removal of vegetation within shoreline and critical areas buffers shall require a critical area report and/or a mitigation plan in coordination with the requirements of Section 14.100.072. The shoreline administrator may require a critical area report for critical areas regulations exempt activities if necessary to document compliance with the provisions in the SMP.
    4. Removal of native vegetation from shoreline buffers must be compensated at a minimum 1:1 ratio, which the shoreline administrator may increase if necessary to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions. Increases may be necessary to compensate for temporal losses, uncertainty of performance and differences in ecological functions and values.
    5. Mitigation ratios shall be based on a scientifically valid measure of habitat function, value and area. Critical area reports shall include a description of how the proposal complies with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and how mitigation areas will be monitored and maintained to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
    6. Vegetation conservation standards shall not apply retroactively to existing, legally established uses and developments. Existing, lawfully established landscaping and gardens within shoreline jurisdiction may be maintained in their existing condition. In the context of this regulation, maintenance includes, but is not limited to, mowing lawns, weeding, removal of noxious and invasive species, harvesting and replanting of garden crops, pruning and replacement planting of ornamental vegetation or indigenous native species to maintain the condition and appearance of such areas.
    7. Clearing of invasive, noxious nonnative vegetation in shoreline buffers is allowed by hand labor or with light equipment. Removal of noxious weeds as listed by the state in Chapter 16-750 WAC is allowed in a manner consistent with Washington State Noxious Weed Control Board regulations. Native vegetation shall be promptly reestablished in the disturbed area.
    8. In shoreline buffers, pruning shall comply with the National Arborist Association pruning standards. Trees that are felled in shoreline buffers should be left in place. The exception to this regulation is that hazard trees, which are dead, diseased, leaning or structurally unsound trees that are deemed an emergency, may be removed at any time. Hazard tree removal is addressed in Section 14.100.050(B)(5)(c).
    9. In those instances where the management of vegetation required by this section conflicts with provisions in state, federal or other flood hazard agency documents that govern licensed or certified flood hazard reduction measures, the requirements of the SMP will not apply. The applicant shall submit documentation of conflicting provisions with a shoreline permit application and shall comply with all other provisions of the SMP that are not strictly prohibited by certifying or licensing agencies.
F. Revegetation. 
    1. Surfaces that are cleared of vegetation in shoreline or critical area buffers, aside from normal maintenance described in subsection (E)(6) of this section, and are not developed must be replanted within one (1) year. Replanted areas shall be planted and maintained such that within three (3) years the vegetation cover is at least ninety (90) percent reestablished. Areas that fail to reestablish vegetation adequately shall be replanted with approved plant materials until the plantings are viable. Revegetation areas will be maintained in good growing condition and kept free of noxious weeds, and with removal of dead or dying plants, for a five (5) year monitoring period.
    2. Vegetation shall be planted in similar quantities and species to what existed previously on the site to achieve no net loss of ecological function. Disturbed ornamental landscapes, including grass, may be replaced with similar species, unless mitigation is necessary to address project impacts.
    3. Native plants are preferred for all revegetation. Nonnative species on the Grays Harbor County’s list of invasive species shall not be allowed.
G. Aquatic Vegetation Control. 
    1. Aquatic vegetation control shall only occur when native plant communities and associated habitats are threatened or where an existing water-dependent use is restricted by the presence of weeds. Aquatic vegetation control shall occur in compliance with all other applicable laws and standards, including the WDFW requirements such as the Aquatic Plants and Fish Pamphlet, which serves as the Hydraulic Project Approval (HPA) for some types of aquatic weed or plant control and removal.
    2. The application of herbicides or pesticides in water bodies including Grays Harbor, lakes, wetlands or ditches requires a permit from Ecology and may require preparation of a SEPA checklist for review by other agencies. The applicator must have a pesticide applicator license from the Washington State Department of Agriculture.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.440 Flood hazard management.
This section applies to actions taken to reduce flood damage or hazards in shoreline jurisdiction as well as uses, development and shoreline modifications proposed in flood hazard areas. As used by the SMP, “flood hazard management measures” include shoreline modifications that directly control the location of floodwaters, while “shoreline stabilization measures” act to prevent the erosion of land from currents and waves – a more indirect control of the location of flood and nonflood water. Shoreline stabilization measures are addressed in Article 6, Shoreline Modification Policies and Regulations.
Measures to reduce flood hazards may consist of nonstructural measures, such as shoreline buffers, land use controls, wetland restoration, dike removal, use relocation, biotechnical measures and stormwater management programs, and structural measures, such as dikes, levees, revetments, floodwalls, dams, channel realignment and elevation of structures consistent with the National Flood Insurance Program.
The city currently implements flood hazard management through the following:
•The Aberdeen comprehensive plan;
•The Aberdeen critical areas ordinance (CAO);
•The current edition of the Stormwater Management Manual as prepared by Ecology;
•The Grays Harbor County Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan;
•The Grays Harbor County All Hazard Mitigation Plan;
•The Chehalis River Basin Comprehensive Flood Hazard Management Plan; and
•Watershed management plans.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.440.01 Policies.
A. Assure flood hazard protection measures do not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
B. Plan for and facilitate returning river and stream conditions to more natural hydrological conditions where feasible and appropriate.
C. Achieve flood hazard management through a coordinated and integrated approach of plans, regulations and programs.
D. Prefer nonstructural flood hazard management measures to structural measures where feasible. New structural flood hazard reduction measures should only be allowed when demonstrated to be necessary, nonstructural methods are insufficient, and mitigation is accomplished.
E. Limit development and shoreline modifications that interfere with the natural process of channel migration within the channel migration zone (CMZ).
F. Require new publicly funded dike or levee projects to dedicate and improve public access, subject to the exceptions in Section 14.50.450.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.440.02 Regulations.
A. All proposed flood hazard management measures shall comply with the Aberdeen Hazard Mitigation Plan and Chapter 15.52, Flood Damage Prevention, where applicable.
B. Development in floodplains shall not increase flood hazards.
C. New development or new uses in shoreline jurisdiction, including subdivision of land, shall not be established when it would be reasonably foreseeable that the use or development would require structural flood hazard reduction measures within the CMZ or floodway.
D. New structural flood hazard management measures may be permitted if:
    1. No net loss of ecological functions and values will occur;
    2. A scientific and engineering analysis confirms they are necessary to protect existing development;
    3. Nonstructural flood hazard management measures are not feasible; and
    4. Appropriate vegetation conservation actions are undertaken as outlined in Section 14.50.430.
E. If new structural flood hazard management measures are required, as documented in a geotechnical analysis, the structural measures shall be placed landward of any associated wetlands and shoreline buffer areas except for actions that increase ecological functions, such as wetland restoration, or if it is determined that no other alternative to reduce flood hazard to existing development is feasible.
F. New publicly funded structural flood hazard management measures, including dikes and levees, shall dedicate and improve public access except when those improvements would:
    1. Cause health or safety hazards or security problems;
    2. Result in significant immitigable ecological impacts;
    3. Create a conflict of uses; or
    4. Cost a disproportionate or unreasonable amount relative to the total long-term cost of the development.
G. Removal of gravel for flood management purposes shall be consistent with Section 14.50.630, and permitted only after a biological and geomorphological study demonstrates that the extraction:
    1. Provides a long-term benefit to flood hazard management;
    2. Does not result in a net loss of ecological functions; and
    3. It is part of a comprehensive flood management solution.
H. New development within floodways and the CMZ shall not interfere with the process of channel migration or cause a net loss of ecological functions.
I. Development in the CMZ and floodways is limited to:
    1. Actions that protect or restore ecosystem-wide processes or ecological functions;
    2. Forest practices in compliance with the FPA;
    3. Existing and ongoing agricultural practices, provided no new restrictions to channel movement occur;
    4. Mining uses conducted consistent with the shoreline environment designation and the provisions of WAC 173-26-241(3)(h);
    5. Bridges, utility lines and other public utility and transportation structures where no other feasible alternative exists or the alternative would result in an unreasonable and disproportionate cost;
    6. Repair and maintenance of an existing legal use; provided, that the repair and maintenance do not cause significant ecological impacts or increase flood hazards to other uses;
    7. Modifications or additions to an existing nonagricultural legal use; provided, that channel migration is not further limited and that the new development includes appropriate protection of ecological functions; or
    8. Measures to reduce shoreline erosion, if it is demonstrated that the erosion rate exceeds that which would normally occur in a natural condition, the measure does not interfere with fluvial hydrological and geomorphological processes normally acting in natural conditions, and the measure includes appropriate mitigation of impacts to ecological functions associated with the river or stream.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.450 Public access.
This section applies to shoreline public access, including the protection of scenic vistas. As provided in WAC 173-26-221(4), public access to the shorelines of the state is the ability of the public “…to reach, touch and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on the waters of the state and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations.” Allowing for appropriate public access to shorelines of the state is a key component of the SMA. Consideration must be given to protection of the visual quality of the shoreline resource and to maintenance of view corridors to and from the water and adjacent shoreland features.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.450.01 Policies.
A. Protect and enhance the public’s visual and physical access to shorelines of the state to the greatest extent feasible.
B. Increase the amount and diversity of public access opportunities to shorelines where consistent with the natural shoreline character, property rights and public safety.
C. Maintain, enhance, and increase public access in accordance with the following priorities unless found infeasible:
    1. Maintain existing public access sites and facilities, rights-of-way, and easements.
    2. Enhance public access opportunities on existing public lands and easements.
    3. Acquire property or easements to add opportunities for public access to shorelines.
    4. Encourage public access to shorelines as part of shoreline development.
D. Ensure shoreline development plans by public entities include public access measures unless it is unsafe, unsecure, or negatively affects the shoreline environment.
E. Ensure that development does not impair or detract from public access to the water through standards for design, construction and operation.
F. Provide public access as close as feasible to the OHWM without adversely affecting a sensitive environment and design with provisions for access for all persons.
G. Development, uses and activities on or near the shoreline should not impair or detract from the public’s visual access to the water.
H. Balance enhancement of views with the protection of shoreline vegetation that may partially impair views.
I. Maintain, enhance and preserve visual access of the shoreline from street-ends, public utilities and rights-of-way.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.450.02 Regulations.
A. Public access shall be designed to achieve no net loss of ecological functions. Where impacts are identified, mitigation shall be required.
B. Public access shall be required for the following shoreline developments and uses:
    1. Shoreline recreation in accordance with Section 14.50.593;
    2. New structural public flood hazard reduction measures, such as dikes and levees;
    3. Shoreline development by public entities, including the city, state agencies and public utility districts; and
    4. All other development not subject to the restrictions in subsection (C) of this section.
C. Public access is not required when any of the following conditions are present:
    1. The subdivision of land into four (4) or fewer parcels;
    2. A development consisting of a building containing four (4) or fewer dwelling units;
    3. Unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public exist that cannot be prevented by any feasible means;
    4. Inherent security requirements of the use cannot be satisfied through the application of alternative design features or other solutions;
    5. Public access results in significant environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated;
    6. Significant undue and unavoidable conflict between any access provisions and the proposed or adjacent uses would occur and cannot be mitigated;
    7. The cost of providing the access, easement or amenity is unreasonably disproportionate to the total long-term cost of the proposed development;
    8. Legal limitations preclude public access;
    9. The subject site is separated from the shoreline water body by intervening public or private improvements such as transportation facilities such as roads or railroads, existing structures and/or other similar improvements, and public access is not desirable or feasible; or
    10. Adequate public access already exists along the subject shoreline and no gaps or enhancements need to be addressed.
D. In addressing subsection (C) of this section, the applicant must demonstrate that all feasible alternatives to allow public access have been exhausted, including:
    1. Regulating access by such means as limiting hours of use to daylight hours;
    2. Separating uses by such means as fences, terracing, landscaping, signage, etc.;
    3. Providing access that is physically separated from the proposal, such as a nearby street end, an off-site viewpoint or a trail system; or
    4. Where physical access is not feasible, visual access is provided instead.
E. The shoreline administrator must support a determination that no public access is feasible in the findings in the underlying permit.
F. Physical public access shall be designed to connect to existing public rights-of-way or existing or future public access points on adjacent or abutting properties. Appropriate design and safety standards should be utilized in the design of the access.
G. Public access facilities shall be compatible with adjacent private properties using vegetative buffering or other techniques to define the separation between public and private space.
H. Where there is an irreconcilable conflict between water-dependent shoreline uses, physical public access and maintenance of views from adjacent properties, water-dependent uses and physical public access shall have priority, unless there is a compelling reason to the contrary.
I. Public access easements or tracts and relevant permit conditions shall be recorded as a separate document or on the face of a plat or short plat with the Grays Harbor County Auditor at the time of permit or plat approval.
J. The applicant shall construct, install and maintain approved signs that indicate the public’s right to access the shoreline and the hours of operation for the shoreline access. These signs shall be placed in conspicuous locations at public access sites. Where public access is prohibited, property owners may install signs subject to size and location restrictions found in Section 14.50.595 that indicate that no public access is permitted.
K. Required public access sites must be fully developed and available for public use at the time of occupancy or use of the development.
L. The city may not vacate any road, street or alley abutting a body of water except as provided under RCW 35.79.035.
M. In addressing the protection of scenic vistas of the shoreline, the following must be taken into consideration:
    1. Public lands such as street ends, rights-of-way and utilities shall provide visual access to the water and shoreline.
    2. Development on or over the water shall be constructed as far landward as feasible to avoid interference with views from surrounding properties to the shoreline and adjoining waters.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.460 Water quality.
Prevent impacts to water quality and stormwater quantity that would result in a loss of ecological functions, a significant impact to aesthetic qualities or recreational opportunities.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.460.01 Policies.
A. Protect shoreline jurisdiction by ensuring that surface water quality and quantity regulations are administered by the city.
B. Prevent impacts to water quality and stormwater quantity that would result in net loss of shoreline ecological function, significant impacts to aesthetic qualities or recreational opportunities.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.460.02 Regulations.
All development in shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with the appropriate requirements of the SMP and the latest version of the Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington as prepared by Ecology, as amended.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 5. Specific Shoreline Use Policies and Regulations

14.50.500 Introduction.
Building on the general SMP goals found in Article 2, Shoreline Management Goals, this chapter contains specific shoreline use policies and regulations that apply to specific uses or development in any shoreline environment designation. Each section includes policies and regulations. Policies are statements of principles that guide and determine present and future decisions. Regulations are rules that govern developments, uses or activities.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.510 General shoreline use.
These policies and regulations apply to all developments and uses within shoreline jurisdiction whether shoreline permits or written letters of exemptions are required or not.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.510.01 Policies.
A. Shorelines are a limited ecological and economic resource. Apply the following priorities in the order presented below when determining allowable uses or resolving use conflicts in shoreline jurisdiction:
    1. Reserve appropriate areas for protecting and restoring ecological functions to control pollution and prevent damage to the natural environment and public health;
    2. Reserve shoreline areas for water-dependent and associated water-related uses. Mixed-use developments that include water-dependent uses may be allowed when specific conditions are met;
    3. Reserve shoreline areas for other water-related and water-enjoyment uses that are compatible with ecological protection and restoration objectives;
    4. Locate single-family residential uses where they are appropriate and can be developed without significant impact to ecological functions or displacement of water-dependent uses;
    5. Limit non-water-oriented uses to those locations where the uses described above are inappropriate or where non-water-oriented uses demonstrably contribute to the objectives of the SMA; and
    6. Allow parking only as an accessory to a primary use.
B. Locate accessory structures or uses within shoreline jurisdiction, such as parking, service buildings or areas, access roads, utilities, signs and storage, landward of required shoreline buffers and water-oriented developments or other approved uses.
C. Locate, design and manage uses and development to minimize impacts through bulk and dimensional regulations, shoreline buffers and other measures to ensure that the development will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions and in a manner that supports long-term beneficial use of the shoreline and protects and maintains shoreline ecological functions and processes.
D. Develop and enforce regulations for shoreline buffers for the purposes of protecting existing ecological functions, accommodating water-oriented and preferred uses, recognizing existing development patterns and minimizing the creation of nonconforming uses and developments.
E. Do not permit uses where they would result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions, adversely affect the quality or extent of habitat for native species, adversely affect other habitat conservation areas or interfere with navigation or other water-dependent uses.
F. Avoid adverse impacts to the shoreline or, if that is not feasible, minimize to the extent feasible and mitigate unavoidable impacts.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.510.02 Regulations.
These regulations apply to all developments and uses within shoreline jurisdiction, whether shoreline permits or written letters of exemptions are required or not.
A. Use and development standards shall not apply retroactively to existing, legally established structures or uses and developments in place at the time of the adoption of the SMP update. Existing structures, uses and developments, including residential appurtenances, may be maintained, repaired and operated within shoreline jurisdiction and the shoreline buffers established in the SMP.
B. Development shall comply with the most restrictive bulk and dimensional requirements found in this code or the SMP.
C. Shoreline developments shall locate water-oriented portions along the shoreline and place other facilities landward or outside shoreline jurisdiction, where feasible.
D. Parking is allowed only as an accessory to a primary use.
E. Accessory uses, such as parking, stormwater management facilities and utilities, shall be located outside of shoreline jurisdiction where feasible. If they are to be located in shoreline jurisdiction, accessory uses shall be limited to water-oriented uses, uses that support physical or visual shoreline access for substantial numbers of the public or preferred uses in the shoreline.
F. Shoreline uses and developments shall be designed to complement the setting of the property and minimize glare. Shoreline applicants shall demonstrate efforts to minimize potential impacts to the extent feasible.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.520 Allowed shoreline uses.
A. Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses below establishes the uses and development allowed within the shoreline environment designations. Where there is a conflict between the table and the written provisions in the SMP, the written provisions shall apply.
B. Authorized uses and development are subject to the policies and regulations of the SMP and are only allowed in shoreline jurisdiction where allowed by the underlying zoning.
C. Uses and development identified as “Permitted” require either a shoreline substantial development permit in accordance with Section 14.50.730.01 or an exemption from the requirement to obtain such a permit in accordance with Section 14.50.730.04. If any part of a proposed development is not eligible for an exemption, then a shoreline substantial development permit is required for the entire proposed development.
D. Uses identified as “Conditional” require a shoreline conditional permit pursuant to Section 14.50.730.02. Any use not listed in Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses shall require a shoreline conditional use permit.
E. Uses identified as “Prohibited” are not allowed in shoreline jurisdiction.
F. Accessory uses and structures shall be subject to the same shoreline permit process and SMP provisions as their primary use. An accessory use shall not be established prior to the establishment of its primary use.
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
|        Shoreline Uses (1)          | High Intensity |  Shoreline  | Urban Conservancy | Aquatic (2) |
|                                    |                | Residential |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
|                     Key: P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional Use, X = Prohibited                     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Agriculture (3) (4)                | X              | P           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Aquaculture                        | C              | C           | C                 | C           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Boating and Water Access Facilities                                                                 |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Boat ramps and launches            | P              | P           | C                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Boat launching rails               | P              | P           | X                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Boat lifts and canopies            | P              | P           | X                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Moorage covers (open sides,        | C              | C           | X                 | C           |
| structural roof)                   |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Mooring buoys                      | X              | X           | X                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Private single/joint-use docks     | P              | P           | X                 | P           |
| and piers                          |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Public piers/docks/marinas         | P              | P           | C                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Recreational floats                | X              | X           | X                 | P           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Commercial Development                                                                              |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Water-oriented                     | P              | X           | X                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Non-water-oriented                 | C              | X           | X                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Forest Practices                   | X              | X           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Industrial and Port Development                                                                     |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Industry                                                                                            |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Water-oriented                     | P              | X           | X                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Non-water-oriented                 | C              | X           | X                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Marine Terminals and Mooring Structures                                                             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| New marine terminals and mooring   | C              | X           | X                 | C           |
| structures (primary use)           |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| New marine terminals and mooring   | P              | X           | X                 | C           |
| structures (accessory to a         |                |             |                   |             |
| permitted use)                     |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Expansion or movement of marine    | C              | X           | X                 | C           |
| terminals and mooring structures   |                |             |                   |             |
| (primary use)                      |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Expansion or movement of marine    | P              | X           | X                 | C           |
| terminals and mooring structures   |                |             |                   |             |
| (accessory to a permitted          |                |             |                   |             |
| use)                               |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Mining                             | C              | X           | X                 | C (5)       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Parking (6)                        | P              | P           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Recreational Development (7)                                                                        |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Water-oriented                     | P              | P           | P                 | P (8)       |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Non-water-oriented                 | P              | P           | C                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Paved trails                       | P              | P           | C                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Unpaved trails                     | P              | P           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Residential Development (9)        | P              | P           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Signs (Separate Structures)        | P              | P           | P                 | X           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Transportation Facilities                                                                           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Bridges and trestles               | C              | C           | C                 | C           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| New transportation facilities      | P              | P           | P                 | X           |
| related to permitted shoreline     |                |             |                   |             |
| uses                               |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Expansion or relocation of         | C              | C           | C                 | X           |
| existing transportation facilities |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Utilities (Primary)                                                                                 |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Solid waste disposal or transfer   | X              | X           | X                 | X           |
| sites                              |                |             |                   |             |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
| Other                              | C              | C           | C                 | C           |
+------------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+
Notes:
(1)Any use that would substantially degrade the ecological functions in shoreline jurisdiction should not be allowed. In addition, development shall be subject to the allowed uses established by this code.
(2)Where a use would be located both upland and over-water, the more restrictive standards apply.
(3)Includes agricultural commercial uses such as roadside stands, on-farm markets, pumpkin patches and Christmas tree farms.
(4)Upland finfish facilities in shoreline jurisdiction require a shoreline conditional use permit.
(5)New mining waterward of the OHWM or in the CMZ shall not be permitted unless the requirements of Section 14.50.591.02(D) are addressed.
(6)Parking is allowed as an accessory use to an approved use in Section 14.50.593. Off-street parking lots or parking structures as a primary use are prohibited in all shoreline environment designations.
(7)Concession stands, gift shops and interpretive centers are permitted as accessory uses when limited to the minimum size necessary for the use and serving a related, permitted recreational use in the shoreline residential and urban conservancy shoreline environment designations.
(8)Only water-dependent uses are permitted in the aquatic shoreline environment designation.
(9)Home occupations, as established by Section 17.56.030: Home occupations, are incidental and accessory to a residential use. Use the “Residential” use category to determine whether they are allowed in a particular shoreline environment designation.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.530 Development standards.
The following development standards apply in addition to the shoreline buffer and structural setback requirements included in Section 14.50.430. New development shall be located and designed to avoid the need for future shoreline stabilization measures to the extent feasible as defined in Section 14.50.660.02(A).
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.530.01 Density and lot coverage.
Density and maximum lot coverage of residential uses allowed in shoreline jurisdiction should be in accordance with the underlying zoning requirements of the city.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.530.02 Shoreline height standards.
A. To limit the obstruction of views from public property or residences, Table 5-2: Shoreline Height Regulations establishes the maximum shoreline height for new or expanded buildings or structures above average grade level.
B. The following structures are exempt from the shoreline height standard requirements: dams, shipping cranes or other freight moving equipment, power or light poles, chimneys, tanks, towers, cupolas, steeples, flagpoles, smokestacks, silos, elevators, fire or parapet walls, open railings and/or similar necessary building appurtenances may exceed the shoreline height limit provided all other requirements of the city are met and no usable floor space above the shoreline height limit is added.
C. Aside from industrial and port development uses, development in the high intensity and the shoreline residential shoreline environment designations may be increased through a shoreline variance that meets the criteria in Section 14.50.730.03 provided:
    1. The increase does not substantially block views from adjacent residential properties;
    2. The increase will serve overriding considerations of the public interest pursuant to RCW 90.58.320;
    3. Greater height is demonstrated to be needed for an essential element of an allowed use;
    4. The project includes compensating elements that substantially enhance the visual and physical public access to the shoreline; and
    5. It is demonstrated that no net loss of shoreline ecological function will be achieved.
D. As defined in Section 14.50.590, industrial and port development in the high intensity shoreline environment designations may be increased without a shoreline variance provided:
    1. Public notice is given following the procedures in Section 14.50.720;
    2. The increase does not substantially block views from adjacent residential properties;
    3. The increase will serve overriding considerations of the public interest pursuant to RCW 90.58.320;
    4. Greater height is demonstrated to be needed for an essential element of an allowed use;
    5. The project includes compensating elements that substantially enhance the visual and physical public access to the shoreline; and
    6. It is demonstrated that no net loss of shoreline ecological function will be achieved.
+--------------------------+----------------+-----------------------+-------------------+---------+
|         Standard         | High Intensity | Shoreline Residential | Urban Conservancy | Aquatic |
+--------------------------+----------------+-----------------------+-------------------+---------+
| Maximum Shoreline Height | 35 feet (1)    | 35 feet (2)           | 35 feet           | 35 feet |
+--------------------------+----------------+-----------------------+-------------------+---------+
Notes:
(1)Except as allowed in subsection (D) of this section, maximum shoreline height may be increased over thirty-five (35) feet in the Light Industrial (L-I) zoning district and Industrial (I) zoning district with approval of a shoreline variance.
(2)Maximum shoreline height may be increased to forty-five (45) feet in the Multiple Family Residential (R-M) zoning district with approval of a shoreline variance.
E. View Corridor Review Process. 
    1. Applicants for new or expanded buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height above average grade level in the high intensity and the shoreline residential shoreline environment designations shall address impacts to views from substantial numbers of residences and public areas as follows:
        a. Site design shall provide for view corridors between buildings using building separation, building setbacks, upper story setbacks, pitched roofs and other mitigation.
        b. To determine appropriate view corridor location, the shoreline administrator shall review shoreline public access plans, location of state or federally designated scenic highways, government-prepared view studies, SEPA documents or applicant-prepared studies.
        c. The maximum width of a view corridor shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the lot width.
    2. For heights above thirty-five (35) feet, the following view analysis standards and procedures apply:
        a. The applicant shall prepare a view analysis conducted consistent with the application requirements in Section 14.50.710.03. The view analysis shall address:
            (1) The cumulative view obstruction created by the proposed development combined with other developments that exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius of the proposed development;
            (2) Available view corridors; and
            (3) Surface water views lost, compromised or retained.
    b. For phased developments, the view analysis shall be prepared in the first phase and include all proposed buildings.
    c. Applicants proposing building or structure heights above thirty-five (35) feet that are consistent with the SMP and underlying zoning allowances may be approved as part of a shoreline variance if the following criteria are met:
        1. The building or structure will not affect a substantial number of residences. The applicant shall review residences in the area adjoining the project area;
        2. The increase will serve overriding considerations of the public interest pursuant to RCW 90.58.320;
        3. The development will not cause an obstruction of view from public properties or substantial number of residences. The applicant shall demonstrate through photographs, videos, photo-based simulations or computer-generated simulations that the proposed development will obstruct less than thirty (30) percent of the view of the shoreline enjoyed by a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.540 Agriculture.
Agriculture includes, but is not limited to, the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural and floricultural products, vegetables, fruit, berries, grains, feed or forage for livestock, Christmas trees and livestock that has long-term commercial significance as well as other definitions of agricultural use found in WAC 173-26-020(3).
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.540.01 Policies.
A. Permit all agricultural activities existing as of the effective date of the updated SMP to continue.
B. Locate and design new agricultural activities on land not currently used for agricultural activity to assure no net loss of ecological functions and not to have a significant adverse impact on other resources and values in shoreline jurisdiction.
C. Implement best management practices (BMPs) to protect the shoreline and aquatic environments from bank failure, erosion, siltation and surface runoff, consistent with critical area regulations.
D. Maintain vegetative cover in areas subject to frequent flooding.
E. Prohibit the storage of toxic or hazardous chemicals used for agricultural practices in shoreline areas subject to flooding.
F. Permit upland finfish facilities in shoreline jurisdiction as a shoreline conditional use to allow the city and Ecology to review proposals on a case-by-case basis using the most current and best information.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.540.02 Regulations.
A. Applicability. The SMA permits specific agricultural activities to be exempted from regulation under the SMP. Other agricultural practices qualify for a more limited exemption from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit.
[IMAGE: <14.50.540.02.A.png>]
    1. Exempted Activities. If an activity qualifies as agricultural activity on agricultural land, as defined in RCW 90.58.065, and the activity existed as of the date of adoption of the SMP, then the provisions of this SMP do not apply and a shoreline permit is not required for that activity.
        a. Maintaining, repairing and replacing agricultural facilities, including modernization and replacement of existing facilities.
        b. In all other cases not specifically excepted under the SMA, all substantive SMP provisions apply.
    2. Permit-Exempt Activities. If an activity does not qualify as excepted as described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, it may still qualify for an exemption from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit under RCW 90.58.030(3)(e) and WAC 173-27-040(2).
    Pursuant to WAC 173-27-040(1), such exemptions are to be construed narrowly and an exemption from the substantial development permit process is not an exemption from compliance with the SMP. A shoreline substantial development permit is required for all agricultural development not specifically exempted by the provisions of RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)(iv).
B. Development Standards for New Agricultural Activities. 
    1. Agricultural uses and development shall be consistent with the shoreline environment designation in which they are proposed, ensure no net loss of ecological function and not have a significant adverse impact on other shoreline resources and values.
    2. Agricultural practices must prevent and control erosion of soils and bank materials within shoreline areas.
    3. Pesticides and herbicides must be handled, applied and disposed of in accordance with provisions of the Washington Pesticide Application Act (Chapter 17.21 RCW) and the Washington Pesticide Control Act (Chapter 15.58 RCW).
    4. Feedlot operations and animal waste retention and storage areas must not be located within shoreline jurisdiction unless direct manure runoff is prevented.
    5. The bulk disposal of inorganic farm wastes, chemicals, fertilizers and associated containers and equipment within shoreline jurisdiction is prohibited.
    6. The storage of toxic or hazardous chemicals used for agricultural practices is prohibited in shoreline areas subject to flooding.
    7. Agricultural-commercial uses (such as roadside stands, pumpkin patches, etc.) are allowed where indicated in Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses and shall be consistent with commercial use standards in Section 14.50.570.
    8. Conversion of agricultural land to nonagricultural uses shall be consistent with the shoreline environment designation in which it is proposed. Conversions shall be subject to the general regulations and those use-specific regulations applicable to the proposed use and shall not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
    9. Upland finfish facilities in the shoreline jurisdiction require a shoreline conditional use permit. Review of the application by the shoreline administrator will include consideration of the following:
        a. Specific site conditions;
        b. Current and locally applicable science;
        c. Potential use conflicts;
        d. Cumulative impacts; and
        e. Potential mitigation and monitoring requirements.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.550 Aquaculture.
Aquaculture is the culture or farming of fish, shellfish or other aquatic plants and animals, excluding upland finfish facilities, which are regulated in Section 14.50.540. Aquaculture is a preferred use of the water area when consistent with control of pollution and prevention of damage to the environment. Locations for aquaculture are relatively restricted due to requirements for water quality, temperature, flows, oxygen content and adjacent land uses.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.550.01 Policies.
A. Design, locate and operate aquaculture uses in a manner that supports the long-term beneficial use of the shoreline and protects and maintains shoreline ecological functions and processes.
B. Do not allow aquaculture in locations that would result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions, adversely affect the quality or extent of habitat for native species or interfere with navigation or other water-dependent uses.
C. Minimize the potential of cumulative adverse impacts from aquaculture on water quality, sediment quality, benthic and pelagic organisms, wild fish populations or other Federal Endangered Species Act (ESA) listed species because of antibiotic resistant bacteria, escapement of nonnative species and/or other factors.
D. Give latitude when implementing regulations for this use, because the technology associated with some forms of aquaculture is in formative stages.
E. Minimize potential aesthetic impacts associated with aquaculture uses through the consideration of view impacts on surrounding properties and public access points.
F. Protect legally established aquaculture enterprises from incompatible uses that may seek to locate nearby and uses or developments that have a high probability of damaging or destroying the aquaculture operations.
G. Recognize limited availability of suitable locations for aquaculture uses because of specific requirements related to water quality, temperature, oxygen content, currents, adjacent land use, wind protection and navigation.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.550.02 Regulations.
A. Applicability. 
    1. Review is required for all new aquaculture facilities or farms, as well as projects that seek to expand an aquaculture use beyond the area for which a previous permit was issued.
    2. Ongoing maintenance, harvest, replanting or changing of culture techniques or species does not require review under the SMP, unless the cultivation of the new species or the use of a new culture technique has the potential for significant adverse environmental impacts.
    3. A written statement of exemption in accordance with Section 14.50.730.04 is required for all aquaculture activities that are reviewed as part of this SMP, but that do not require a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance.
B. Location. 
    1. Water-dependent portions of aquaculture facilities and their necessary accessories may be located waterward of the OHWM in the aquatic shoreline environment or in the shoreline buffer. Water intakes and discharge structures, water and power conveyances, and fish collection and discharge structures are considered water-dependent or accessory to water-dependent facilities.
    2. All other elements of aquaculture facilities shall be located outside the shoreline buffer, unless those facilities are deemed water-related and proximity to the water-dependent project elements is critical to implementation of the facility’s purpose.
    3. Sites shall be selected to avoid or minimize alteration of the shoreline. Applicants for aquaculture operations shall be required to demonstrate that the location of the proposed facilities avoids and minimizes impacts to on-site critical areas and habitats to the maximum extent feasible and limits impacts on existing public access points, navigable waters and other water-dependent uses.
    4. Aquaculture facilities shall be designed and located so as not to spread disease to native aquatic life, establish new nonnative species that cause significant ecological impacts, or significantly affect the aesthetic qualities of the shoreline.
C. General Requirements. 
    1. Aquaculture that involves substantial aquatic substrate modification or sedimentation through dredging, trenching, digging or other mechanisms shall not be permitted in areas where the proposal would have long-term adverse impacts on the strength or viability of native stocks. The degree of proposed substrate modification shall be the minimum necessary for feasible aquaculture operations at the site.
    2. New aquaculture proposals shall comply with mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420. Aquaculture uses that would have a significant adverse impact on natural shoreline processes or result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions are prohibited.
    3. New aquatic species that were not previously found or cultivated in the shoreline jurisdiction shall not be introduced into fresh waters without prior written approval of the WDFW.
    4. Permanent water-dependent instream facilities must be properly anchored to prevent channel migration, erosion or a safety hazard and must evaluate and mitigate potential adverse effects on adjacent properties upstream and downstream.
    5. No processing of aquaculture products, except for the sorting or culling of the cultured organism and the washing or removal of surface materials or organisms after harvest, shall occur in or over the water unless specifically approved by permit. All other processing facilities shall be located on land. If within shoreline jurisdiction, such facilities shall be subject to the applicable policies and regulations of Sections 14.50.550 and 14.50.590.
    6. Aquaculture structures and equipment shall be of sound construction and shall be so maintained. Abandoned or unsafe structures or equipment shall be removed or repaired promptly by the owner.
    7. Aquacultural uses shall comply with all applicable noise, air and water quality standards. All projects shall be designed, operated and maintained to minimize odor and noise.
    8. Aquaculture facilities shall not substantially degrade the aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. Aquaculture structures and equipment, except navigation aids, shall be designed, operated and maintained to blend into their surroundings.
D. Commercial Geoduck Aquaculture. 
    1. Commercial geoduck aquaculture shall only be allowed where sediments, topography and land and water access support geoduck aquaculture operations without significant clearing or grading.
    2. Planting, growing and harvesting of farm-raised geoduck clams require a substantial development permit if a specific product or practice causes substantial interference with normal public use of the surface waters.
    3. A conditional use permit is required for new commercial geoduck aquaculture. Where an applicant proposes to convert existing nongeoduck aquaculture to geoduck aquaculture, a conditional use permit is required. No subsequent cycles of planting and harvest shall require a new conditional use permit.
E. Application Requirements. 
    1. Commercial aquaculture shall conform to all applicable state and federal regulations. The city may accept application documentation required by other permitting agencies for new and expanded aquaculture uses and development to minimize redundancy in permit application requirements.
    2. Additional studies or information may be required by the city, which may include but is not limited to monitoring and adaptive management plans and information on the presence of and potential impacts to, including ecological and visual impacts, existing shoreline or water conditions and/or uses, vegetation and over-water structures.
    3. The city shall provide public notice to affected tribes and all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed project boundary.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.560 Boating and water access facilities.
This section applies to all in-water and over-water structures and uses that facilitate water access or the launching or mooring of vessels, including all public and private docks, piers, marinas, mooring buoys, launch ramps and recreational floats. It does not apply to marine terminals and moorage structures, which are regulated in Section 14.50.590.
Construction of dock structures for the private noncommercial use of the owner, lessee or contract purchaser of single- and multifamily residences is exempt from the requirement for a shoreline substantial development permit pursuant to RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)(vii) and WAC 173-27-040(h). An HPA from the WDFW may still be required, as well as approvals from other agencies such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.560.01 Policies.
A. Encourage the construction and operation of boating and water access facilities to allow public access for enjoyment of shorelines.
B. Site, design, construct and operate boating and water access facilities to incorporate BMPs and ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
C. Balance the encouragement of public access and the protection of ecological functions in the expansion of existing or construction of new boating and water access facilities.
D. Minimize the amount of shoreline modification, over-water cover, changes to water circulation and quality and effects to fish and wildlife habitat from boating and water access facilities. The length, width and height of over-water structures should be no greater than that required for safety and feasibility for the primary use.
E. Ensure that boating and water access facilities do not impact the navigability of the water body or adversely affect other water-dependent uses.
F. Plan and coordinate public boating and water access facilities needs regionally. Shorelines particularly suitable for public boat launch facilities are limited and should be identified and reserved on a regional basis.
G. Only allow the construction of new docks and piers for public access or water-dependent uses.
H. Allow recreational floats only where they support public or private recreational uses or in lieu of fixed piers adjacent to a residential land use.
I. Minimize impacts to adjacent uses and users, such as aesthetic or noise-related impacts, impacts to public visual access to the shoreline or off-site impacts caused by public access to the shoreline. If impact avoidance is not feasible, require mitigation.
J. Limit the lighting of boating and water access facilities to the minimum extent necessary.
K. Prohibit new moorage covers, except in limited instances through the shoreline conditional use process.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.560.02 Regulations.
A. Location Standards. 
    1. New boating and water access facilities shall maintain the rights of navigation on the waters of the state.
    2. Boating and other water access facilities shall be sited and designed to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
    3. Boating and other water access facilities shall meet the Washington State Department of Natural Resources (WDNR) requirements and other state guidance if located in or over state-owned aquatic lands.
    4. Boating and water access facilities shall be located where:
        a. There is adequate water mixing and flushing;
        b. Such facilities will not adversely affect flood channel capacity or otherwise create a flood hazard;
        c. Water depths are adequate to minimize spoil disposal, filling, beach enhancement and other channel maintenance activities; and
        d. Water depths are adequate to prevent the facility from grounding out at the lowest low water or the facility includes stoppers to prevent grounding.
    5. Boating and water access facilities shall not be located:
        a. Along braided or meandering river channels where the channel is subject to change in alignment;
        b. On point bars or other accretion beaches;
        c. Where new dredging or new ongoing maintenance dredging will be required solely for creating a new facility. This requirement does not prohibit the siting of new boating facilities in locations where maintenance dredging activities occur to support another existing use;
        d. In areas with important habitat for aquatic species or where wave action caused by boating use would increase bank erosion rates; or
        e. In areas where it would be incompatible with the need to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
    6. Boating and water access facilities shall be designed to ensure that lawfully existing or planned public shoreline access is not blocked, obstructed, or made dangerous.
    7. Major boating and water access facilities, such as marinas, shall be located only where adequate utility services are available or can be provided concurrently.
B. General Design Standards for Boating and Water Access Facilities. 
    1. Boating and water access facilities shall be designed and operated to avoid or minimize impacts. Unavoidable impacts must be mitigated consistent with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and critical areas in Section 14.50.430.
    2. All boating and water access facilities and shoreline modifications to support these uses shall be the minimum size necessary to accommodate the anticipated demand for the facility.
    3. Boating and water access facilities shall be designed to provide physical or visual public access to the shoreline for as many water-oriented recreational uses as feasible, commensurate with the scale of the proposal, including, but not limited to, physical and visual access to water bodies, public piers or fishing platforms.
    4. Project applicants shall comply with all local and state policies and regulations, including all applicable health, safety and welfare requirements associated with the primary or accessory use. These standards include but are not limited to the WDNR and the WDFW standards and regulations including Hydraulic Code Rules (Chapter 220-660 WAC).
    5. All boating or water access facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a safe condition. Abandoned or unsafe boating or water access facilities shall be removed or repaired promptly by the owner.
    6. Wooden components of boating or water access facilities that will be in contact with water or installed over water shall not be treated or coated with herbicides, fungicides, paint, pentachlorophenol, arsenate, creosote or similar toxic substances. Boating or water access facilities shall be made out of materials that have been approved by applicable state and federal agencies.
    7. Lighting associated with boating or water access facilities shall be shielded to avoid causing glare on adjacent properties or water bodies. Illumination levels shall be the minimum necessary for safety.
    8. Boating or water access facilities must be limited to day moorage only. No live-aboard vessels or floating homes are allowed.
    9. Non-water-dependent elements and uses, such as decks and gazebos built on docks or piers, are not allowed.
    10. Upland boat storage may be allowed within the shoreline jurisdiction provided impermeable surface limitations and other standards are met, mitigation sequencing is followed and impacts can be mitigated to achieve no net loss.
C. Supplementary Standards for Boat Ramps and Launches. 
    1. New boat ramps and launches shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-150 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. Only joint-use new boat ramps and launches are allowed for new residential development or subdivisions of two (2) or more waterfront dwellings occurring after the effective date of this SMP.
    3. Boat ramps and launches may be permitted for boating and water access facilities, recreational uses and developments with more than four (4) residential units subject to Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses.
    4. Boat ramps and launches shall be sited to minimize impacts to aquatic and upland wildlife habitats, native emergent vegetation, fluvial processes, water quality and navigation. All facilities shall be sited and designed per required mitigation sequencing.
    5. Boat ramps and launches shall be located where water depths are adequate to eliminate or minimize the need for dredging, filling, beach enhancement or other maintenance activities.
    6. The design of boat ramps and launches shall comply with all regulations as stipulated by state and federal agencies, affected tribes or other agencies with jurisdiction.
    7. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed length of a boat ramp or launch is the minimum necessary to launch the intended craft safely.
    8. Boat ramps and launches shall be designed and be constructed using methods and technology recognized and approved by state and federal resource agencies as BMPs.
D. Supplementary Standards for Boat Launching Rails. 
    1. Boat launching rails may be permitted subject to the requirements of Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses.
    2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed length of the boat launching rail is the minimum necessary to launch the intended craft safely and to comply with all requirements established by state and federal agencies, affected tribes and other agencies with jurisdiction. In no case shall the rail extend beyond the point where the water depth is eight (8) feet below the OHWM.
    3. Boat launching rails shall be anchored to the ground with the use of tie-type construction.
    4. No more than one (1) boat launching rail per single-family residence or duplex is permitted.
E. Supplementary Standards for Boat Lifts and Canopies. 
    1. New boat lifts and canopies shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-140 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. New boat lifts and accessory boat lift canopies may be permitted as part of an approved dock or pier as specified in Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses, so long as the following requirements are met:
        a. The boat lift is placed as far waterward of the OHWM as is feasible and safe, to avoid impacts to nearshore habitat.
        b. The bottom of a boat lift canopy is elevated above the boat lift to the maximum extent feasible. The lowest edge of the canopy must be at least four (4) feet above the water surface and the top of the canopy must not extend more than seven (7) feet above an associated pier.
        c. No hydraulic fluid other than water shall be used in the boat lift system. A backflow protection may be required.
    3. A maximum of two (2) cubic yards of clean rock fill or pre-cast concrete blocks is permitted to anchor the boat lift if the substrate prevents the use of anchoring devices.
    4. One (1) boat lift or up to two (2) Jet Ski lifts are allowed per dock or pier.
F. Supplementary Standards for Docks and Piers. 
    1. New docks and piers shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-140 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. New docks and piers shall be allowed only for public access and water-dependent uses, including single-family residences, so long as the dock or pier complies with the regulations contained in this section. Docks and piers shall meet the following standards:
        a. Docks and piers serving a single-family residence are defined as water-dependent accessory uses when designed and intended as a facility for access to watercraft. To be authorized, the residential use and the accessory dock or pier must be allowed in the underlying upland shoreline environment designation.
        b. New docks and piers that are not accessory to single-family residences shall be permitted only when they are intended for public use or when the applicant demonstrates that the new dock or pier supports a water-dependent use.
        c. No more than one (1) dock or pier is permitted for each single-family residence existing as of the effective date of this SMP.
        d. No more than one (1) pier, dock or other moorage structure is allowed for a water-dependent commercial use or a multifamily development.
    3. When individual lots have less than fifty (50) feet of water frontage, a joint-use dock or pier that is shared with neighboring properties shall be required; provided, that an individual dock may be allowed subject to the requirements of Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses, when lots on either side of the subject lot have legal preexisting docks or piers and the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the shoreline administrator that a shared use agreement is not feasible. In this case, only, a lot with less than fifty (50) feet of minimum shoreline frontage may be permitted an individual dock or pier.
    4. The maximum dimensions of a dock or pier shall meet the following development standards. An explanation of why the dock or pier length was chosen shall be submitted with the application.
        a. Residential docks and piers shall be no greater than the widths allowed for HPA permits in WAC 220-660-140(3) and shall not exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the OHWM.
        b. Docks and piers for commercial, recreational or public access use may be up to ten (10) feet in width and shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet beyond the OHWM.
        c. Docks and piers shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from side property lines. Provided, that joint-use facilities may be located closer to or upon a side property line when agreed to by contract or covenant with the owners of the affected properties. A copy of such agreement shall be recorded with the Grays Harbor County Auditor and filed with the shoreline permit application.
        d. Proposed docks and piers that do not comply with the dimensional standards above may only be approved if they obtain a shoreline variance. Pursuant to WAC 173-27-040(2)(b), any existing legal nonconforming dock or pier may be repaired or restored to its original size, dimension and location without the need for a variance, if it is below the replacement thresholds found in subsection (K)(1) of this section. Projects undertaken pursuant to this section must be permitted within two (2) years of removal of the preexisting, nonconforming structure.
G. Supplementary Standards for Marinas. 
    1. New marinas shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-140 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. Marinas shall be designed to:
        a. Provide thorough flushing of all enclosed water areas;
        b. Allow the free movement of aquatic life in shallow water areas; and
        c. Avoid and minimize any interference with geohydraulic processes and disruption of existing shore forms.
    3. New marinas shall provide public access amenities such as viewpoints, interpretive displays and public access to water-enjoyment uses such as restaurants.
    4. Marinas shall have adequate facilities and procedures for fuel handling and storage and the containment, recovery and mitigation of spilled petroleum, sewage and other potentially harmful or hazardous materials and toxic products.
    5. Sufficient utility services must be provided concurrent with the marina development or be situated where they are already available. New marinas must include adequate restroom and sewage disposal facilities, such as pump out, holding or treatment facilities.
    6. The marina operator shall be responsible for the collection and dumping of sewage, solid waste and petroleum waste.
H. Supplementary Standards for Moorage Covers. 
    1. New moorage covers may be permitted as a shoreline conditional use in the locations specified in Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses, if the proposal addresses the following:
        a. The applicant demonstrates that the moorage cover is the minimum size necessary to provide for the water-dependent use;
        b. The moorage cover does not create any potential adverse impacts to public safety;
        c. The moorage cover is placed as far waterward of the OHWM as feasible and safe, within the limits of the dimensional standards for docks and piers (except for dock and pier width) established in this section;
        d. There is only one (1) moorage cover per dock or pier, including joint-use docks or piers; and
        e. The moorage cover complies with all other conditional use criteria in WAC 173-27-160 and Section 14.50.730.02.
I. Supplementary Standards for Mooring Buoys. 
    1. New mooring buoys shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-140 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. Up to one (1) mooring buoy is allowed per dwelling unit in lieu of a dock or pier.
    3. Mooring buoys shall be anchored in accordance with all state and federal requirements.
J. Supplementary Standards for Recreational Floats. 
    1. New recreational floats shall follow BMPs and the standards in WAC 220-660-140 to avoid impacts to shoreline ecological functions, such as effects to nearshore habitat.
    2. New recreational floats may be permitted as specified in Table 5-1: Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses, so long as the following requirements are met:
        a. The recreational float complies with all requirements established by state and federal agencies, affected tribes and other agencies that have jurisdiction.
        b. The recreational float is located as close to the shore as feasible and no farther waterward than the existing floats and established swimming areas.
    3. Recreational floats shall be designed and intended for swimming or other nonmotorized uses.
    4. Recreational floats must be built so that the deck surface is one (1) foot above the water’s surface.
    5. Retrieval lines for recreational floats shall not float at or near the surface of the water.
K. Existing Uses and Structures. 
    1. Replacement. If any of the following are proposed, the project is considered a new boating and water access facility and must be designed consistent with any applicable standards for new boating and water access facilities:
        a. Replacement of the entire over-water boating and water access facility;
        b. Replacement of seventy-five (75) percent or more of support piles on a cumulative basis over the life of the piles; or
        c. Replacement of seventy-five (75) percent or more of a boat launch on a cumulative basis over the life of the boat launch.
    2. Modification or Enlargement. 
        a. Applicants must demonstrate that there is a need for modification or enlargement due to increased or changed use or demand, safety concerns or inadequate depth of water.
        b. Enlarged portions of boating and water access facilities must comply with any applicable design and mitigation standards for new facilities.
    3. Repair. 
        a. Repairs to existing legally established boating and water access facilities that fall below the standards identified in subsection (K)(1) of this section are permitted consistent with all other applicable codes and regulations.
        b. All repairs must utilize any material standards specified for new facilities.
L. Mitigation. 
    1. New or expanded boating and water access facilities should follow the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420.
    2. Compensatory mitigation proposals must provide mitigation at a minimum 1:1 ratio, by area, of new over-water cover to mitigation action using one (1) or more of the potential mitigation measures listed below. The ratio should be increased if the measure will take more than one (1) year to provide equivalent function or if the measure does not have a high success rate, as determined by a qualified professional.
    3. For new development and expansion of existing boating and water access facilities, appropriate compensatory mitigation may include items including, but not limited to, one (1) or more of the following measures:
        a. Removal of any legal existing over-water or in-water structures that are not the subject of the application or otherwise required to be removed;
        b. Removal or ecological improvement of hardened shoreline, including existing launch ramps or structural shoreline stabilization;
        c. Removal of manmade debris waterward of the OHWM, such as car bodies, oil drums, concrete or asphalt debris, remnant docks or other material detrimental to ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes; or
        d. Planting of native vegetation along the shoreline immediately landward of the OHWM consisting of a density and composition of trees and shrubs typically found in undisturbed areas adjacent to the subject water body.
    4. In-kind measures are preferred over out-of-kind measures when consistent with the objective of compensating for adverse impacts to ecological function.
M. Application Requirements. In addition to the general application requirements, the following submittals, as applicable, are necessary for all new or expanded boating and water access facilities:
    1. A description of the proposed boating and water access facility, including its size, location, design and any shoreline stabilization or other modification measures.
    2. The ownership of the property and aquatic lands.
    3. Habitat surveys and critical area studies consistent with Sections 14.50.430 and 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations.
    4. Assessment of potential impacts to existing ecological processes, including but not limited to sediment transport, hydrologic patterns and vegetation disturbance.
    5. A mitigation plan for unavoidable adverse impacts to ecological functions or processes pursuant to Sections 14.50.430 and 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations.
    6. A slope bathymetry map when deemed beneficial by the shoreline administrator.
    7. An assessment of existing water-dependent uses in the vicinity and documentation of potential impacts to those uses and mitigating measures.
    8. In addition, applicants must provide an assessment of need and demand for all new or expanded marina facilities, including, but not limited to:
        a. Existing approved facilities or pending applications, within the service range of the proposed new facility;
        b. The expected service population served by the facility; and
        c. Boat ownership characteristics of the population, if that information supports justification for specific design elements related to facility length or width or necessary water depth or other design factors.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.570 Commercial development.
Commercial uses and developments are those uses that are involved in wholesale and retail trade or business activities. Many commercial developments are intensive users of space because of extensive floor areas and facilities, such as parking, necessary to service them.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.570.01 Policies.
A. Encourage the development of water-oriented commercial developments, which utilize their location to offer opportunities for substantial numbers of people to enjoy the shoreline.
B. Encourage new commercial development along shorelines to locate in areas where current commercial uses exist, if the locations are suitable for such use.
C. Encourage non-water-oriented commercial development to locate outside of the shoreline jurisdiction.
D. Design new commercial development to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare; provide public access where feasible; and ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
E. Minimize the adverse impacts that may result from commercial buildings, such as blocked views, aesthetic impacts or noise.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.570.02 Regulations.
A. Commercial development shall not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions or have significant negative impacts to shoreline uses, resources and values such as navigation, recreation and public access.
B. New non-water-oriented commercial development is prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction unless it meets one (1) of the following criteria:
    1. The commercial use is part of a mixed-use project that includes water-dependent uses and provides a significant public benefit such as providing public access or ecological restoration;
    2. Navigability is severely limited at that location and the commercial use provides a significant public benefit such as public access or ecological restoration; or
    3. The commercial use is physically separated from the shoreline by another property, railroad or public right-of-way.
C. Non-water-dependent commercial uses over water are prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction except in existing structures or where necessary in support of water-dependent uses.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.580 Forest practices.
Forest management practices are those methods used for the protection, production and harvesting of timber. The FPA (Chapter 76.09 RCW) is the basis of management of commercial forest uses within shoreline jurisdiction. The WDNR is responsible for all forest practices including those within shoreline jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.580.01 Policies.
A. Effectively balance timber harvesting with the preservation of shoreline ecological functions, public access to shorelines and other shoreline goals.
B. Ensure state and federal water quality standards are maintained while conducting timber-harvesting practices in shoreline jurisdiction.
C. Prevent the accumulation of slash and other debris in waterways during logging and thinning operations.
D. Ensure that timber harvesting on shorelines of statewide significance does not exceed the limitations established in RCW 90.58.150 except in cases where selective logging is found to be ecologically detrimental or inadequate for the preparation of land for other uses authorized in the SMP.
E. Ensure the maintenance of shoreline buffers while conducting logging within shoreline jurisdiction.
F. Promote proper road, trail and bridge design, location and construction and maintenance practices to prevent development of roads and structures that would adversely affect shoreline resources.
G. Ensure that forest practice conversions to nonforest uses do not result in net loss of ecological functions or significant adverse impacts to other shoreline uses, resources and values such as navigation, recreation and public access.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.580.02 Regulations.
A. Aside from timber cutting, all forest practices, including forest conversions, building roads, trails, bridges and placing culverts in the shoreline jurisdiction, shall comply with the applicable policies and provisions of the FPA, the SMP, Chapter 76.09 RCW as amended and WAC Title 222 as administered by the city.
B. Preparatory work associated with the conversion of land to nonforestry uses or developments shall:
    1. Limit the conversion to the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose and intent of the SMP on the subject property.
    2. Ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions or significant adverse impacts to shoreline uses, resources and values provided for in RCW 90.58.020 such as navigation, recreation and public access.
    3. Demonstrate that conversion practices are conducted in a manner consistent with the shoreline environment designation in which they are located.
C. Within shoreline jurisdiction along shorelines of statewide significance, only selective commercial timber cutting may be permitted so that no more than thirty (30) percent of the merchantable timber may be harvested in any ten (10) year period.
    1. Other timber harvesting methods may be permitted with a shoreline conditional use permit in those limited instances where the topography, soil conditions or silviculture practices necessary for regeneration render selective logging ecologically detrimental.
    2. Clear cutting of timber solely incidental to the conversion and preparation of land for uses authorized in the SMP may be permitted.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.590 Industrial and port development.
In applying the policies and regulations of this section, the following definitions are used:
•“Industrial” means the production, processing, manufacturing or fabrication of goods or materials. Warehousing and storage of goods and materials are considered industrial development.
•“Port” means a center for water-borne commerce and traffic and includes marine terminals and moorage facilities.
Industrial and port developments are often associated with other uses and modifications that are identified separately in the SMP, such as parking or dredging. Every use and type of shoreline modification should be identified and reviewed for compliance with all applicable sections.
For the purposes of determining to which uses and activities this classification applies, the use of marine terminals and moorage facilities shall be permitted only where port and industrial uses are allowed. This use category shall likewise apply to facilities that handle the loading and unloading of cargo, freight mobility and materials associated with industrial or port uses.
Industrial and port development is intensive and has the potential to impact the shoreline environment. When impacts cannot be avoided, they must be mitigated to assure no net loss of the ecological function necessary to sustain shoreline resources.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.590.01 Policies.
A. Ensure the designation of sufficient land to accommodate water-dependent or water-related industrial and port development.
B. Locate, design and construct industrial and port development to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and to limit adverse impacts to other shoreline resources and values.
C. Encourage new industrial and port development to locate where environmental cleanup and restoration can be incorporated.
D. Consider public access and ecological restoration as potential mitigation of impacts to shoreline resources for all water-related and water-dependent industrial and port uses consistent with the regulation of private property.
E. Expansion or redevelopment of water-dependent industrial and port facilities and areas should be encouraged, provided it results in no net loss of shoreline functions.
F. Locate future non-water-dependent industry in areas away from the shoreline.
G. Encourage the cooperative use of docking, parking, cargo handling, freight mobility and storage facilities in shoreline industrial areas.
H. Encourage viewing of port and industrial uses from viewpoints and similar public facilities that do not interfere with operations, violate federal security regulations or endanger public health and safety.
I. Ensure that ports and industrial uses that are located in the aquatic shoreline environment designation are the minimum size necessary to support the proposed use and that multiple uses of over-water facilities are encouraged.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.590.02 Regulations.
A. Water-dependent industrial and port uses shall have shoreline location priority over all other uses in the high intensity shoreline environment designation.
B. The location, design and construction of industrial and port development shall not result in net loss of ecological functions or have significant negative impacts to shoreline use, resources and navigation, recreation and public access.
C. New ports and industrial uses that are located in the aquatic shoreline environment designation shall be the minimum size necessary to support the proposed use and multiple uses of over-water facilities are encouraged.
D. New non-water-oriented uses are prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction unless they meet one (1) of the following criteria:
    1. It is part of a mixed-use project that includes water-dependent uses and provides a significant public benefit such as providing public access or ecological restoration;
    2. Navigability is severely limited on the site and the industrial use provides a significant public benefit of providing public access or ecological restoration;
    3. The site is physically separated from the shoreline by another property or public right-of-way; or
    4. The site is adjacent to a tributary such as Fry Creek or an associated wetland and not the Chehalis, Hoquiam or Wishkah River or the Grays Harbor Estuary.
E. Public access should be incorporated where feasible. Public access shall be required where feasible for new industrial and port development on publicly owned land and does not interfere with operations, violate federal security regulations or endanger public health and safety.
F. Industrial and port development shall comply with all local, state and federal requirements regarding air and water quality.
G. BMPs shall be strictly adhered to for facilities, vessels and products used in association with these facilities and vessels.
H. All developments shall include the capability to contain and clean up spills, discharges or pollutants and shall be responsible for any pollution which they cause.
I. Procedures for handling toxic materials in shoreline areas shall prevent their entering the air or water.
J. Accessory development, which does not require a shoreline location, shall be located upland of the water-dependent portions of the development and set back from the OHWM as set forth in the shoreline environment designation.
K. All new or expanded upland industrial or port development shall be set back and buffered from adjacent shoreline properties which are used for nonindustrial purposes. Buffers shall be of adequate width, height and plant and soil composition to protect shorelines and such other properties from visual or noise intrusion, minimize erosion and protect water quality. New or expanded industrial and port development shall be set back and buffered from the shoreline except those water-dependent portions of the development, which require direct access to the water, or shoreline and any adverse impacts are minimized.
L. Buffers shall not be used for storage of industrial or port equipment or materials or for waste disposal, but may be used for outdoor recreation if consistent with public access and other provisions of the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.591 Mining.
Mining is the removal of sand, gravel, minerals and other materials for commercial and other uses. Mining in the shoreline can alter the natural character, resources and ecology of shorelines.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.591.01 Policies.
A. Design and conduct new mining and associated uses to result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes.
B. Do not locate new mining on shorelines where unavoidable adverse impacts on other users or resources taken together equal or outweigh the benefits from mining.
C. Minimize the impacts of mining, such as aesthetics, dust, noise, etc., on existing public access points and water-dependent or enjoyment uses.
D. Begin land reclamation immediately after the termination of mining operations. Use of reclaimed mine property must be consistent with the SMP and provide appropriate ecological functions consistent with the location and Washington State Surface Mining Reclamation Act requirements.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.591.02 Regulations.
A. Application for mining permits within shoreline jurisdiction shall be accompanied by operation plans, reclamation plans and an analysis of environmental impacts sufficient to make a determination as to whether the project will result in net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes during the course of mining and after reclamation.
B. Mining operations and subsequent uses shall not cause permanent impairment or loss of floodwater storage, wetlands or other stream corridor features and habitats. Mitigation shall provide for the replacement of impacted functions necessary to achieve no net loss of shoreline ecological function.
C. The evaluation of impacts of mining shall be integrated with relevant environment review requirements of SEPA (Chapter 43.21 RCW) and SEPA rules (Chapter 197-11 WAC).
D. New mining waterward of the OHWM or in the CMZ shall not be permitted unless:
    1. Removal of specified quantities of sand and gravel or other materials is proposed at precise locations, which will not adversely affect the natural processes of gravel transportation in the water body as a whole;
    2. The mining and associated permitted uses will not have significant adverse impacts on habitat for priority species or cause a net loss of shoreline ecological functions;
    3. Such uses will not divert flood flows, increase the flooding of downstream or upstream flood hazard areas or threaten public or private properties; and
    4. A shoreline conditional use permit is obtained.
E. In considering renewal, extension or reauthorization of mining waterward of the OHWM in locations where mining was previously conducted, compliance with subsection (D) of this section shall be required where no such review has previously been conducted. Where there has been a prior review of the mining activities, the shoreline administrator shall review the previous determinations to assure compliance under current site conditions.
F. For mining proposals that meet the definition of surface mine in RCW 78.44.031, the proposal shall be consistent with WDNR surface mine reclamation standards found in Chapter 332-18 WAC and Chapter 78.44 RCW. A reclamation plan that complies with the format and standards of Chapter 78.44 RCW shall be included with a shoreline permit application.
G. In reviewing the permit application and reclamation plan, the shoreline administrator shall determine whether the plan is consistent with the SMP and other applicable local regulations. After the applicant has been given reasonable opportunity to revise the plan, an inconsistent reclamation plan shall constitute sufficient grounds for denial of a shoreline permit. Subsequent use of reclaimed sites shall be consistent with the shoreline environment designation and the use criteria provisions of the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.592 Parking.
Parking is the temporary storage of automobiles or other motorized vehicles. The following provisions apply to parking that is allowed as an accessory to a permitted shoreline use. Stand-alone parking facilities are prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.592.01 Policies.
A. Minimize the amount of parking in the shoreline jurisdiction.
B. Locate and design parking facilities to have the least impact on shoreline features, including shoreline ecological functions and existing or planned water-dependent uses.
C. Locate and design parking to minimize adverse impacts including those related to stormwater run-off, water quality, visual qualities, public access, vegetation and habitat.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.592.02 Regulations.
A. Parking facilities are allowed only as accessories to authorized shoreline uses. Stand-alone parking facilities not supporting an authorized primary use are prohibited in shoreline jurisdiction.
B. Parking facilities serving individual buildings in shoreline jurisdiction shall be located upland from the principal structure being served, except in the following cases:
    1. When parking facilities are within or beneath the structure and adequately screened.
    2. Where the existing configuration of a commercial or industrial building has parking situated between the structure and the shoreline. No expansion of the parking area towards the water shall be allowed.
    3. When parking to address specific Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 requirements is required and cannot be placed in another location.
C. Exterior parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon adjacent and abutting properties’ shoreline jurisdiction.
D. Existing parking areas that are of a nonpaved surface, such as gravel, may be paved provided such facilities comply with all applicable water quality, stormwater, landscaping and other applicable requirements and regulations. Paved parking areas shall be designed to incorporate LID practices, such as permeable surfaces and bioswales, to the extent feasible.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.593 Recreational development.
Recreational development includes commercial and public facilities that provide recreational opportunities to the public. This section applies to public and private recreational uses and development, accessory recreational uses and development and excludes private recreational uses associated with residential development.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.593.01 Policies.
A. Prevent recreational development from causing a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
B. Encourage the development of recreational facilities that allow the public to access and enjoy shorelines.
C. Create new public access points to shorelines on public lands.
D. Promote the ongoing maintenance of shoreline public access.
E. Work to link shoreline parks and public access points.
F. Protect the rights of private property owners and help to minimize adverse impacts on private land associated with neighboring public access points.
G. Ensure sufficient water and wastewater facilities are available to accommodate the demands of recreational development proposals.
H. Encourage preservation of scenic views and vistas.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.593.02 Regulations.
A. Recreational uses and facilities proposed within the shoreline jurisdiction shall be primarily designed to promote access, enjoyment and use of the water and shorelines of the state. Non-water-related recreational uses shall predominantly be located outside of the shoreline jurisdiction.
B. Where recreation facilities include over-water structures designed for public access to shorelines, such as public viewing or fishing platforms, the structures shall comply with the relevant requirements of Section 14.50.560.
C. Applicant shall submit plans that demonstrate the BMPs and methods to be used to prevent chemical applications and resultant leachate from entering adjacent water bodies.
D. Recreational facilities shall make adequate provisions, such as screening, buffer strips, fences and signs, to minimize impacts to neighbors and prevent the overflow of pedestrians onto adjacent private properties.
E. Wildlife viewing structures and permeable trails or raised boardwalks are allowed within riparian and wetland buffers in accordance with the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420, the critical area regulations in Section 14.50.430, and Section 14.50.910, Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations.
F. Trails. 
    1. See public access standards in Section 14.50.450.
    2. Trails shall be planted or landscaped to provide a visual buffer for adjoining dissimilar uses or scenic areas. The shoreline administrator may condition proposals to:
        a. Select species that are suitable for the local climate and have minimal demands for water, minimal vulnerability to pests and minimal demands for fertilizers; and
        b. Incorporate native species.
G. Recreational development proposals shall include facilities for water supply, wastewater and garbage disposal in conformance with local standards.
H. Recreational development shall be located, designed and constructed in a manner that assures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
I. In addition to these standards, commercial recreational development shall be consistent with the provisions for commercial development in Section 14.50.570.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.594 Residential development.
Residential development includes single-family residences and appurtenances, multifamily development and appurtenant structures and uses, including garages, sheds, fences, necessary utilities and driveways as well as the creation of new residential lots through land division. Single-family residences are a priority use when developed in a manner consistent with no net loss of ecological functions.
The construction of a single-family residence by an owner, lessee or contract purchaser for their own use or for the use of their family that does not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet above average grade level may be exempt from the requirement for a shoreline substantial development permit but must be consistent with all applicable policies and regulations in the SMP. Refer to the application and interpretation of exemptions in WAC 173-27-040(2)(g).
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.594.01 Policies.
A. Develop residential uses in a manner that ensures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and is consistent with provisions relating to shoreline buffer areas, shoreline armoring, vegetation conservation requirements, on-site sewage system standards and aesthetic enhancement.
B. Control residential uses and development in areas subject to environmental limitations, such as wetlands, stream buffers and areas of frequent flooding.
C. Set back residential development and uses from steep slopes and shorelines vulnerable to erosion so that structural shoreline stabilization or flood hazard reduction measures are not required to protect such structures.
D. Prohibit new over-water residential development.
E. Encourage public access to the shoreline as part of new residential development and require public access in accordance with Section 14.50.450 for new multifamily residential development and subdivisions that include more than four (4) parcels.
F. Consider single-family residences a priority use in planning for uses in the shoreline jurisdiction when developed with no net loss of ecological functions.
G. Consider accessory uses such as driveways, utilities and other appurtenances as part of the primary residential use and review under the standards of this section.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.594.02 Regulations.
A. Residential uses and development may be allowed in conformance with local development requirements and SMP provisions.
B. Residential subdivisions shall:
    1. Comply with all applicable subdivision, critical areas and zoning regulations.
    2. Include facilities for water supply, wastewater, stormwater, solid waste, access, utilities and other support facilities in conformance with local standards.
    3. Be designed, configured and developed to:
        a. Assure that no net loss of ecological functions will result from the initial division of the land, at full build-out of all the lots and throughout all phases of development.
        b. Avoid critical areas and their buffers in accordance with Section 14.50.420.
        c. Prevent the need for new hard or soft shoreline stabilization or flood hazard reduction measures in accordance with Sections 14.50.440 and 14.50.660.
        d. Minimize physical impacts to vegetation and other natural features within the shoreline.
        e. Assure that lots in proposed subdivisions are sufficiently sized and oriented to allow future residential development, without these residential uses requiring a shoreline variance. Lot configurations shall plan for building sites outside of required shoreline and critical area buffers.
    4. Clustering may be permitted, as allowed by local code, to achieve these provisions.
C. Each residential structure, including accessory and appurtenant structures and uses, shall:
    1. Comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
    2. Meet all applicable critical areas, vegetation conservation and water quality standards of Article 4, General Policies and Regulations.
    3. Be designed, sited, and constructed to:
        a. Assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
        b. Prevent the need for new structural flood hazard management measures to the greatest extent feasible.
        c. Be sufficiently set back from steep slopes and shorelines vulnerable to erosion, in accordance with the required critical area and shoreline buffers, to ensure that structural improvements and stabilization structures are not necessary to protect such structures and uses.
D. New multifamily developments and subdivisions over four (4) lots in size shall provide public access under Section 14.50.450.
E. The primary residential use on any lot shall be established prior to any accessory residential uses. Accessory and appurtenant uses and structures not specifically addressed in the SMP shall be subject to the same regulations as the primary residence.
F. Primary residential uses are prohibited over the water.
G. Residential accessory and appurtenant structures and uses shall be prohibited waterward of the OHWM, unless clearly water-dependent.
H. Residential appurtenant and accessory structures or uses are prohibited within shoreline buffers unless specifically authorized in Section 14.50.430.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.595 Signs.
The following provisions apply to any commercial or advertising sign directing attention to a business, professional service, community, site, facility or entertainment.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.595.01 Policies.
A. Limit off-premises outdoor advertising signs within the shoreline environment.
B. Ensure that signs are sized and placed to protect vistas and viewpoints of shorelines, water bodies, and surrounding landscapes from public properties and rights-of-way.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.595.02 Regulations.
A. Signs shall comply with the applicable city regulations.
B. All signs shall be located and designed to minimize interference with visual access to shoreline jurisdiction.
C. Signs may be allowed if they:
    1. Do not obstruct sight distance of drivers and nonmotorized roadway users;
    2. Conform with Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) standards for signs on public highways; and
    3. Are official in nature, such as traffic control, wayfinding, monument, historic or cultural site markers or water navigational, railway, and security signs necessary for operation and safety, etc., and are located within the public right-of-way or are located on the public or private property that contains the use advertised.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.596 Transportation facilities.
Transportation facilities include structures that provide for the movement of people, goods and services by land, air and water. Transportation facilities include highways, bridges, bikeways, airports and other related facilities. This section applies to new and expanded transportation facilities within shoreline jurisdiction. A driveway for an individual single-family residence is considered part of the primary use and it should be reviewed as part of Section 14.50.594.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.596.01 Policies.
A. Plan, locate and design new transportation facilities or the expansion of existing facilities where they will have the least adverse effect on shoreline features, shoreline ecological functions and existing or planned water-dependent uses and impacts can be adequately mitigated.
B. Maintain and reconstruct roads in accordance with the BMPs adopted by the city and WSDOT.
C. Require that public and private developments provide circulation facilities including roads, streets, alleys, pedestrian, bicycle and public transportation facilities in a manner consistent with local, state and federal standards and adopted levels of service.
D. Preserve the aesthetic values of the shoreline environment along roadways.
E. Promote the creation and upkeep of viewpoints, rest areas and picnic areas that are located along transportation facilities in the shoreline jurisdiction.
F. Seek to provide for safe pedestrian and nonmotorized travel along scenic corridors, public roadways and multi-use trails in the shoreline jurisdiction.
G. Design road and railroad structures so that flood debris will not be trapped by the structure.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.596.02 Regulations.
A. Transportation facilities shall only be placed within shoreline jurisdiction, when no other reasonable option for the location of the facility exists. If no reasonable alternative exists to placing a new transportation facility or expanding an existing facility in shoreline jurisdiction, a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional must be prepared consistent with the provisions of Section 14.50.420.
B. When located within the shoreline jurisdiction, new and expanded transportation facilities shall:
    1. Be set back from the OHWM as far as feasible and locate any new water crossings as near to perpendicular with the water body as feasible, unless an alternate path would minimize the disturbance of native vegetation or result in the avoidance of critical areas;
    2. Be designed with the minimum pavement area required;
    3. Minimize adverse effects to unique or fragile shoreline features;
    4. Implement the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 and ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions;
    5. Avoid adverse impacts on existing or planned water-dependent uses;
    6. Allow joint use of the right-of-way with nonmotorized uses and existing or planned primary utility facilities to consolidate the crossings of water bodies and minimize adverse impacts to shoreline jurisdiction, where feasible; and
    7. Provide and maintain visual access to scenic vistas on public roads, where feasible. Visual access may include, but is not limited to, turnouts, rest areas and picnic areas.
C. Existing roads that are of a nonpaved surface, such as gravel, may be paved, if the facilities comply with all applicable mitigation, water quality, stormwater and landscaping standards, as well as other requirements of the SMP and local regulations.
D. Seasonal work windows may be required for construction projects to minimize impacts to shoreline functions.
E. Where public access to shorelines across transportation facilities is intended, facility designs must provide safe pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicular crossings.
F. Crossings of water bodies, such as bridges, shall be designed to minimize impact to aquatic habitat, allow for fish passage and the passage of flood debris.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.597 Utilities.
The provisions of this section apply to public and private facilities that produce, convey, store or process power, gas, sewage, communications, oil or waste. Utilities serving an individual use or on-site utility features serving a primary use, such as an electrical line or water, sewer or gas lines, are considered accessory utilities and shall be considered under the standards of the primary use of the property.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.597.01 Policies.
A. Ensure that the installation of new utilities results in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
B. Locate utility lines and facilities outside of the shoreline environment where feasible.
C. Locate water-oriented utilities, such as sewage treatment, water reclamation and some power facilities, where they do not interfere with other public uses of the water and shoreline.
D. Locate and design utilities to accommodate future growth and development.
E. Locate utilities so as not to obstruct or destroy scenic views wherever facilities must be placed in a shoreline area. Place utility lines underground when feasible to minimize damage to the shoreline aesthetic quality.
F. Locate utilities in existing rights-of-way or corridors whenever feasible.
G. Restore shoreline areas damaged by the installation or maintenance of utilities.
H. Provide public access to the shoreline whenever a major utility line or facility utilizes a shoreline location or crossing, unless the utility presents a serious hazard to the public.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.597.02 Regulations.
A. All utility system projects and maintenance shall be designed, located and installed in a manner which results in no net loss of ecological function.
B. Water-oriented utilities are allowed in the shoreline jurisdiction.
C. If a utility is required to be sited in shoreline jurisdiction, a mitigation plan must be prepared by a qualified professional consistent with the provisions of Section 14.50.430.
D. Where utilities must be located in shoreline jurisdiction, the utilities must:
    1. Be designed and constructed to meet all adopted engineering standards.
    2. Provide for compatible, multiple-use sites and rights-of-way whenever feasible. Compatible uses include shoreline access points, trails and other forms of recreation and transportation, provided these uses do not interfere with utility operation, endanger public health and safety or cause a significant and disproportionate liability for the owner.
    3. Minimize processes affecting the rate of channel migration or shoreline erosion. Where this may occur, the shoreline administrator may require a monitoring plan and adaptive management measures prepared by a qualified professional as appropriate.
    4. Limit clearing to the minimum necessary for installation or maintenance. Impacts associated with removal of vegetation or clearing shall be mitigated on site.
E. In addition to the standards above, utility lines within the shoreline jurisdiction shall:
    1. Be undergrounded, except where technical, environmental or geological conditions make undergrounding infeasible.
    2. Be sited within the footprint of an existing right-of-way or utility easement, wherever feasible in locations where rights-of-way and easements exist.
    3. Avoid paralleling the shoreline or following a down-valley course near the channel, except where located in an existing road or easement footprint.
F. If an underwater location is necessary for the siting of utilities, the following performance standards apply:
    1. The design, installation and operation shall minimize impacts to the waterway and the resident aquatic ecosystems.
    2. Seasonal work windows may be made a condition of approval.
    3. All state and federal permits must be obtained.
    4. A maintenance schedule and emergency repair protocol shall be prepared and recorded.
G. After the installation of a utility system or the completion of a maintenance project, the disturbed area shall be regraded to match the natural terrain and replanted to prevent erosion and provide appropriate vegetative cover, including meeting standards of Section 14.50.430.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 6. Shoreline Modification Policies and Regulations

14.50.600 Introduction.
This chapter contains specific shoreline modification policies and regulations that apply to those activities that modify the physical form of the shoreline in any shoreline environment designation. By definition, shoreline modification activities are undertaken in support of or in preparation for a permitted shoreline use. A single permitted use may require several different shoreline modifications. Shoreline modification activities include the construction of in-water structures, over-water structures and launching facilities and shoreline stabilization measures, as well as actions such as clearing, grading, filling, dredging and dredge material disposal. At a minimum, shoreline modification policies and regulations are intended to assure no net loss of the ecological functions necessary to sustain shoreline natural resources.
Each section includes policies and regulations. Policies are statements of principles that guide and determine present and future decisions. Regulations are rules that govern developments, uses or activities.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.600.01 Shoreline modification table.
Table 6-1: Shoreline Modifications establishes what specific shoreline modification activities are allowed within each of the shoreline environment designations. Shoreline modification activities may be permitted, allowed with a conditional use permit or not applicable to a shoreline environment designation. Refer to individual standards in this chapter for a full explanation of modifications and required conditions for permitted uses.
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Shoreline Modifications (1)  | High Intensity |  Shoreline  | Urban Conservancy | Aquatic |
|             (2)              |                | Residential |                   |         |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
|             Key: P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional Use, N/A = Not Applicable             |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Clearing and Grading         | P              | P           | P                 | N/A     |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Fill                                                                                      |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Fill Landward of the OHWM    | P              | P           | P                 | N/A     |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Fill Waterward of the OHWM   | N/A            | N/A         | N/A               | C       |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Dredging and Dredge Material | C              | C           | C                 | C       |
| Disposal                     |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| In-Water Structures (3)      | N/A            | N/A         | N/A               | C       |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Restoration (4)              | P              | P           | P                 | P       |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Flood Control Structures (5) | P              | P           | P                 | N/A     |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Shoreline Stabilization                                                                   |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Hard Shoreline Stabilization | P              | P           | C                 | C       |
| Measures                     |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
| Soft Shoreline Stabilization | P              | P           | P                 | C       |
| Measures                     |                |             |                   |         |
+------------------------------+----------------+-------------+-------------------+---------+
Notes:
(1)In the event of a conflict between Table 6-1: Shoreline Modifications and the regulatory text, the text shall hold.
(2)In the shoreline environment designations where these activities are allowed, fill waterward of the OHWM and dredging are only permitted in limited situations. See Sections 14.50.620 and 14.50.630 for requirements.
(3)All in-water structures require a shoreline conditional use permit, except when such structures are installed to protect or restore ecological functions, such as woody debris installed in streams. In such cases, it would be considered a permitted shoreline modification.
(4)Exemptions from shoreline permitting are available for certain restoration activities as outlined in WAC 173-27-040(2)(o) and 173-27-040(2)(p). Projects are still required to comply with the SMP.
(5)Nonstructural flood hazard management measures are preferred over structural measures where feasible. New structural flood hazard reduction measures should only be allowed when demonstrated to be necessary, nonstructural methods are insufficient and mitigation is accomplished.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.610 General shoreline modification provisions.
The following provisions apply to all shoreline modification activities, whether shoreline modifications address a single or multiple properties. Where other requirements may conflict with the provisions contained in this chapter, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.610.01 Policies.
A. Ensure shoreline modifications individually and cumulatively do not result in a net loss of ecological functions.
B. Limit the number and extent of shoreline modification activities to reduce the negative effects of shoreline modifications to the greatest extent feasible.
C. Plan for enhancement of impaired ecological functions where it is feasible, appropriate and accommodates permitted uses.
D. Allow only shoreline modifications that are appropriate to the specific shoreline environmental designation in which they are located.
E. Prefer those types of shoreline modifications that have a lesser impact on ecological functions. Promote soft over hard shoreline modification measures.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.610.02 Regulations.
A. Structural shoreline modifications may be allowed if they are demonstrated to be necessary to support or protect a legally permitted shoreline structure or use that is in danger of loss or substantial damage or are necessary for mitigation or enhancement.
B. Shoreline modifications shall be limited in number and extent.
C. The shoreline administrator shall base all decisions regarding shoreline modification on available scientific and technical information and a comprehensive analysis of site-specific conditions provided by the applicant.
D. Shoreline modifications must be designed and located to ensure that they will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions and will not have significant adverse impacts to shoreline uses, resources and values provided for in RCW 90.58.020.
E. Shoreline modifications and uses shall be designed and managed to prevent degradation of water quality and alteration of natural hydrographic conditions.
F. Shoreline modification standards shall not apply retroactively to existing, legally established shoreline modifications. Existing structures may be maintained, repaired and operated within shoreline jurisdiction and within the shoreline buffers established in the SMP. Repair and replacement provisions in later sections of this chapter may apply to specific modifications.
G. All disturbed upland areas shall be restored and protected from erosion by using native vegetation or other approved means.
H. All shoreline modifications are subject to the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420, with appropriate mitigation required for unavoidable impacts to ecological functions. If critical areas in shoreline jurisdiction are impacted, the project is also subject to relevant requirements of Section 14.50.430.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.620 Clearing, grading, and fill.
Clearing, grading and filling are the activities associated with preparing a site for development, as well as physically altering topography. The clearing and grading regulations in this section apply to activities landward of the OHWM and fill activity applies both waterward and landward of the OHWM.
See Section 14.50.630 for dredging for purposes of flood control, navigation, primary utility installation, the construction of water-dependent portions of essential public facilities or restoration.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.620.01 Policies.
A. Protect shoreline ecological functions, including channel migration, by regulating clearing, grading and filling.
B. Permit clearing, grading and filling only to the minimum extent necessary to accommodate an approved shoreline use or development and with no net loss of shoreline ecological functions and processes.
C. Require that BMPs be utilized during clearing, grading and filling activities.
D. Allow clearing, grading and filling only as part of a permitted development in shoreline jurisdiction.
E. Permit clearing, grading and filling associated with dike or levee maintenance as necessary to provide protection from flood hazards when consistent with the flood hazard management provisions in Section 14.50.440.
F. Ensure that the placement of fill does not result in a loss of flood storage.
G. Encourage the enhancement and voluntary restoration of landforms for habitat along shorelines.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.620.02 Regulations.
A. All clearing, grading and filling shall be located, designed and constructed to protect shoreline ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes, including channel migration.
B. Clearing, grading and filling shall be minimized to the extent feasible and only allowed when necessary to accommodate an approved shoreline use or development.
C. Speculative clearing, grading and filling are prohibited.
D. When clearing, grading and filling cause adverse impacts to ecological functions, a mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional must be prepared consistent with the provisions of Section 14.50.430.
E. Clearing, grading and filling within wetlands, floodways or CMZs, and fill waterward of the OHWM, are only allowed when:
    1. Due consideration has been given to the site-specific conditions;
    2. All impacts have been mitigated;
    3. All required state and federal permits have been obtained; and
    4. The shoreline use or development is one (1) of the following:
        a. A water-dependent use or public access to the shoreline;
        b. The cleanup and disposal of contaminated sediments as part of an interagency environmental clean-up plan;
        c. The disposal of dredged material considered suitable under and conducted in accordance with, the WDNR’s Dredged Material Management Program and the USACE Dredged Material Management Office. See also Section 14.50.630;
        d. The expansion or alteration of transportation facilities of statewide significance that are currently located in the shoreline, where alternatives to fill are infeasible;
        e. Ecological enhancement, restoration or mitigation, when consistent with an approved plan; or
        f. The protection of historic or cultural resources when fill is the most feasible method to avoid continued degradation, disturbance or erosion of a site. Such fill must be coordinated with any affected tribes and comply with applicable provisions of Section 14.50.410.
F. All fill waterward of the OHWM that is not associated with an ecological restoration project shall require a shoreline conditional use permit.
G. Upland clearing, grading and filling outside of wetlands, floodways and CMZs are permitted provided they:
    1. Are the minimum necessary to implement the approved use or modification;
    2. Do not significantly change the topography of the landscape in a manner that affects hydrology or increases the risk of slope failure, consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 14.50.430; and
    3. Are conducted outside required shoreline buffers, unless specifically authorized by the SMP, or are necessary to provide protection to historic or cultural resources.
H. Grading and filling shall be designed to blend physically and visually with the existing topography whenever feasible, so as not to interfere with lawful access and enjoyment of scenery.
I. Clearing, grading and filling shall not be located where shoreline stabilization will be necessary to protect the materials placed or removed, except when part of an approved plan for protection of historic or cultural resources.
J. Cut and fill slopes shall generally be sloped no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for every two (2) feet horizontal (1:2) unless a specific engineering analysis has been provided that demonstrates the stability of a steeper slope.
K. A temporary erosion and sediment control plan, including BMPs, consistent with the city’s stormwater manual, shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer and the shoreline administrator prior to commencement of all clearing, grading and filling activities.
L. To prevent a loss of flood storage, compensatory storage shall be provided commensurate with the amount of fill placed in the floodway per Section 14.50.440.
M. Fill on state-owned aquatic lands must comply with the WDNR and the WDFW standards and regulations.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.630 Dredging and dredge material disposal.
This section is intended to cover dredging and dredge material disposal. It is not intended to cover mining or other excavations waterward of the OHWM that are incidental to construction of an authorized use or modification such as bulkhead replacements, large woody debris installations, boat launch ramp installation or pile placement. These in-water substrate modifications should be conducted in accordance with all applicable regulations for the proposed use found in the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.630.01 Policies.
A. Conduct dredging in a manner that utilizes mitigation sequencing and ensures no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
B. Allow dredging for navigation channels, marine terminal berths, and mooring structures to assure safe and efficient accommodation of existing navigational uses, only when significant ecological impacts are minimized and mitigated.
C. Maintenance dredging of established navigation channels, basins and marine terminal berths should be restricted to maintaining previously dredged or existing locations to their authorized depths and widths.
D. Permit dredging as part of restoration or enhancement, public access, flood storage as part of a flood hazard management program or navigation if deemed consistent with the SMP.
E. Prohibit dredging waterward of the OHWM to obtain fill except when the dredge material is necessary for the restoration of shoreline ecological functions.
F. Site new development to avoid the need for new and maintenance dredging. Where avoidance is not feasible, ensure the site is designed to minimize the need for dredging.
G. Prefer the disposal of dredged material on land outside of the shoreline jurisdiction to open water disposal.
H. Coordinate local, state and federal permit requirements for dredging.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.630.02 Regulations.
A. Dredging. 
    1. Dredging and dredge disposal proposals shall utilize the mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420. Where adverse impacts are unavoidable, a mitigation plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional consistent with the provisions of Section 14.50.430.
    2. Dredging shall only be permitted for the following activities:
        a. Development of new or expanded moorages or water-dependent industrial or port uses where there are no other feasible alternatives, significant ecological impacts are minimized and mitigation is provided.
        b. Development of essential public facilities where no feasible alternative location exists.
        c. Maintenance of irrigation reservoirs, drains, canals and ditches for agricultural purposes, when the facility is not already exempt from the SMP.
        d. Restoration or enhancement of shoreline ecological functions and processes that benefit water quality or fish and wildlife habitat.
        e. Trenching to allow the installation of underground utilities, if no feasible alternative location for the utilities exists and:
            (1) Impacts to fish and wildlife habitat are minimized to the maximum extent feasible;
            (2) The utility installation does not increase or decrease the natural rate, extent or chance of channel migration; and
            (3) Appropriate BMPs are employed to prevent water quality impacts or other environmental degradation.
        f. Establishment, expansion, relocation or reconfiguration of navigation channels where necessary to assure the safe and efficient accommodation of existing navigational uses.
        g. Maintenance dredging of established navigation channels and basins, so long as the dredging is restricted to the previously dredged or authorized location, depth and width. Such dredging shall be considered an exempt activity so long as it meets the requirements of Section 14.50.730.04.
        h. Flood hazard reduction.
    3. Applicants must receive all applicable state and federal permits prior to the commencement of any dredging.
    4. Dredging shall be prohibited for the primary purpose of obtaining fill material, except when necessary for the restoration of shoreline ecological functions and consistent with the following:
        a. Dredge material must be placed waterward of the OHWM.
        b. The project must be associated with either an MTCA or CERCLA habitat restoration project or, if the project is approved through a shoreline conditional use permit, the project may be another significant habitat enhancement project.
    5. New development shall be sited and designed to avoid or minimize the need for new or maintenance dredging.
B. Dredge Material Disposal. 
    1. Dredge material disposal within shoreline jurisdiction may be permitted so long as:
        a. Shoreline ecological functions and processes are preserved, restored or enhanced. Factors to consider include surface and groundwater protection, erosion, sedimentation and the impacts of floodwaters or runoff; and
        b. The disposal will not negatively affect public or private property.
    2. Disposal of dredge material within CMZs is discouraged. In the limited instances where it is allowed, such disposal shall require a shoreline conditional use permit, if this provision is not intended to address the discharge of dredge material into the flowing current of a river or in deep water within the channel where it does not substantially affect the geohydrologic character of the CMZ.
    3. Dredge material disposal in open waters may be approved when authorized by the Dredge Material Management Office or other applicable state and federal agencies, which may include the USACE in accordance with Section 10 (Rivers and Harbors Act) and Section 404 (Clean Water Act) permits and the WDFW HPA; and when one (1) of the following conditions applies:
        a. Open water disposal at an approved USACE disposal site is the common method for disposal of maintenance dredge materials from navigation channels and basins; or
        b. If applicable, the use of dredge material to benefit shoreline resources shall be addressed through the implementation of a regional interagency dredge material management plan or watershed plan.
    4. All dredge material disposal on state-owned aquatic lands must comply with the WDNR and the WDFW standards and regulations.
C. Submittal Requirements. A detailed description of the purpose of the proposed dredging and an analysis of compliance with the policies and regulations of the SMP shall be required for all dredging applications. Materials prepared for state or federal permits such as an HPA may be used to support the analysis.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.640 In-water structures.
This section applies to in-water structures, such as dams, groins and weirs, that are built by humans and located waterward of the OHWM.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.640.01 Policies.
A. Design in-water structures to be compatible with the long-term use of resources, such as public access, recreation and fish migration.
B. Locate, design, construct and maintain in-water structures to give due consideration to:
    1. The full range of public interests;
    2. Watershed processes, including prevention of damage to other properties and other shoreline resources from alterations to geologic and hydrologic processes;
    3. Scenic vistas;
    4. Historic and cultural resources; and
    5. Ecological functions, with special emphasis on protecting and restoring priority habitats and species.
C. Site and design in-water structures to be consistent with appropriate engineering principles, including guidelines of the WDFW, Natural Resources Conservation Service and the USACE.
D. Incorporate applicable watershed, surface water management and restoration plans in the planning and design of in-water structures.
E. Encourage nonstructural and nonregulatory methods to protect, enhance and restore shoreline ecological functions as an alternative to in-water structures.
F. Consider alternatives to hard in-water structures, such as soft in-water structures or several smaller discontinuous structures, as part of an application where physical conditions make such alternatives with less impact feasible.
G. Incorporate native vegetation as part of the design of in-water structures to enhance ecological functions, create a more natural appearance, improve ecological processes and provide more flexibility for long-term shoreline management.
H. Require a shoreline conditional use permit for dams, weirs and similar structures, except for those structures installed to protect or restore ecological functions, such as woody debris, engineered logjams or habitat-forming rock weirs installed in streams.
I. Only allow groins and weirs to be placed waterward of the OHWM in limited instances.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.640.02 Regulations.
A. In-water structures shall require a shoreline conditional use permit, except for those structures installed to protect or restore ecological functions, such as woody debris installed in streams.
B. In-water structures shall be designed, constructed and maintained to ensure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions.
C. A professional engineer licensed in the state shall certify the designs of all in-water structures and include a monitoring and maintenance schedule.
D. Appropriate engineering principles and BMPs, including guidelines of the WDFW, NRCS and the USACE, shall be used in the design of in-water structures. The WDFW’s Integrated Streambank Protection Guidelines may be used for BMPs for in-water structures.
E. The mitigation sequence in Section 14.50.420 shall be required, with mitigation required for all unavoidable impacts to ecological functions. If critical areas in the shoreline jurisdiction are impacted, the project is subject to Section 14.50.430.
F. Projects involving in-water work may not commence without having obtained all applicable local, state, and federal permits and approvals.
G. If at any time, because of in-water work, fish are observed to be in distress or water quality problems develop, immediate notification shall be made to the appropriate state or federal agencies, including Ecology, the WDFW, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
H. Alteration or disturbance of the bank and bank vegetation shall be limited to the minimum necessary to perform the in-water work. All disturbed areas shall be protected from erosion and be restored using vegetation or other means.
I. Waste material resulting from in-water structure installation and removal shall be deposited in an approved upland disposal site outside of the shoreline jurisdiction unless the applicant can demonstrate in-water disposal is the preferred method for the shoreline location and in-water disposal has been approved in accordance with Section 14.50.630.02.
J. Natural in-water features such as snags, uprooted trees or stumps should be left in place unless removal is approved by the WDFW.
K. Motor vehicles, appliances or other solid waste shall not be used as in-water structures. Demolition debris that is nontoxic, nonchemically contaminating, reclaimed materials may be used.
L. In-water structures designed by public entities shall include public access under Section 14.50.450 whenever feasible. At a minimum, in-water structures should not decrease public access or the use potential of shorelines.
M. In-water structures and uses shall be sited and designed to avoid the need for future shoreline stabilization and dredging.
N. New, expanded or replacement in-water structures shall only be permitted if it can be demonstrated that:
    1. The proposed structure utilizes BMPs and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions;
    2. The proposed in-water structure supports water-dependent uses, public access, shoreline stabilization, shoreline restoration or some other specific public purpose; and
    3. The benefits to the region outweigh the short- and long-term resource losses from such work.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.650 Restoration.
Shoreline habitat and natural systems enhancement and restoration projects include those activities proposed and conducted specifically for the purpose of establishing, restoring or enhancing habitat for priority species in shorelines.
Examples of shoreline habitat and natural systems enhancement projects include floodplain restoration projects, fish passage barrier removal or improvement and projects to increase shoreline habitat complexity, among others. Projects that qualify as streamlined fish enhancement projects per RCW 77.55.181 shall be considered under this section.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.650.01 Policies.
A. Use principles of landscape and conservation ecology to design restoration and enhancement actions and improve shoreline ecological functions and processes. Consider the restoration of ecosystem-wide physical and biological processes that affect shoreline habitat structure and functions as the primary goal of these actions.
B. Encourage cooperative shoreline restoration and enhancement programs between local, state and federal agencies, tribes, nonprofit organizations and landowners to improve impaired ecological functions.
C. Target restoration and enhancement projects that support the life cycles of priority species, such as Chinook salmon and other anadromous fish; locally important plants, fish and wildlife; and other populations or habitats for which a prioritized restoration or recovery plan is available.
D. Encourage restoration and enhancement projects by developing project permitting and processing guidelines that streamline permit review.
E. Seek and support funding opportunities to implement restoration and enhancement projects.
F. Avoid adverse impacts to critical areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, water quality and water storage capacity in all shoreline restoration and enhancement projects.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.650.02 Regulations.
A. The shoreline restoration plan identifies potential restoration priorities and projects in shoreline areas throughout the city. The plan may be used as a guide for shoreline restoration and enhancement projects.
B. Where the shoreline restoration plan is not used in the creation of a proposed restoration or enhancement project, the shoreline administrator shall review the proposal to assure that the project addresses legitimate restoration needs and priorities.
C. All shoreline restoration and enhancement projects shall be designed and implemented by qualified professionals using best available science (BAS) and BMPs.
D. Shoreline restoration and enhancement projects shall protect the integrity of on-site and adjacent natural resources, including aquatic and terrestrial habitats, processes and properties.
E. Shoreline restoration and enhancement projects shall demonstrate that no significant change to river current, sediment transport or water quality will result from the project.
F. Restoration and enhancement projects shall be designed, maintained and monitored to ensure long-term success. Measures to ensure the success of the project shall be identified by a qualified professional in any plan or details submitted for the project. Monitoring periods should generally not be less than three (3) years.
G. Shoreline restoration and enhancement efforts shall not significantly interfere with the normal public use of the navigable waters of the state without appropriate mitigation. For projects on state-owned aquatic lands, project proponents must coordinate with the WDNR to ensure the project will be appropriately located, prior to the solicitation of permits from regulatory agencies.
H. Shoreline restoration and ecological enhancement projects are permitted in all shoreline environment designations provided the project’s purpose is the restoration of the natural character and ecological functions of the shoreline.
I. In accordance with RCW 90.58.580, the city may waive the need for a shoreline substantial development permit for development on land that is brought under shoreline jurisdiction due to a shoreline restoration project that causes or would cause a landward shift in the OHWM. Any relief granted shall be strictly in accordance with the limited provisions of RCW 90.58.580, including the specific approval of Ecology.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.660 Shoreline stabilization.
Shoreline stabilization includes structural and nonstructural measures taken to address erosion impacts caused by natural processes, such as currents, floods and waves. “Hard” structural shoreline stabilization measures include solid, hard surfaces, such as concrete or boulder bulkheads. “Soft” structural shoreline stabilization measures rely on less rigid materials, such as anchored logs, limited rock placement in conjunction with other components and beach enhancement.
Generally, the harder the structural shoreline stabilization measure, the greater the impact on shoreline processes. Nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures include shoreline buffers, relocation of structures, groundwater management and planning and regulatory measures to avoid the need for stabilization structures.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.660.01 Policies.
A. Use structural shoreline stabilization measures only when nonstructural shoreline stabilization measures have been determined to be infeasible. The use of shoreline stabilization measures should be based on the following hierarchy of preference:
    1. Take no action. Allow the shoreline to retreat naturally, increase shoreline buffers and relocate structures.
    2. Use flexible, bioengineered structures constructed of natural materials such as protective berms, protective matting made of natural materials, large woody debris or vegetative stabilization.
    3. Employ rigid structures constructed of artificial materials such as riprap or concrete.
B. Locate and design shoreline stabilization measures to fit the physical character of the specific shoreline reach, which may differ substantially from adjacent reaches.
C. Coordinate the development of shoreline stabilization measures between affected property owners and public agencies.
D. Consider the probable effects of proposed shoreline stabilization measures on neighboring properties.
E. Restrict the size of new shoreline stabilization structures to the minimum necessary.
F. Only permit new or expanded shoreline stabilization structures in limited instances.
G. Locate, design and maintain shoreline stabilization structures to protect and maintain shoreline ecological functions, ongoing shoreline processes and the integrity of shoreline features.
H. Locate and design shoreline stabilization structures to avoid the need for future structures where feasible.
I. Prohibit the installation of shoreline stabilization structures to create additional property.
J. Design land subdivisions to assure that future development on created lots will not require shoreline stabilization structures for reasonable development to occur.
K. Require new development on steep slopes or bluffs to be set back so that the need for shoreline stabilization structures is unlikely during the life of the development.
L. Prohibit new development requiring shoreline stabilization structures that are likely to cause adverse impacts to adjacent or down-current properties and shoreline areas.
M. Incorporate multiple use, restoration and public shoreline access in the location, design and maintenance of shoreline stabilization structures for public developments, whenever compatible with the primary purpose of the shoreline stabilization.
N. Utilize BMPs in the design of shoreline stabilization structures.
O. Allow new or expanded shoreline stabilization structures for ecological enhancement and restoration projects or hazardous substance remediation projects only when nonstructural measures are infeasible or would be insufficient to achieve enhancement, restoration or remediation objectives.
P. If state-owned aquatic lands are beyond the OHWM, consultation with WDNR will be required.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.660.02 Regulations.
A. Design and Location of New Development. 
    1. New development that requires shoreline stabilization measures that cause significant impacts to adjacent or down-current properties and shorelines shall not be allowed.
    2. Land subdivisions shall be designed to assure that future development of the created lots will not require shoreline stabilization structures for reasonable development to occur.
    3. New development on steep slopes or bluffs shall be set back sufficiently to ensure that shoreline stabilization structures are unlikely to be necessary during the life of the development. The shoreline administrator may require a geotechnical analysis to demonstrate this.
    4. If new development is proposed on state-owned aquatic lands, consultation with WDNR will be required before final design is completed.
B. Repair and Maintenance of Existing Shoreline Stabilization Structures. 
    1. The following items distinguish between maintenance and repair of a shoreline stabilization structure and a new structure:
        a. Maintenance and repair include modifications to an existing shoreline stabilization structure that is designed to ensure the continued function of the existing structure.
        b. A modification that increases the size of the existing shoreline stabilization structure shall be considered a new structure, not maintenance or repair.
        c. Replacement of greater than fifty (50) percent of the linear length of an existing shoreline stabilization structure, as measured on a cumulative basis since the structure was established, is not considered repair or maintenance and is considered a new structure.
        d. Removal of an existing shoreline stabilization structure, including its footing or bottom course of rock, prior to the placement of a new structure, is considered a new structure for the purposes of this section. Removal of only material above the footings or bottom course of rock is not considered a new structure and it qualifies as maintenance and repair.
        e. The placement of a new shoreline stabilization structure landward of a failing shoreline stabilization structure shall be considered a new structure subject to all the requirements of Section 14.50.660, not maintenance or repair.
    2. When an application proposes repair and maintenance of an existing legally established shoreline stabilization structure, it is subject to the following standards:
        a. Repair and maintenance of existing shoreline stabilization structures must be consistent with the requirements of Section 14.50.430.
        b. Areas of temporary disturbance within the shoreline buffer associated with maintenance and repair shall be restored to their pre-project condition within thirty (30) days.
    3. Repair of shoreline stabilization structures meeting all the criteria for exemption from a shoreline substantial development permit must still comply with subsection (E) of this section and the SMP.
C. Replacement or Enlargement of Existing Shoreline Stabilization Structures. 
    1. Replacement or enlargement of an existing shoreline stabilization structure shall be considered a new structure.
    2. For purposes of this section, “replacement” means the construction of a new structure to perform the shoreline stabilization function of an existing structure that can no longer adequately serve its purpose.
D. Standards to Demonstrate Need for Shoreline Stabilization Structures. 
    1. New shoreline stabilization structures shall only be allowed when demonstrated to be necessary as follows:
        a. To protect an existing primary structure, including a residence, if there is conclusive evidence documented by a geotechnical analysis that the primary structure is in danger from shoreline erosion caused by natural processes. Normal sloughing, erosion of steep bluffs or shoreline erosion in itself, without a geotechnical analysis, is not demonstration of need. The geotechnical analysis shall evaluate on-site drainage issues and address problems away from the OHWM before considering new shoreline stabilization structures.
        b. In support of water-dependent development when all of the conditions below apply:
            (1) Site erosion is not being caused by upland conditions, such as drainage and the loss of vegetation;
            (2) Nonstructural measures, such as planting vegetation or installing on-site drainage improvements, are not feasible or sufficient to address erosion causes or impacts adequately; and
            (3) The need to protect primary structures from damage due to erosion is demonstrated through a geotechnical analysis.
        c. In support of new non-water-dependent development, including residences, when all of the conditions from water-dependent development from subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section apply and nonstructural measures, such as placing the proposed development farther from the shoreline, are not feasible or sufficient to address the erosion impacts adequately.
        d. To protect historic or cultural resources, or as part of restoration or hazardous substance remediation projects pursuant to Chapter 70.105D RCW, when nonstructural measures, such as planting vegetation or installing on-site drainage improvements, are not feasible or sufficient to adequately address the causes of erosion or avoid continued degradation, disturbance, or erosion of a site.
    2. A geotechnical analysis is not required when an applicant proposes to replace an existing shoreline stabilization structure with a softer measure, so long as the applicant demonstrates through site photographs and a written narrative the need to protect the primary uses or structures from erosion caused by waves or other natural processes operating at or waterward of the OHWM.
    3. Replacement of hard shoreline stabilization structures shall not encroach waterward of the OHWM or the existing shoreline stabilization measures unless the primary residence was constructed prior to January 1, 1992, and there are overriding safety or environmental concerns. In such cases, the replacement for the shoreline stabilization structure shall be attached to and waterward of the existing structure. All other replacement of hard stabilization structures shall be located at or landward of the existing shoreline stabilization measure.
E. General Design Standards. 
    1. Shoreline stabilization measures shall not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological function.
    2. When a hard or soft shoreline stabilization structure is demonstrated to be necessary, the following design standards shall be incorporated as part of the design:
        a. Impacts to sediment transport shall be avoided or minimized.
        b. Shoreline stabilization structures shall be the minimum size necessary by height, depth and mass and not extend waterward more than the minimum amount needed to achieve effective stabilization, except for those elements that enhance shoreline ecological functions and minimize impacts.
        c. Soft structural shoreline stabilization measures shall be used to the maximum extent feasible for new, enlarged or replacement shoreline stabilization structures, unless demonstrated insufficient to protect primary structures in a geotechnical analysis.
        d. When feasible, hard structural shoreline stabilization measures shall be limited to the portion of the site necessary to protect primary structures or connect to existing shoreline stabilization measures on adjacent properties.
        e. All clearing, grading and filling associated with shoreline stabilization structures shall be conducted landward of the OHWM to the maximum extent feasible unless it is infeasible due to safety or environmental concerns.
        f. Fill behind shoreline stabilization structures is limited to one (1) cubic yard per running foot of stabilization. Filling in excess of this amount shall be subject to the regulations in Section 14.50.620 and require a shoreline substantial development permit or shoreline conditional use permit.
        g. All approved new, enlarged or replacement shoreline stabilization structures shall be designed using BMPs, including WDFW’s Integrated Streambank Protection Guidelines, and minimize and mitigate unavoidable adverse impacts to ecological functions, consistent with Section 14.50.430.
        h. All new, enlarged or replacement shoreline stabilization structures shall mitigate adverse impacts to ecological functions. Mitigation measures shall be identified by the project proponent as part of the project application and may be supplemented by local, state or federal agencies, depending on the level of impact.
        i. When a new shoreline stabilization structure is proposed on a site where adjacent properties do not have shoreline stabilization structures, the new structure shall tie in with the existing contours of the adjoining properties, as feasible, to prevent erosion of the neighboring land.
        j. When a new shoreline stabilization structure is proposed on a site where adjacent properties have shoreline stabilization structures, the new structure may tie in with the existing structures on the adjoining properties. The new structure shall minimize, to the maximum extent feasible, the portion of the new structure that is waterward of the OHWM to connect to the existing structures.
        k. Shoreline stabilization structures shall be designed to ensure the project remains stable during storm and flood events on rivers and wave conditions on lakes.
        l. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed not to significantly interfere with normal surface or subsurface drainage into the adjacent water body.
        m. All shoreline stabilization shall be designed to avoid hazards to navigation.
        n. Shoreline stabilization shall be designed to ensure that it does not restrict appropriate public access to the shoreline. Where a shoreline stabilization structure is required at a public access site, provisions for safe access to the water shall be incorporated into the design.
        o. Stairs or other water access measures may be incorporated into shoreline stabilization design, but they shall not extend waterward of the OHWM.
F. Submittal Requirements. In addition to submitting an application for the appropriate shoreline permit, the applicant shall submit a geotechnical analysis prepared by an engineer licensed by the state as part of a request to construct a new, enlarged or replacement shoreline stabilization structure. This analysis must include:
    1. An assessment of the need for the shoreline stabilization structure based on site-specific conditions such as water depth, orientation of the shoreline, wave fetch or flow velocity and the location of the nearest shoreline stabilization structure.
    2. The estimated time frames and rates of erosion, to convey the urgency associated with the specific situation.
    3. An explanation of why subsections (D)(1)(b) and (D)(1)(c) of this section are not sufficient to address erosion issues.
    4. Detailed construction plans for all shoreline stabilization structures, including, but not limited to, the following:
        a. Plan and cross-section views of the existing and proposed shoreline configuration, showing the OHWM and accurate existing and proposed topography;
        b. A detailed construction sequence and specifications for all materials; and
        c. A mitigation and monitoring plan to ensure no net loss of shoreline functions.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 7. Shoreline Administration

14.50.700 Introduction.
This article describes the administrative procedures and enforcement of a permit system that implements the SMP, together with amendments or additions thereto. Issuance of a shoreline permit or letter of exemption from the shoreline administrator does not exclude the requirements for other local, state and federal permits, procedures and regulations.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.710 Permit processing – General.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.710.01 Shoreline administrator.
A. The shoreline administrator shall be responsible for the administration of the permit system in accordance with the requirements of the SMA and regulations adopted as part of the SMP as it pertains to the city. This shall include, but not be limited to, determinations of whether a development is exempt or requires a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance.
B. The shoreline administrator shall ensure that administrative provisions are in place so that SMP permit procedures and enforcement are conducted in a manner consistent with relevant constitutional limitations on regulation of private property.
C. Administrative Interpretations. 
    1. The shoreline administrator shall have authority to interpret this SMP when such interpretation is clearly consistent with the goals and policies of this SMP and the SMA.
    2. As part of this process, the shoreline administrator shall consult with Ecology to ensure that formal written interpretations are consistent with the purpose and intent of the SMA and Chapter 173-26 WAC.
    3. Formal interpretations shall be kept on file by the city and shall be available for public review and shall periodically be incorporated into the SMP during required update processes.
D. The shoreline administrator shall review every application that is submitted and determine if the application is complete based upon the information required by this section.
E. The shoreline administrator may recommend conditions to the city’s hearing examiner for the approval of permits as necessary to ensure consistency of the project with the SMA and the SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.710.02 Provisions applicable to all shoreline permits.
A. Unless specifically exempted by statute (see RCW 90.58.355), all proposed uses and development occurring within shoreline jurisdiction must conform to local development codes and standards, Chapter 90.58 RCW, the SMA and this SMP whether or not a permit is required.
B. No authorization to undertake a use or development on shorelines of the state shall be granted by the city, unless, upon review, the use or development is determined to be consistent with the policy and provisions of the SMP.
C. RCW 36.70A.480 governs the relationship between the SMP and the local development regulations to protect critical areas that are adopted under Chapter 36.70A RCW.
D. Applications for shoreline substantial development permits, conditional use permits and variances shall be processed in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the applicable local code; if, where the provisions of a local code and the administration and permitting provisions of the SMP conflict, the provisions of the SMP shall apply. The applicable local codes are located in Chapter 17.96 – Administration and Enforcement.
E. The applicant shall meet all of the review criteria for all development found in WAC 173-27-140.
F. A shoreline substantial development shall not be undertaken within the city unless a shoreline substantial development permit has been obtained, the appeal period has been completed and any appeals have been resolved.
G. No building permit or other development permit shall be issued for any parcel of land developed or divided in violation of the SMP.
H. All purchasers or transferees of property shall comply with the provisions of the SMA, the SMP and any shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, permit revision or letter of exemption.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.710.03 Application requirements.
Applications for shoreline permits or letters of exemption shall be made on forms provided by the shoreline administrator. An applicant for a shoreline substantial development permit, who wishes to request a shoreline conditional use permit or variance, shall submit the shoreline conditional use permit or variance application(s) and the shoreline substantial development permit application simultaneously.
Applications shall be substantially consistent with the information required by WAC 173-27-180 and include any additional submittals deemed necessary by the shoreline administrator for proper review of the proposal.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.720 Application – Notices.
The following is applicable for the notice requirements of all notices related to actions under the SMP:
A. Within fourteen (14) days from making a determination of complete application, the shoreline administrator shall provide public notice of the application. Notice of environmental review under SEPA (Chapter 43.21C RCW) may be combined with the application notice.
B. The public notice shall include:
    1. The date the application was made and the date the application was determined to be complete;
    2. A description of the proposed project action and a list of the project permits included in the subject application;
    3. The identification of other permits not included in the subject application, if known;
    4. The identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project and where such documents may be reviewed;
    5. A statement of the public comment period, which shall be at least thirty (30) days;
    6. The date, time and place of the public hearing, if any, and a statement that a person desiring to present his/her views may do so orally or in writing at the public hearing, or may submit written comments prior to the public hearing which will be provided to the hearing examiner at the public hearing;
    7. A statement of preliminary determination, if one has been made; and
    8. Any other information determined appropriate by the city.
C. The shoreline administrator shall provide notice by at least one (1) of the following noticing methods:
    1. Mailing of the notice to the latest recorded real property owners as shown by the records of the Grays Harbor County Assessor within three hundred (300) feet of the property boundary of the subject proposal;
    2. Posting the notice in a conspicuous manner on the property upon which the project is to be undertaken; or
    3. Publishing the notice in the legal newspaper for the city.
D. The notification system shall also provide notice to all agencies with jurisdiction in the proposal per Chapter 43.21C RCW and to all other agencies that request in writing any such notice.
E. The shoreline administrator shall give notice of the application no less than thirty (30) days prior to permit issuance.
F. When a public hearing is required, public notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. The notices shall include a statement that a person desiring to present his/her views may do so orally or in writing at the public hearing or may submit written comments prior to the public hearing which will be provided to the hearing examiner.
G. The public notice shall also state that a person interested in the hearing examiner’s action on an application for a permit may notify the shoreline administrator of his/her interest in writing within thirty (30) days of the last date of publication of the notice. Such notification to the shoreline administrator or the submission of views to the hearing examiner shall entitle said persons to a copy of the action taken on the application.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.730 Shoreline permits and approvals.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.730.01 Shoreline substantial development permits.
A. The following is applicable for shoreline substantial development permits:
    1. The applicant shall meet all of the review criteria for a shoreline substantial development permit as listed in WAC 173-27-150.
    2. A shoreline substantial development permit shall be granted by the shoreline administrator without a public hearing unless one (1) or more of the following conditions apply:
        a. One (1) or more interested persons have submitted to the shoreline administrator, within fifteen (15) days of the final publication of notice of the application, a written request for a public hearing together with a statement of the reasons for the request;
        b. The estimated total cost of the proposed development exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); or
        c. The shoreline administrator determines that the proposed development is one of broad public significance.
B. If a public hearing is required, the hearing examiner shall grant a shoreline substantial development permit with conditions after the shoreline administrator completes a recommendation to the examiner that may contain conditions to the approval of permits as necessary to assure consistency of the proposal with the above criteria and when the development proposed is consistent with the standards in WAC 173-27-140 and 173-27-150.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.730.02 Shoreline conditional use permits.
A. The criteria in WAC 173-27-140 and 173-27-160 shall constitute the minimum criteria for review and approval of a shoreline conditional use permit.
B. Uses that are not classified or set forth in the SMP may be authorized as conditional uses provided the applicant can demonstrate consistency with the requirements of this section and the requirements for conditional uses contained in the SMP.
C. Uses that are specifically prohibited may not be authorized.
D. The hearing examiner may attach conditions to the approval of permits as necessary to assure consistency of the proposal with the above criteria.
E. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be the final decision of the city. Ecology shall be the final authority authorizing a shoreline conditional use permit consistent with WAC 173-27-200.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.730.03 Shoreline variances.
A. The purpose of a shoreline variance is strictly limited to granting relief from specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the SMP where the strict implementation of the master program will impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or thwart the policies set forth in RCW 90.58.020.
B. The criteria in WAC 173-27-140 and 173-027-170 shall constitute the minimum criteria for review and approval of a shoreline variance.
C. The hearing examiner may attach conditions to the approval of the shoreline variance as necessary to assure consistency of the proposal with the above criteria.
D. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be the final decision of the city. Ecology shall be the final authority authorizing a shoreline variance consistent with WAC 173-27-200.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.730.04 Shoreline letters of exemption.
The following is applicable for all shoreline letters of exemption:
A. A letter of exemption shall be required for a development that is exempt from the requirements for a shoreline substantial development permit.
B. To qualify for a letter of exemption, the proposed use, activity or development must meet all of the requirements for an exemption. Exemptions and the standards for interpreting exemptions are found in WAC 173-27-040.
C. The shoreline administrator may issue a letter of exemption for emergency construction necessary to protect property from damage by the elements in accordance with WAC 173-27-040. All emergency construction shall be consistent with the policies of Chapter 90.58 RCW and the SMP. As a general matter, flooding or other seasonal events that can be anticipated and may occur but that are not imminent are not an emergency.
D. Before determining that a proposal is exempt, the shoreline administrator may conduct a site inspection and/or request additional information to ensure that the proposal meets the exemption criteria.
E. For exempt development proposals subject to review, approval and permitting by a state or federal agency in shoreline jurisdiction or identified in this SMP as requiring a shoreline letter of exemption, the shoreline administrator shall prepare a letter of exemption in accordance with WAC 173-27-050(1). The letter of exemption shall indicate the specific exemption provisions from WAC 173-27-040(2) that are being applied to the development and it shall provide a summary of the analysis demonstrating consistency of the project with the SMA and the SMP. The letter of exemption granted may be conditioned to ensure that the activity is consistent with the SMA and the SMP.
F. Ecology is designated as the coordinating agency for the state with regard to permits issued by the USACE. The following is intended to facilitate Ecology’s coordination of actions, with regard to exempt development, with federal permit review:
    1. The shoreline administrator shall prepare a letter of exemption and transmit a copy to the applicant and Ecology whenever a development is determined by the shoreline administrator to be exempt from the shoreline substantial development permit requirements and the development is subject to one (1) or more of the following federal permit requirements:
        a. A USACE Section 10 permit under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899. The provisions of Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act generally apply to a project occurring on or over navigable waters. Specific applicability information should be obtained from the USACE; or
        b. A Section 404 permit under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972. The provisions of Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act generally apply to a project that may involve discharge of dredge or fill material to any water or wetland area. Specific applicability information should be obtained from the USACE.
    2. Ecology will be notified prior to issuance of the letter of exemption.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740 Public hearing and decision.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740.01 Burden of proof for development conformance.
The burden of proving that the proposed development is consistent with the criteria set forth in the SMP, as well as the requirements of the SMA, shall be on the applicant.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740.02 Public hearing process.
A. The hearing examiner shall hold at least one (1) open record public hearing on each application for a shoreline conditional use permit or variance and on each substantial development permit where the conditions of Section 14.50.730.01(A)(2) are met. The hearing examiner will make the final decision at a closed record hearing.
B. If, for any reason, testimony on a matter set for public hearing or being heard cannot be completed on the date set for such hearing, the hearing examiner may, before adjournment or recess of such matters under consideration, publicly announce the time and place of the continued hearing and no further notice is required.
C. When the hearing examiner renders the final decision, the hearing examiner shall make and enter written findings from the record and conclusions thereof which support the decision. The findings and conclusions shall set forth the manner in which the decision is consistent with the criteria set forth in the SMA and local regulations.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740.03 Notice of decision.
The shoreline administrator shall notify the following persons in writing of the hearing examiner’s final approval, conditional approval or disapproval of a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance within fourteen (14) days of the hearing examiner’s final decision:
A. The applicant;
B. Ecology, consistent with the requirements of WAC 173-27-130;
C. The Washington State Attorney General;
D. Any person who has provided written or oral comments on the application or the public hearing; and
E. Any person who has written the shoreline administrator requesting notification.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740.04 Development start.
A. Development in accordance with a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance shall not be authorized until twenty-one (21) days from the date of filing of the approved shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance with Ecology and Attorney General or until all review proceedings initiated within twenty-one (21) days of the date of such filing have been terminated.
B. The date of filing of a substantial development permit is the date of receipt by Ecology of the city’s decision.
C. Shoreline conditional use permits and variances are subject to Ecology review and approval before the twenty-one (21) day period starts. The date of filing of a shoreline conditional use permit or variance is the date Ecology’s decision is transmitted to the city.
D. The date of filing of a shoreline substantial development permit transmitted simultaneously with a shoreline conditional use permit or variance, or both, is the date Ecology’s decision is transmitted to the city.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.740.05 Appeals of decisions.
A. Any person aggrieved by the granting or denying of a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance or by the rescinding of a permit in accordance with the provisions of the SMP may seek review from the Washington State Shorelines Hearings Board (SHB). A request for review may be done by filing a petition for review with the Board within twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing of the final decision, as defined by RCW 90.58.140(6), and by concurrently filing copies of such request with the city clerk, Ecology and the Attorney General’s office. SHB regulations are provided in RCW 90.58.180 and Chapter 461-08 WAC.
B. An appeal of a letter of exemption follows the Land Use Petition Act (LUPA) judicial review of land use decisions process found in Chapter 36.70C RCW.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.750 Time requirements and revisions.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.750.01 Time requirements for shoreline permits.
The time requirements of WAC 173-27-090 shall apply to all shoreline substantial development permits, conditional use permits or variances authorized in accordance with this SMP.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.750.02 Revisions of shoreline permits.
A. A permit revision is required whenever the applicant proposes substantive changes to the design, terms or conditions of a project from that which is approved in the permit. Changes are substantive if they materially alter the project in a manner that relates to its conformance to the terms and conditions of the permit, the SMP or the SMA. Changes which are not substantive in effect do not require approval of a revision.
B. Permit revisions shall be processed in accordance with WAC 173-27-100.
C. If the revision involves a shoreline variance or conditional use which was conditioned by Ecology, the revision must be reviewed and approved by Ecology under the SMA.
D. Revisions to permits under WAC 173-27-100 shall not be used to extend the original permit time requirements or to authorize substantial development after the time limits of the original permit.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.760 Nonconforming development.
A. “Nonconforming use or development” means a shoreline use, development or structure that was lawfully constructed or established prior to the effective date of the SMA or the SMP or amendments thereto, but does not conform to present regulations or standards of the SMP.
B. Nonconforming use and development standards not addressed in RCW 90.58.620 and not addressed by the SMP are found in WAC 173-27-080. In the event of a conflict between WAC 173-27-080 and the standards contained in the city code, the requirement that most supports the provisions of the SMA as stated in RCW 90.58.020 shall apply, as determined by the shoreline administrator.
C. For nonconforming shoreline uses, development or structures, the following standards shall apply:
    1. A nonconforming use, development or structure may continue; provided, that it is not enlarged or expanded;
    2. Legally established uses and developments may be maintained, repaired and operated within shoreline jurisdiction and within shoreline buffers established in the SMP;
    3. A nonconforming use, development or structure which is moved any distance must be brought into conformance with the SMA and the SMP;
    4. If a nonconforming structure is damaged to an extent not exceeding seventy-five (75) percent of the replacement cost of the nonconforming structure, it may be reconstructed to those configurations existing immediately prior to the time the structure was damaged, so long as restoration is completed within two (2) years of the date of damage. Single-family nonconforming development may be replaced if damaged to one hundred (100) percent, if the restoration is completed within three (3) years of the date of damage;
    5. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months or for twelve (12) months during any two (2) year period, any subsequent use shall be conforming. It shall not be necessary to show that the owner of the property intends to abandon such nonconforming use in order for the nonconforming rights to expire;
    6. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, regardless of the conforming or nonconforming status of the building or structure in which it is housed;
    7. An undeveloped lot, tract, parcel, site or division of land located landward of the OHWM, which was established in accordance with local and state subdivision requirements prior to the effective date of the SMA and the SMP, may be developed if permitted by other local land use regulations so long as such development conforms to all other requirements of the SMA and the SMP;
    8. A use which is listed as a shoreline conditional use but which existed prior to adoption of the SMP and for which a shoreline conditional use permit has not been obtained shall be considered a nonconforming use; and
    9. A structure for which a shoreline variance has been issued shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure and the requirements of this section shall apply as they apply to preexisting nonconformities.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.770 Enforcement and penalties.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.770.01 Enforcement.
A. The shoreline administrator or a designated representative shall enforce all provisions of the SMP. For such purposes, the shoreline administrator or a designated representative shall have the power of a police officer.
B. The choice of enforcement action and the severity of any penalty should be based on the nature of the violation and the damage or risk to the public or to public resources. The existence or degree of bad faith of the persons subject to the enforcement action, the benefits that accrue to the violator, and the cost of obtaining compliance may also be considered.
C. The enforcement procedures and penalties contained in Part II of Chapter 173-27 WAC are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.770.02 Penalty.
A person found to have willfully engaged in activities in shoreline jurisdiction in violation of the SMA or in violation of the SMP or rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be subject to the penalty provisions of the local code, RCW 90.58.210 and 90.58.220 and WAC 173-27-270 and 173-27-280.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.770.03 Public and private redress.
A. A person subject to the regulatory program of the SMP who violates any provision of the SMP or the provisions of a permit issued pursuant thereto shall be liable for all damages to public or private property arising from such violation, including the cost of restoring the affected area to its condition prior to such violation. The city attorney may sue for damages under Section 14.50.770 on behalf of the city.
B. Private persons shall have the right to sue for damages under this section on their own behalf and on behalf of all persons similarly situated. If liability has been established for the cost of restoring an area affected by violation, the court shall make provisions to assure that restoration will be accomplished within a reasonable time at the expense of the violator. In addition to such relief, including monetary damages, the court, in its discretion, may award attorneys’ fees and costs of the suit to the prevailing party.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.770.04 Delinquent permit penalty.
A person applying for a permit after commencement of the use or activity may be required to pay a delinquent permit penalty at the discretion of the city.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.780 Shoreline Master Program – Administration.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.780.01 General administration.
A. The city shall record all project review actions within shoreline jurisdiction, including shoreline permits and letters of exemption.
B. As part of shoreline permit review process, the city shall evaluate shoreline conditions on an ongoing basis to ensure no net loss of ecological functions, to protect and enhance visual quality and to identify and protect significant historic or cultural resources in the shoreline. Specific issues to address in evaluations include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Water quality;
    2. Conservation of aquatic vegetation and control of noxious weeds;
    3. Changing visual character as a result of new development or redevelopment and individual vegetation conservation practices along shoreline and upland areas;
    4. Shoreline stabilization and modifications; and
    5. Significant historic or cultural resources within shoreline jurisdiction resulting from research, inventories, discoveries or new information.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.780.02 Shoreline Master Program Review.
The following guidelines are to be used for review of the SMP:
A. The SMP shall be reviewed periodically at least once every eight (8) years as required by RCW 90.58.080(4)(b) beginning on or before June 30, 2022, and every eight (8) years thereafter. Amendments shall be made as necessary to reflect changing local circumstances, new information or improved data and changes in state statutes and regulations.
B. The city should use a process designed to assure that proposed regulatory or administrative actions do not infringe upon constitutionally established private property rights. Related to the constitutional takings limitation, a process established for this purpose is set forth in a publication entitled State of Washington, Attorney General’s Recommended Process for Evaluation of Proposed Regulatory or Administrative Actions to Avoid Unconstitutional Takings of Private Property, first published in February 1992.
C. Provisions of the SMP may be amended as provided for in RCW 90.58.120 and 90.58.200 and Chapter 173-26 WAC. Standards in WAC 173-26-201 in particular articulate many of the factors to consider as part of the revisions.
D. Amendments or revisions to the SMP, as provided by law, do not become effective until approved by Ecology.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.780.03 Annexation of a shoreline of the state.
A. Except as provided in WAC 173-26-150, in the event of annexation of a shoreline of the state, the city shall notify Ecology of such annexation and develop or amend the city’s SMP to include the annexed area. Such SMP development or amendment shall be consistent with the policy of RCW 90.58.020 and the applicable guidelines and shall be submitted to Ecology for approval no later than one (1) year from the effective date of annexation.
B. Until a new or amended master program is approved by Ecology, any decision on an application for a shoreline permit in the annexed shoreline area shall be based upon compliance with the SMP in effect for the area prior to annexation.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 8. Definitions

14.50.800 Unlisted words or phrases.
Any word or phrase not defined in this article that is called into question when administering the SMP shall be defined utilizing the SMA and its implementing rules.
The shoreline administrator may obtain secondary definition sources from one (1) of the following sources:
A. The city’s code.
B. Any city resolution, ordinance, policy or regulation.
C. The most applicable statute or regulation from the state.
D. Legal definitions generated from case law or provided within a law dictionary.
E. The common dictionary.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.810 Definitions.
“Accessory structure or use” means a structure or use incidental, related and clearly subordinate to the principal structure or use of a lot or main building. An accessory structure or use is only located on the same lot as a permitted principal structure or use.
“Act” means the Washington State Shoreline Management Act (SMA) (Chapter 90.58 RCW and addressed in Chapter 173-27 WAC).
“Agricultural activities” means agricultural uses and practices including, but not limited to: producing, breeding or increasing agricultural products; rotating and changing agricultural crops; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie fallow in which it is plowed and tilled but left unseeded; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant as a result of adverse agricultural market conditions; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant because the land is enrolled in a local, state or federal conservation program or the land is subject to a conservation easement; conducting agricultural operations; maintaining, repairing and replacing agricultural equipment; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural facilities; provided, that the replacement facility is no closer to the shoreline than the original facility; and maintaining agricultural lands under production or cultivation.
“Agricultural equipment and facilities” includes, but is not limited to, the following:
    1. The following used in agricultural operations: Equipment; machinery; constructed shelters, buildings and ponds; fences; upland finfish rearing facilities; water diversion, withdrawal, conveyance and use equipment and facilities including, but not limited to: pumps, pipes, taps, canals, ditches and drains;
    2. Corridors and facilities for transporting personnel, livestock and equipment to, from and within agricultural lands;
    3. Farm residences and associated equipment, lands and facilities; and
    4. Roadside stands and on-farm markets for marketing fruit or vegetables.
“Agricultural land” means those specific land areas on which agricultural activities are conducted as of the date of adoption of a local master program and pursuant to these guidelines as evidenced by aerial photography or other documentation. After the effective date of the master program, land converted to agricultural use is subject to compliance with the requirements of the master program.
“Agricultural products” includes, but is not limited to, horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, vegetable, fruit, berry, grain, hops, hay, straw, turf, sod, seed and apiary products; feed or forage for livestock; Christmas trees; hybrid cottonwood and similar hardwood trees grown as crops and harvested within twenty (20) years of planting; and livestock including both the animals themselves and animal products including, but not limited to: meat, upland finfish, poultry and poultry products and dairy products.
“Agriculture” means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, apiaries and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for storing produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of normal agricultural activities. In all cases, the use of agriculture related terms should be consistent with the specific meanings provided in RCW 90.58.065.
“Applicant” means any person or entity designated or named in writing by the property or easement owner to be the applicant, in an application for a shoreline development proposal, permit or approval.
“Appurtenance” means a building, structure or development necessarily connected to the use and enjoyment of a single-family residence that is located landward of the OHWM and of the perimeter of any wetland. On a statewide basis, normal appurtenances include a garage, deck, driveway, utilities, fences, installation of a septic tank and drain field and grading which does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards (except to construct a conventional drain field) and which does not involve placement of fill in any wetland or waterward of the OHWM. Refer to WAC 173-27-040(2)(g).
“Aquaculture” means the culture or farming of fish, shellfish or other aquatic plants and animals. Aquaculture does not include the harvest of wild geoduck associated with the state managed wildstock geoduck fishery.
“Associated wetlands” means those wetlands that are in proximity to and either influence or are influenced by tidal waters or a lake or stream in shoreline jurisdiction. Refer to WAC 173-22-030(1).
“Average grade level” means the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel or tract of real property, which will be directly under the proposed building or structure. In the case of structures to be built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of the OHWM. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the ground elevations at the midpoint of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure.
“Berm” means a linear mound or series of mounds of sand or gravel generally that parallels the water at or landward of the line of ordinary high tide or the OHWM. In addition, a linear mound used to screen an adjacent use, such as a parking lot, from transmitting excess noise and glare.
“Best available science (BAS)” means information from research, inventory, monitoring, surveys, modeling, synthesis, expert opinion and assessment that is used to designate, protect or restore critical areas and that is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. BAS is derived from a process that includes peer-reviewed literature, standard methods, logical conclusions and reasonable inferences, quantitative analysis and documented references to produce reliable information.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). BMPs are the utilization of methods, techniques or products which have been demonstrated to be the most effective and reliable in minimizing environmental impacts. BMPs encompass a variety of behavioral, procedural and structural measures that reduce the amount of contaminants in stormwater run-off and in receiving waters.
“Breakwater” means an offshore structure that is generally built parallel to shore that may or may not be connected to land and may be floating or stationary. Their primary purpose is to protect harbors, moorages and navigation activity from wave and wind action by creating stillwater areas along shore. A secondary purpose is to protect shorelines from wave caused erosion.
“Bulkhead” means a vertical or nearly vertical erosion protection structure placed parallel to the shoreline consisting of concrete, timber, steel, rock, or other permanent material not readily subject to erosion.
“Channel migration zone (CMZ)” means the area along a river or stream within which the channel can reasonably be expected to migrate over time because of normally occurring processes. It encompasses that area of lateral stream channel movement that can be identified by credible scientific information that is subject to erosion, bank destabilization, rapid stream incision and/or channel shifting, as well as adjacent areas that are susceptible to channel erosion. The area within which a river channel is likely to move over an interval of time is referred to as the CMZ or the meander belt.
“Chapter 90.58 RCW” means the Shoreline Management Act of 1971, as amended.
“City” means the city of Aberdeen.
“Clean Water Act” means the primary federal law providing water pollution prevention and control; previously known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. See 33 U.S.C. §  1251  et seq.
“Clearing” means the removal of vegetation or plant cover by manual, chemical or mechanical means. Clearing includes, but is not limited to, actions such as cutting, felling, thinning, flooding, killing, poisoning, girdling, uprooting or burning.
“Comprehensive Plan” means the document, including maps adopted by the city in accordance with applicable state law, that guides land use development within the city.
“Conditional use” means a use, development or substantial development that is classified as a conditional use or is not classified within the applicable SMP. Refer to WAC 173-27-030(4).
“County” means Grays Harbor County.
“Critical areas,” as defined under Chapter 36.70A RCW, includes the following areas and ecosystems:
    1. Wetlands;
    2. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable waters;
    3. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;
    4. Frequently flooded areas; and
    5. Geologically hazardous areas.
“Critical saltwater habitats” includes all kelp beds, eelgrass beds, spawning and holding areas for forage fish, such as herring, smelt and sandlance; subsistence, commercial and recreational shellfish beds; mudflats, intertidal habitats with vascular plants and areas with which priority species have a primary association.
“Cumulative impact” means the impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative impacts can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place over an interval of time.
Date of Filing. For a substantial development permit, the “date of filing” is the date of receipt by Ecology. For shoreline conditional use and variance permits, and substantial development permits simultaneously transmitted with a shoreline conditional use or variance permit, the “date of filing” is the date Ecology’s decision is transmitted to the city.
“Development” means the construction or exterior alteration of buildings or structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of sand, gravel or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or a project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to Chapter 90.58 RCW at any state of water level (RCW 90.58.030(3)(a)).
“Dredging” means excavating or displacing of the bottom or shoreline of a water body. Dredging can be accomplished with mechanical or hydraulic machines. Most dredging is done to maintain channel depths or berths for navigational purposes; other dredging is for cleanup of polluted sediments.
“Ecological functions” means the work performed or the role played by the physical, chemical and biological processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem.
“Ecology” means the Washington State Department of Ecology.
“Ecosystem-wide processes” means the suite of naturally occurring physical and geologic processes of erosion, transport and deposition; and specific chemical processes that shape landforms within a specific shoreline ecosystem and determine both the types of habitat and the associated ecological functions.
“Emergency” means an unanticipated and imminent threat to public health, safety or the environment, requiring immediate action within a time too short to allow full compliance with the SMP. Emergency construction is construed narrowly as that which is necessary to protect property from the elements (RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)(iii) and WAC 173-27-040(2)(d)). Emergency construction does not include development of new permanent protective structures where none previously existed. Where new protective structures are deemed by the administrator to be the appropriate means to address the emergency situation, upon abatement of the emergency situation the new structure shall be removed or any permit which would have been required, absent an emergency, obtained. All emergency construction shall be consistent with the policies of Chapter 90.58 RCW and this chapter. As a general matter, flooding or other seasonal events that can be anticipated and may occur but that are not imminent are not an emergency.
“Endangered Species Act (ESA)” means the federal law intended to protect any fish or wildlife species that are threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of their range.
“Environmental impacts” means the effects or consequences of actions on the natural and built environments. Environmental impacts include effects upon the elements of the environment listed in the SEPA. Refer to WAC 197-11-600 and 197-11-444.
“Environments (shoreline environment)” means designations given to specific shoreline areas based on the existing development pattern, the biophysical character and limitations and the goals and aspirations of local citizenry, as part of an SMP.
“Exemption” means certain specific developments are exempt from the definition of substantial developments and are therefore exempt from the shoreline substantial development permit process of the SMA. A use or activity that is exempt from the substantial development provisions of the SMA must still be carried out in compliance with policies and standards of the SMA and this chapter. Shoreline conditional use permits and variances may also still be required even though the use or activity does not need a shoreline substantial development permit (WAC 173-27-040).
“Fair market value” means the open market bid price for conducting the work, using the equipment and facilities and purchase of the goods, services and materials necessary to accomplish the development. This would normally equate to the cost of hiring a contractor to undertake the development from start to finish, including the cost of labor, materials, equipment and facility usage, transportation and contractor overhead and profit. The fair market value of the development shall include the fair market value of donated, contributed or found labor, equipment or materials (WAC 173-27-030(8)).
“Feasible” means an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement, that meets all of the following conditions:
    1. The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;
    2. The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and
    3. The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use.
In cases where the SMP guidelines require certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is on the applicant.
In determining an action’s infeasibility, the city may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames.
“Feasible alternatives” means alternatives to the proposed project that will accomplish essentially the same objective as the original project while avoiding or having less adverse impacts.
“Fill” means raising the elevation or creating dry land by adding soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth-retaining structure or other material to an area waterward of the OHWM, in wetland or on shorelands.
“Floodplain” is synonymous with one hundred (100) year floodplain. The land area that is susceptible to being inundated with a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in a given year. The limits of this area are based on flood regulation ordinance maps or a reasonable method that meets the objectives of the SMA (WAC 173-22-030(2)).
“Floodway” means the area that has either: (1) has been established in FEMA flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) or floodway maps; or (2) consists of those portions of the area of a river valley lying streamward from the outer limits of a watercourse upon which floodwaters are carried during periods of flooding that occur with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually, said floodway being identified, under normal condition, by changes in surface soil conditions or changes in types or quality of vegetative ground cover condition, topography or other indicators of flooding that occurs with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually. Regardless of the method used to identify the floodway, the floodway shall not include those lands that can reasonably be expected to be protected from floodwaters by flood control devices maintained by or maintained under license from the federal government, the state or a political subdivision of the state.
“Geotechnical report” or “geotechnical analysis” means a scientific study or evaluation conducted by a qualified expert that includes a description of the ground and surface hydrology and geology, the affected land form and its susceptibility to mass wasting, erosion and other geologic hazards or processes, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of the proposed development on geologic conditions, the adequacy of the site to be developed, the impacts of the proposed development, alternative approaches to the proposed development and measures to mitigate potential site-specific and cumulative geological and hydrological impacts of the proposed development, including the potential adverse impacts to adjacent and down-current properties. Geotechnical reports shall conform to accepted technical standards and must be prepared by qualified professional engineers or geologists who have professional expertise about the regional and local shoreline geology and processes.
“Grading” means the movement or redistribution of the soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land.
“Groin” means a barrier-type structure extending from and usually perpendicular to the backshore into a water body. Its purpose is to protect a shoreline and adjacent upland by influencing the movement of water or deposition of materials. This is accomplished by building or preserving an accretion beach on its updrift side by trapping littoral drift. A groin is relatively narrow in width but varies greatly in length. A groin is sometimes built in a series as a system and may be permeable or impermeable, high or low and fixed or adjustable.
“Growth Management Act (GMA)” means Chapters 36.70A and  36.70B RCW, as amended.
Guidelines. See Shoreline Master Program (SMP) Guidelines (Chapter 173-26 WAC).
“Hazard tree” means any tree that is susceptible to immediate fall due to its condition (damaged, diseased or dead) or other factors and which, because of its location, is at risk of damaging permanent physical improvements to property or causing personal injury.
“Hearing examiner” conducts public hearings and proceedings required by Chapter 16.20 , Shoreline Master Program, for appeals of the hearing examiner’s decision, Chapter 17.96 for enforcement and penalties. See RCW 90.58.170 and 90.58.180.
“Height” is measured from average grade level to the highest point of a structure; provided, that television antennas, chimneys and similar appurtenances shall not be used in calculating height, except where such appurtenances obstruct the view of the shoreline of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines or the applicable SMP specifically requires that such appurtenances be included; provided further, that temporary construction equipment is excluded in this calculation.
“Historic resources” means those historic or cultural properties or items that fall under the jurisdiction of the DAHP.
“Impermeable surface” means the area of a lot that is covered by impermeable surfaces, measured by percentage. A nonvertical surface artificially covered or hardened to prevent or impede the percolation of water into the soil mantle including, but not limited to, rooftops, swimming pools, paved or graveled roads and walkways or parking areas, but excluding landscaping and surface water retention/detention facilities.
“In-water structure” means a structure placed by humans within a stream or river waterward of the OHWM that either causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction or modification of water flow. In-water structures may include those for hydroelectric generation, irrigation, water supply, flood control, transportation, utility service transmission, fish habitat enhancement or other purpose.
“Interested party,” synonymous with party of record, means all persons, agencies or organizations who have submitted written comments in response to a notice of application; made oral comments in a formal public hearing conducted on the application; or notified the city of their desire to receive a copy of the final decision on a permit and who have provided an address for delivery of such notice by mail (WAC 173-27-030(12)).
“Jetty” means a structure generally perpendicular to the shore, extending through or past the intertidal zone. Jetties are built singly or in pairs at a harbor entrance or river mouth mainly to prevent accretion from littoral drift in an entrance channel. Jetties also serve to protect channels from storm waves or cross currents and to stabilize inlets through barrier beaches. Most jetties are of riprapped mound construction.
“Landscaping” means vegetation ground cover including shrubs, trees, flower beds, grass, ivy and other similar plants and including tree bark and other materials which aid vegetative growth and maintenance.
“Low impact development (LID)” is a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic pre-disturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.
“Marine” means pertaining to tidally influenced waters, including oceans, sounds, straits, marine channels and estuaries, including the Pacific Ocean, Puget Sound, Straits of Georgia and Juan de Fuca and the bays, estuaries and inlets associated therewith.
“Marine terminal” includes industrial and commercial wharfs, piers, berths, docks, roads, rail lines and similar structures used for shipping, marine cargo handling, freight mobility, transportation, navigation services and vessel berthing, moorage, construction, repair and resupply. See “mooring structure.”
“May” means an action that is acceptable, provided it conforms to the provisions of the SMP.
“Mitigation” or “mitigation sequencing” means avoiding, reducing or compensating for a proposal’s environmental impact(s). See WAC 173-26-020(30) and 197-11-768. “Mitigation” or “mitigation sequencing” means the following sequence of steps listed in order of priority, with subsection (1) of this definition being top priority:
    1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
    2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;
    3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment;
    4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;
    5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and
    6. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.
“Mooring structure” is used in conjunction with a marine terminal including all manner of over-water and in-water fixed structures which include single pilings or multiple pilings connected together to form or support an anchoring structure for the mooring of vessels and protection of terminals from moored vessels. Examples include, but are not limited to, mooring piles and various forms of dolphins and fender piles.
“Must” is a mandate; the action is required.
“Native vegetation” means vegetation comprised of plant species that are indigenous to an area.
“Natural or existing topography” means the topography of the lot, parcel or tract of real property immediately prior to site preparation or grading, including exaction or filling.
“Non-water-oriented uses” means those uses that are not water-dependent, water-related or water-enjoyment, which have little or no relationship to the shoreline and are not considered priority uses under the SMA. Examples include professional offices, automobile sales or repair shops, mini-storage facilities, residential development, department stores and gas stations.
“Nonconforming use or development” means a shoreline use, building or structure which was lawfully constructed or established prior to the effective date of the applicable SMA/SMP provision and which no longer conforms to the applicable shoreline provisions (WAC 173-27-080).
“Normal maintenance” means those usual acts to prevent a decline, lapse or cessation from a lawfully established condition (WAC 173-27-040(2)(b)). See also “normal repair.”
“Normal repair” means to restore a development to a state comparable to its original condition, including but not limited to its size, shape, configuration, location and external appearance, within a reasonable period after decay or partial destruction except where repair involves total replacement which is not common practice or causes substantial adverse effects to the shoreline resource or environment (WAC 173-27-040(2)(b)). See also “normal maintenance.”
“Ordinary high water mark (OHWM)” means that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by the city or Ecology; provided, that in an area where the OHWM cannot be found, the OHWM adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water. See RCW 90.58.030(2)(b) and WAC 173-22-030(5).
“Over-water structure” means a device or structure projecting over the OHWM, including, but not limited to: bridges for motorized or nonmotorized uses, piers, docks, floats and moorage.
“Permit” (or “shoreline permit”) means a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance or any combination thereof, authorized by the SMA. Refer to WAC 173-27-030(13).
“Primary structure” means the structure associated with the principal use of the property. It may also include single-family residential appurtenant structures, such as garages, attached decks, driveways, utilities, septic tanks and drain fields, which cannot feasibly be relocated. It does not include structures such as tool sheds, gazebos, greenhouses or other ancillary residential improvements that can feasibly be moved landward to prevent the erosion threat.
“Priority habitat” means a habitat type with unique or significant value to one (1) or more species. An area classified and mapped as priority habitat must have one (1) or more of the following attributes:
    1. Comparatively high fish or wildlife density;
    2. Comparatively high fish or wildlife species diversity;
    3. Fish spawning habitat;
    4. Important wildlife habitat;
    5. Important fish or wildlife seasonal range;
    6. Important fish or wildlife movement corridor;
    7. Rearing and foraging habitat;
    8. Important marine mammal haul-out;
    9. Refugia habitat;
    10. Limited availability;
    11. High vulnerability to habitat alteration;
    12. Unique or dependent species; or
    13. Shellfish bed.
A priority habitat may be described by a unique vegetation type or by a dominant plant species that is of primary importance to fish and wildlife (such as oak woodlands or eelgrass meadows). A priority habitat may also be described by a successional stage (such as old growth and mature forests). Alternatively, a priority habitat may consist of a specific habitat element (such as a consolidated marine/estuarine shoreline, talus slopes, caves, snags) of key value to fish and wildlife. A priority habitat may contain priority and/or nonpriority fish and wildlife.
“Priority species” means species requiring protective measures and/or management guidelines to ensure their persistence at genetically viable population levels. Priority species are those that meet any of the four (4) criteria listed below:
    1. Criterion 1. State-listed or state-proposed species. State-listed species are those native fish and wildlife species legally designated as endangered (WAC 232-12-014), threatened (WAC 232-12-011) or sensitive (WAC 232-12-011). State-proposed species are those fish and wildlife species that will be reviewed by the WDFW (POL-M-6001) for possible listing as endangered, threatened or sensitive according to the process and criteria defined in WAC 232-12-297.
    2. Criterion 2. Vulnerable aggregations. Vulnerable aggregations include those species or groups of animals susceptible to significant population declines, within a specific area or statewide, by virtue of their inclination to congregate. Examples include heron colonies, seabird concentrations and marine mammal congregations.
    3. Criterion 3. Species of recreational, commercial or tribal importance. Native and nonnative fish, shellfish and wildlife species of recreational or commercial importance and recognized species used for tribal ceremonial and subsistence purposes that are vulnerable to habitat loss or degradation.
    4. Criterion 4. Species listed under the ESA as either proposed, threatened or endangered.
“Proposed, threatened and endangered species” means those native species that are proposed to be listed or are listed in rule by the WDFW as threatened or endangered or that are proposed to be listed as threatened or endangered or that are listed as threatened or endangered under the ESA.
“Provisions” means policies, regulations, standards, guideline criteria or shoreline environment designations.
“Public access” is the ability of the public to reach, touch and enjoy the water’s edge, to travel on the waters of the state and to view the water and the shoreline from adjacent locations. Refer to WAC 173-26-221(4).
“Public interest” means the interest shared by the citizens of the state or community at large in the affairs of government or some interest by which their rights or liabilities are affected such as an effect on public property or on health, safety or general welfare resulting from a use or development (WAC 173-27-030(14)).
“Public use” means to be made available daily to the public on a first-come, first-served basis and may not be leased to private parties on more than a day use basis. Refer to WAC 332-30-106.
“RCW” means the Revised Code of Washington.
“Recreational facilities” means facilities such as parks, trails and pathways, whether public, private or commercial, that provide a means for relaxation, play or amusement. For the purposes of the SMP, recreational facilities are divided into two (2) categories:
    1. Water-dependent (i.e., moorage facilities, fishing piers, docks); and
    2. Non-water-dependent (i.e., sports fields, golf courses and RV camping).
“Residential development” means development which is primarily devoted to or designed for use as a dwelling(s). Residential development includes single-family development, multifamily development and the creation of new residential lots through land division.
“Restore,” “restoration,” or “ecological restoration” means the reestablishment or upgrading of impaired ecological shoreline processes or functions. This may be accomplished through measures including, but not limited to, revegetation, removal of intrusive shoreline structures and removal or treatment of toxic materials. Restoration does not imply a requirement for returning the shoreline area to aboriginal or pre-European settlement conditions.
“Riparian” means of, on or pertaining to the banks of a river, stream or lake.
“Riprap” means a layer, facing or protective mound of stones placed to prevent erosion, scour or sloughing of a structure or embankment; also, the stone so used.
“Run-off” means water that is not absorbed into the soil but rather flows along the ground surface following the topography.
“Shall” is a mandate; the action must be done.
“Shorelands” or “shoreland areas” means those lands extending landward for two hundred (200) feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the OHWM; adopted FEMA floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred (200) feet from such adopted FEMA floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes and tidal waters, which are subject to the provisions of the SMA.
Shoreline Administrator. The community development director is the city’s shoreline administrator and is charged with the responsibility of administering the SMP.
“Shoreline buffer” means a required vegetated open space measured horizontally upland from and perpendicular to the OHWM. Shoreline buffers are naturally vegetated areas that protect the ecological functions of the shoreline and help to reduce the impacts of land uses on the water body.
“Shoreline building setback” means a required building setback, specified in the SMP, measured horizontally upland from a shoreline buffer and perpendicular to the OHWM, if used with a shoreline buffer, as specified in Article 4, General Policies and Regulations. It establishes a definite point beyond which the foundation for a building shall not extend. A shoreline building setback protects the shoreline buffer from the impacts related to use of a structure.
“Shoreline environment designations” means the categories of shorelines established by the SMP in order to provide a uniform basis for applying policies and use regulations within distinctively different shoreline areas. See WAC 173-26-211.
“Shoreline jurisdiction” is the term describing all of the geographic areas covered by the SMA, related rules, the applicable SMP and such areas within the city that are under the SMA. See definitions of “shorelines,” “shorelines of the state,” “shorelines of statewide significance,” “shorelands” and “wetlands.”
“Shoreline Management Act (SMA)” means Chapter 90.58 RCW, as amended. Washington’s SMA was passed by the Legislature in 1971 and adopted by the public in a 1972 referendum. The goal of the SMA is to prevent the inherent harm in an uncoordinated and piecemeal development of the state’s shorelines.
“Shoreline master program (SMP)” means the comprehensive use plan and related use regulations, together with maps, diagrams, charts or other descriptive material and text, which are used by the city to administer and enforce the permit system for shoreline management. The SMP must be developed in accordance with the policies of the SMA, be approved and adopted by the state, and be consistent with the rules (WACs) adopted by Ecology.
“Shoreline master program (SMP) guidelines” means the state standards that the city must follow in drafting its SMP. The guidelines translate the broad policies of the SMA into standards for regulation of shoreline uses.
“Shoreline modification” means those actions that modify the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, usually through the construction of a physical element such as a dike, breakwater, pier, weir, dredged basin, fill, bulkhead or other shoreline structure. They can include other actions, such as clearing, grading, application of chemicals or significant vegetation removal.
“Shoreline permit” means a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, variance, revision or any combination thereof (WAC 173-27-030(13)).
“Shoreline stabilization” means actions taken to address erosion impacts to property and dwellings, businesses, buildings or structures caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, tides, wind or wave action. These actions include structural measures such as bulkheads and nonstructural methods such as building setbacks. New stabilization measures include enlargement of existing structures.
“Shorelines” means all of the water areas of the state, including reservoirs and their associated uplands, together with the lands underlying them, except those areas excluded under RCW 90.58.030(2)(d).
“Shorelines of statewide significance” means a select category of shorelines of the state, defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e), where use preferences apply and where greater planning authority is granted by the SMA. Permit review must acknowledge the use priorities for these areas established by the SMA. See RCW 90.58.020.
“Shorelines of the state” means the total of shorelines and shorelines of statewide significance.
“Should” means a particular action is required unless there is a demonstrated, compelling reason, based on policy of the SMA and the SMP, against taking the action.
“Sign” means a device, structure, fixture, or placard that uses words, letters, numbers, symbols, graphic designs, logos or trademarks for the purpose of: (1) providing information or directions or (2) identifying or advertising a place, establishment, product, good or service.
“Significant vegetation removal” means the removal or alteration of trees, shrubs and/or ground cover by clearing, grading, cutting, burning, chemical means or other activity that causes significant ecological impacts to functions provided by such vegetation. The removal of invasive or noxious weeds does not constitute significant vegetation removal. Tree pruning, not including tree topping, where it does not affect ecological functions, does not constitute significant vegetation removal.
“Significantly degrade” means to cause significant ecological impact.
“Single-family residence” means a detached dwelling designed for and occupied by one (1) family including those buildings, structures and developments within a contiguous ownership which are a normal appurtenance (WAC 173-27-040(2)(g)).
“Solid waste” means all garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, debris, scrap, waste materials and discarded materials of all types whatsoever, whether the sources be residential or commercial, exclusive of hazardous wastes and including all source-separated recyclable materials and yard waste.
“Stream” means a naturally occurring body of periodic or continuously flowing water where: (1) the mean annual flow is greater than twenty (20) cubic feet per second and (2) the water is contained within a channel. A channel is an open conduit either naturally or artificially created. This definition does not include artificially created irrigation, return flow or stock watering channels (WAC 173-22-030(8)).
“Strict construction” means the close or narrow reading and interpretation of a statute or written document.
Structural Shoreline Stabilization. “Hard structural stabilization measures” refer to those with solid, hard surfaces, such as concrete groins, retaining walls and bulkheads, while “soft structural stabilization measures” rely on less rigid materials, such as biotechnical vegetation measures or beach enhancement. There is a range of measures varying from soft to hard that include vegetation enhancement, upland drainage control, biotechnical measures, beach enhancement, anchor trees, gravel placement, rock revetments, gabions, concrete groins, retaining and bluff walls and bulkheads. Generally, the harder the construction measure, the greater the impact on shoreline processes, including sediment transport, geomorphology and biological functions.
“Structure” means a permanent or temporary edifice or building or a piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, whether installed on, above or below the surface of the ground or water, except for vessels (WAC 173-27-030(15)).
“Substantial development” means a development of which the total cost or fair market value exceeds six thousand four hundred sixteen dollars ($6,416.00), or any development, which materially interferes with the normal public use of the water or shorelines of the state. The dollar threshold established in this definition must be adjusted for inflation by the Office of Financial Management every five (5) years, beginning July 1, 2007, based upon changes in the consumer price index during that time period. “Consumer price index” means, for a calendar year, that year’s annual average consumer price index, Seattle, Washington area, for urban wage earners and clerical workers, all items, compiled by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics, United States Department of Labor. The Office of Financial Management must calculate the new dollar threshold and transmit it to the office of the code reviser for publication in the Washington State Register at least one (1) month before the new dollar threshold is to take effect (RCW 90.58.030(3)(e)). A list of developments, uses and activities that shall not be considered substantial development is provided in Article 7, Shoreline Administration (WAC 173-27-040(2)(a)).
“Upland” is generally described as the dry land area above and landward of the OHWM.
“Utilities” means services and facilities that produce, transmit, store, process or dispose of electric power, gas, water, stormwater, sewage and communications.
“Utilities, accessory” means utilities comprised of small-scale distribution and collection facilities connected directly to development within the shoreline area. Examples include local power, telephone, cable, gas, water, sewer and stormwater service lines.
“Utilities, primary” means utilities comprised of trunk lines or mains that serve neighborhoods, areas and the city. Examples include solid waste handling and disposal sites, water transmission lines, sewage treatment facilities and mains, power generating or transmission facilities, gas storage and transmission facilities and stormwater mains and regional facilities.
“Variance” is a means to grant relief from the specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards specified in the SMP, but not a means to vary a shoreline use. Shoreline variances must be specifically approved, approved with conditions, or denied by Ecology (see WAC 173-27-170).
“Water-dependent use” means a use or a portion of a use, which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water due to the intrinsic nature of its operations. Examples of “water-dependent uses” may include moorage structures (including those associated with residential properties), ship cargo terminal loading areas, ferry and passenger terminals, barge loading facilities, ship building and dry docking, marinas, aquaculture, float plane facilities and sewer outfalls.
“Water-enjoyment use” means a recreational use or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through location, design and operation ensures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that foster shoreline enjoyment.
“Water-oriented use” means any combination of water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment uses that serves as an all-encompassing definition for priority uses under the SMA.
“Water quality” means the physical characteristics of water within shoreline jurisdiction, including water quantity, hydrological, physical, chemical, aesthetic, recreation-related and biological characteristics. Where used in the SMP, the term “water quantity” refers only to development and uses regulated under the SMP and affecting water quantity, such as impermeable surfaces and stormwater handling practices. “Water quantity,” for purposes of the SMP, does not mean the withdrawal of ground water or diversion of surface water in accordance with RCW 90.03.250 through 90.03.340.
“Water-related use” means a use or a portion of a use, which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location because:
    1. Of a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or
    2. The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent commercial activities and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive or more convenient. Examples include manufacturers of ship parts large enough that transportation becomes a significant factor in the product’s cost, professional services serving primarily water-dependent uses and storage of water-transported foods. Examples of water-related uses may include warehousing of goods transported by water, seafood processing plants, hydroelectric generating plants, gravel storage when transported by barge, oil refineries where transport is by tanker and log storage.
“Watershed restoration plan” means a plan developed or sponsored by the WDFW, Ecology or WSDOT acting within or in accordance with its authority, a city, a county or a conservation district that provides a general program and implementation measures or actions for the preservation, restoration, recreation or enhancement of the natural resources, character and ecology of a stream, stream segment, drainage area or watershed for which agency and public review has been conducted in accordance with SEPA.
“Weir” means a low dam built across a stream to raise its level, divert its flow or measure its flow. Weirs have been used to address erosion and scouring of stream channels, but can also have negative impacts depending on how they are constructed, such as detrimental effects on fish habitat conditions.
“Wetland” or “wetland areas” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to: irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds and landscape amenities or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.820 Abbreviations.
AMC. Aberdeen Municipal Code.
BAS. Best available science.
BMPs. Best management practices.
CAC. Citizen advisory committee for the Shoreline Master Plan update process.
CAO. Critical areas ordinance.
Cities. Cities of Aberdeen, Cosmopolis, and Hoquiam.
City. City of Aberdeen.
CMZ. Channel migration zone.
DAHP. Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation.
Ecology. Washington State Department of Ecology.
ESA. Federal Endangered Species Act.
FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM. Flood insurance rate map.
FPA. Washington State Forest Practices Act (Chapter 76.09 RCW).
GMA. Washington State Growth Management Act (Chapter 36.70A RCW).
HPA. Hydraulic project approval.
LUPA. Land Use Petition Act.
NMFS. National Marine Fisheries Service.
OHWM. Ordinary high water mark.
RCW. Revised Code of Washington.
SEPA. State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW).
SHB. Washington State Shorelines Hearings Board.
SMA. Shoreline Management Act (Chapter 90.58 RCW).
SMP. Shoreline master program.
State. State of Washington.
TAC. Technical advisory committee for the shoreline master program update process.
USACE. United States Army Corps of Engineers.
WAC. Washington Administrative Code.
WDFW. Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife.
WDNR. Washington State Department of Natural Resources.
WSDOT. Washington State Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Article 9. Appendices

14.50.900 Appendix 1: Shoreline environment designation maps.
[IMAGE: <14.50.900_App1_002.jpg>]
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.910 Appendix 2: Critical areas regulations.
A. Introduction. 
    1. The critical areas regulations in effect on April 12, 2017, which are codified in the city’s critical areas ordinance (CAO), Chapter 14.100, Critical Area Protection, are integral and applicable to the SMP and are hereby adopted by reference. All uses and development occurring within critical areas or their buffers within shoreline jurisdiction shall comply with the regulations established in the CAO, except as substituted, as listed in Appendix 2: Table A2-1 in subsection (B) of this section.
    2. If there are any conflicts or unclear distinctions between the provisions of Chapter 14.100, the SMP and this Appendix, the requirements most consistent with the SMA shall apply, as determined by the shoreline administrator.
B. To ensure consistency with the SMA, exceptions to the applicability of the regulations in Chapter 14.100 for development, activities and projects in shoreline jurisdiction are listed below:
    1. Where there is a difference in a definition between the CAO and the SMP, the SMP definition shall apply.
    2. Within shoreline jurisdiction, critical area review, approval, notice and appeal periods shall be integrated with the associated shoreline permit or exemption found in Article 7, Shoreline Administration. Where there is a difference in a review, approval, notice and appeal process between the CAO and the SMP, the SMP process shall apply.
    3. Exempt and allowed activities listed in Sections 14.100.050 and 14.100.230 must be consistent with the applicable provisions of the SMP and any required shoreline permit(s) shall be obtained.
    4. The following listed sections of Chapter 14.100, Critical Area Protection, do not apply within the shoreline jurisdiction and they are replaced by the particular regulations listed in Appendix 2: Table A2-1:
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    |  AMC Section   |        AMC Section Description         |     Replacement Section in the      |
    |                |                                        |                 SMP                 |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.035     | Appeals                                | Replaced by Section 14.50.740.05    |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.051     | Reasonable Use                         | Replaced by Section 14.50.730.03    |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.052     | Nonconforming Development              | Replaced by Section 14.50.760       |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.053     | Variances                              | Replaced by Section 14.50.730.03    |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.200     | Wetlands Critical Areas – Designation  | Replaced by Section 14.50.912       |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.210(C)  | Mapping of Wetlands Areas              | Replaced by Section 14.50.913       |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.250     | Wetland Buffers – Dimensions           | Replaced by Section 14.50.914       |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.530     | Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation | Replaced by Section 14.50.917       |
    |                | Areas – Water Bodies – Performance     |                                     |
    |                | Standards – Specific Activities        |                                     |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.550     | Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation | Replaced by Section 14.50.918       |
    |                | Areas – Water Bodies – Buffers         |                                     |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.551     | Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation | Replaced by Section 14.50.430.02(C) |
    |                | Areas – Water Bodies – Buffer          |                                     |
    |                | Averaging                              |                                     |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
    | 14.100.553     | Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation | Replaced by Section 14.50.430.02(C) |
    |                | Areas – Water Bodies – Buffer          |                                     |
    |                | Decrease                               |                                     |
    +----------------+----------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.912 Wetlands critical areas – Designation.
A. Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands.
B. Wetlands shall be identified in accordance with the requirements of RCW 36.70A.175 and 90.58.380. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all areas within the city meeting the criteria in the approved Federal Wetland Delineation Manual and applicable regional supplements, as amended, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Wetlands shall be rated based on categories that reflect the functions and values of each wetland. Wetland categories shall be based on the criteria provided in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington 2014 Update October 2014 – Effective January 2015 (Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, as amended). These categories are generally defined as follows:
    1. Category I Wetlands. Category I wetlands are those wetlands of exceptional value in terms of protecting water quality, storing flood and stormwater and/or providing habitat for wildlife as indicated by a rating system score of twenty-three (23) or more. These wetland communities of infrequent occurrence often provide documented habitat for critical, threatened or endangered species and/or have other attributes that are very difficult or impossible to replace if altered.
    2. Category II Wetlands. Category II wetlands have significant value based on their function as indicated by a rating system score of twenty (20) to twenty-two (22) points. They do not meet the criteria for Category I rating but occur infrequently and have qualities that are difficult to replace if altered.
    3. Category III Wetlands. Category III wetlands have important resource value as indicated by a rating system score of sixteen (16) to nineteen (19) points.
    4. Category IV Wetlands. Category IV wetlands are wetlands of limited resource value as indicated by a rating system score of less than sixteen (16) points. They typically have vegetation of similar age and class, lack special habitat features and/or are isolated or disconnected from other aquatic systems or high quality upland habitats.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.913 Wetland identification and delineation.
Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this appendix shall be done in accordance with the approved Federal Wetland Delineation Manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the shoreline jurisdiction of the city meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this appendix. Wetland delineations are valid for five (5) years; after such date, the city shall determine whether a revision or additional assessment is necessary.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.914 Wetland buffers – Dimensions.
A. Wetland buffers shall be required for all regulated activities adjacent to regulated wetlands. Any wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall also include the standard buffer required for the category of the created, restored or enhanced wetland. Buffers shall not include areas that are disconnected functionally and effectively from the wetland by a road or other substantially developed surface of sufficient width and with use characteristics such that buffer functions are not provided.
B. The buffer standards required by this chapter presume the existence of a dense vegetation community in the buffer adequate to protect the wetland functions and values. When a buffer lacks adequate vegetation, the shoreline administrator may increase the standard buffer, require buffer planting or enhancement and/or deny a proposal for buffer reduction or buffer averaging.
C. Buffer Dimensions. 
    1. The wetland buffer widths are based on wetland category, intensity of impacts and wetland functions or special characteristics. Wetland buffer widths shall be determined according to the land use intensities and wetland characteristics of Appendix 2: Table A2-2 and Appendix 2: Table A2-3.
    2. The buffer is to be vegetated with native plant communities that are appropriate for the site conditions. If vegetation in the buffer is disturbed (grazed or mowed), proponents planning changes to land that will increase impacts to wetlands need to rehabilitate the buffer with native plant communities that are appropriate for the site conditions. The width of the buffer is measured in horizontal distance. All buffers shall be measured from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field.
    3. The buffer for a wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for wetland alterations shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored or enhanced wetland.
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Level of Impact from Proposed |                  Types of Land Uses                  |
|      Change in Land Use       |                                                      |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Low                           | • Forestry                                           |
|                               | • Low-intensity open space (hiking, bird watching,   |
|                               | preservation of natural resources, etc.)             |
|                               | • Unpaved trails                                     |
|                               | • Utility corridor without maintenance road and      |
|                               | little to no vegetation management                   |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Moderate                      | • Residential (one unit/acre or less)                |
|                               | • Moderate-intensity open space (parks with biking,  |
|                               | jogging, etc.)                                       |
|                               | • Paved driveways and gravel driveways serving three |
|                               | or more residences                                   |
|                               | • Paved trails                                       |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| High                          | • Commercial                                         |
|                               | • Urban                                              |
|                               | • Industrial                                         |
|                               | • Institutional                                      |
|                               | • Retail sales                                       |
|                               | • Residential (more than one unit/acre)              |
|                               | • High-intensity recreation (golf courses, ball      |
|                               | fields, etc.)                                        |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
|      Wetland Characteristics       |   Buffer Width by Impact    | Other Measures Recommended |
|                                    |    of Proposed Land Use     |       for Protection       |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Category IV Wetlands                                                                          |
| (For wetlands scoring less than 16 points for all functions)                                  |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Score for all 3 basic functions    | Low – 25 ft.                | None                       |
| is less than 16 points             | Moderate – 40 ft.           |                            |
|                                    | High – 50 ft.               |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Category III Wetlands                                                                         |
| (For wetlands scoring 16 – 19 points for all functions)                                       |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| High level of function for habitat | Low – 150 ft.               | Maintain connections       |
| (score for habitat 8 – 9 points)   | Moderate – 225 ft.          | to other habitat           |
|                                    | High – 300 ft.              | areas                      |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Moderate level of function for     | Low – 75 ft.                | None                       |
| habitat                            | Moderate – 110 ft.          |                            |
| (score for habitat 5 – 7 points)   | High – 150 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristics  | Low – 40 ft.                | None                       |
|                                    | Moderate – 60 ft.           |                            |
|                                    | High – 80 ft.               |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Category II Wetlands                                                                          |
| (For wetlands that score 20 – 22 points for all functions, or having the                      |
| “Special Characteristics” identified in the rating system)                                    |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| High level of function for habitat | Low – 150 ft.               | Maintain connections       |
|                                    | Moderate – 225 ft.          | to other habitat           |
| (score for habitat 8 – 9 points)   | High – 300 ft.              | areas                      |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Moderate level of function for     | Low – 75 ft.                | None                       |
| habitat                            | Moderate – 110 ft.          |                            |
| (score for habitat 5 – 7 points)   | High – 150 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| High level of function for water   | Low – 50 ft.                | No additional surface      |
| quality improvement and low        | Moderate – 75 ft.           | discharges of untreated    |
| for habitat                        | High – 100 ft.              | run-off                    |
| (score for water quality 8 –       |                             |                            |
| 9 points; habitat less than        |                             |                            |
| 5 points)                          |                             |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Estuarine                          | Low – 75 ft.                | None                       |
|                                    | Moderate – 110 ft.          |                            |
|                                    | High – 150 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristics  | Low – 50 ft.                | None                       |
|                                    | Moderate – 75 ft.           |                            |
|                                    | High – 100 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Category I Wetlands                                                                           |
| (For wetlands that score 23 points or more for all functions, or having the                   |
| “Special Characteristics” identified in the rating system)                                    |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Natural Heritage wetlands          | Low – 125 ft.               | No additional surface      |
|                                    | Moderate – 190 ft.          | discharges to wetland      |
|                                    | High – 250 ft.              | or its tributaries;        |
|                                    |                             | No septic systems          |
|                                    |                             | within 300 ft. of          |
|                                    |                             | wetland;                   |
|                                    |                             | Restore degraded parts     |
|                                    |                             | of buffer                  |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Bogs                               | Low – 125 ft.               | No additional surface      |
|                                    | Moderate – 190 ft.          | discharges to wetland      |
|                                    | High – 250 ft.              | or its tributaries;        |
|                                    |                             | Restore degraded parts     |
|                                    |                             | of buffer                  |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Forested                           | Buffer width based on score | If forested wetland        |
|                                    | for habitat functions       | scores high for habitat,   |
|                                    | or water quality functions  | need to maintain           |
|                                    |                             | connections to other       |
|                                    |                             | habitat areas              |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Estuarine                          | Low – 100 ft.               | None                       |
|                                    | Moderate – 150 ft.          |                            |
|                                    | High – 200 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| High level of function for habitat | Low – 150 ft.               | Restore degraded parts     |
| (score for habitat 8 – 9 points)   | Moderate – 225 ft.          | of buffer;                 |
|                                    | High – 300 ft.              | Maintain connections       |
|                                    |                             | to other habitat           |
|                                    |                             | areas                      |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Moderate level of function for     | Low – 75 ft.                | None                       |
| habitat                            | Moderate – 110 ft.          |                            |
| (score for habitat 5 – 7 points)   | High – 150 ft.              |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| High level of function for water   | Low – 50 ft.                | No additional surface      |
| quality improvement (8 – 9         | Moderate – 75 ft.           | discharges of untreated    |
| points) and low for habitat        | High – 100 ft.              | runoff                     |
| (less than 5 points)               |                             |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristics  | Low – 50 ft.                | None                       |
|                                    | Moderate – 75 ft.           |                            |
|                                    |  High – 100 ft.             |                            |
+------------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------+
D. Where lands within the wetland buffer have an average continuous slope of twenty (20) percent to thirty-five (35) percent and the required buffer width is less than one hundred (100) feet, the buffer shall increase to a greater dimension by thirty (30) percent. In all cases, where slopes within the buffers exceed thirty-five (35) percent, the buffer shall extend twenty-five (25) feet beyond the top of the bank of the sloping area or if a buffer associated with a geological hazard is present, to whichever extent is greater.
E. Where other critical areas defined in this chapter fall within the wetland buffer, the buffer dimension shall be the most expansive of the buffers applicable to any applicable critical area.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.915 Performance standards – Mitigation requirements.
A. Activities that adversely affect wetlands and/or wetland buffers shall include mitigation sufficient to achieve no net loss of wetland function and values in accordance with Section 14.100.070 and this section.
B. Wetland Alterations. Compensatory mitigation shall be provided for all wetland alteration and shall reestablish, create, rehabilitate, enhance and/or preserve equivalent wetland functions and values. Compensation for wetland alterations shall occur in the following order of preference:
    1. Reestablishing wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.
    2. Rehabilitating wetlands for the purposes of repairing or restoring natural and/or historic functions.
    3. Creating wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those consisting primarily of nonnative, invasive plant species.
    4. Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands.
    5. Preserving Category I or II wetlands that are under imminent threat; provided, that preservation shall only be allowed in combination with other forms of mitigation and when the shoreline administrator determines the overall mitigation package fully replaces the functions and values lost due to development.
C. Mitigation Ratios. Compensatory mitigation for wetland alterations shall be based on the wetland category and the type of mitigation activity proposed. The replacement ratio shall be determined according to the ratios provided in Appendix 2: Table A2-4; provided, that replacement ratio for preservation shall be determined by the shoreline administrator on a case-by-case basis. The created, re-established, rehabilitated or enhanced wetland area shall at a minimum provide a level of function equivalent to the wetland being altered and shall be located in an appropriate landscape setting.
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| Wetland Category |     Creation      | Rehabilitation  |   Reestablishment   |   Reestablishment   |    Enhancement    |
|                  |                   |    Only (1)     |     or Creation     |     or Creation     |     Only (1)      |
|                  |                   |                 |      (R/C) and      |      (R/C) and      |                   |
|                  |                   |                 |   Rehabilitation    |     Enhancement     |                   |
|                  |                   |                 |      (RH) (1)       |       (E) (1)       |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| IV               | 1.5:1             | 3:1             | 1:1 R/C and         | 1:1 R/C and         | 6:1               |
|                  |                   |                 | 1:1 RH              | 2:1 E               |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| III              | 2:1               | 4:1             | 1:1 R/C and         | 1:1 R/C and         | 8:1               |
|                  |                   |                 | 2:1 RH              | 4:1 E               |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| II (Estuarine)   | On a case-by-case | 4:1             | On a case-by-case   | On a case-by-case   | On a case-by-case |
|                  | basis             | Rehabilitation  | basis               | basis               | basis             |
|                  |                   | of an estuarine |                     |                     |                   |
|                  |                   | wetland         |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| II               | 2:1               | 4:1             | 1:1 R/C and         | Not recommended     | Not recommended   |
| (Interdunal)     | Compensation      | Compensation    | 2:1 RH              | (2)                 | (2)               |
|                  | has to be         | has to be       | Compensation        |                     |                   |
|                  | interdunal        | interdunal      | has to be           |                     |                   |
|                  | wetland           | wetland         | interdunal          |                     |                   |
|                  |                   |                 | wetland             |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| II               | 3:1               | 6:1             | 1:1 R/C and         | 1:1 R/C and         | 12:1              |
|                  |                   |                 | 4:1 RH              | 8:1 E               |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Forested)     | 6:1               | 12:1            | 1:1 R/C and         | 1:1 R/C and         | 24:1              |
|                  |                   |                 | 10:1 RH             | 20:1 E              |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Based on      | 4:1               | 8:1             | 1:1 R/C and         | 1:1 R/C and         | 16:1              |
| Score for        |                   |                 | 6:1 RH              | 12:1 E              |                   |
| Functions)       |                   |                 |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Natural       | Not recommended   | 6:1             | R/C not recommended | R/C not recommended | On a case-by-case |
| Heritage)        | (3)               | Restoration     | (3)                 | (3)                 | basis             |
|                  |                   | of a Natural    |                     |                     |                   |
|                  |                   | Heritage        |                     |                     |                   |
|                  |                   | site            |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Coastal       | Not recommended   | 6:1             | R/C not recommended | R/C not recommended | On a case-by-case |
| Lagoon)          | (3)               | Rehabilitation  | (3)                 | (3)                 | basis             |
|                  |                   | of a coastal    |                     |                     |                   |
|                  |                   | lagoon          |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Bog)          | Not recommended   | 6:1             | R/C not recommended | R/C not recommended | On a case-by-case |
|                  | (3)               | Rehabilitation  | (3)                 | (3)                 | basis             |
|                  |                   | of a bog        |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
| I (Estuarine)    | On a case-by-case | 6:1             | On a case-by-case   | On a case-by-case   | On a case-by-case |
|                  | basis             | Rehabilitation  | basis               | basis               | basis             |
|                  |                   | of an estuarine |                     |                     |                   |
|                  |                   | wetland         |                     |                     |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+-----------------+---------------------+---------------------+-------------------+
Notes:
(1)These ratios are based on the assumption that the rehabilitation or enhancement actions implemented represent the average degree of improvement possible for the site. Proposals to implement more effective rehabilitation or enhancement actions may result in a lower ratio, while less effective actions may result in a higher ratio. The distinction between rehabilitation and enhancement is not clear-cut. Instead, rehabilitation and enhancement actions span a continuum. Proposals that fall within the gray area between rehabilitation and enhancement will result in a ratio that lies between the ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement (see Chapter 14.100 Appendix H for further discussion).
(2)Due to the dynamic nature of interdunal systems, enhancement is not considered an ecologically appropriate action.
(3)Natural Heritage sites, coastal lagoons and bogs are considered irreplaceable wetlands because they perform some functions that cannot be replaced through compensatory mitigation. Impacts to such wetlands would therefore result in a net loss of some functions no matter what kind of compensation is proposed.
D. Compensation for wetland buffer impacts shall occur at a minimum 1:1 ratio. Compensatory mitigation for buffer impacts shall include enhancement of degraded buffers by planting native species, removing structures and impervious surfaces within buffers and other measures.
E. Mitigation banks shall not be subject to the replacement ratios outlined in the replacement ratio table above, but shall be determined as part of the mitigation banking agreement and certification process.
F. Buffers. Replacement wetlands established pursuant to these mitigation provisions shall have adequate buffers to ensure their protection and sustainability. The buffer shall be based on the category and land use intensity in Tables 14.100.250.C.1a and 14.100.250.C.1b; provided, that the shoreline administrator shall have the authority to approve a smaller buffer when existing site constraints (such as a road) prohibit attainment of the standard buffer.
G. Adjustment of Ratios. The shoreline administrator shall have the authority to adjust these ratios when a combination of mitigation approaches is proposed. In such cases, the area of altered wetland shall be replaced at a 1:1 ratio through reestablishment or creation and the remainder of the area needed to meet the ratio can be replaced by enhancement at a 2:1 ratio. For example, impacts to one (1) acre of a Category II wetland requiring a 3:1 ratio for creation can be compensated by creating one (1) acre and enhancing four (4) acres (instead of the additional two (2) acres of creation that would otherwise be required).
H. Location. Compensatory mitigation shall be provided on or off site in the location that will provide the greatest ecological benefit and have the greatest likelihood of success; provided, that mitigation occurs as close as possible to the impact area and within the same watershed sub-basin as the permitted alteration. Compensatory mitigation shall use a landscape-based approach sufficient to maintain the functions and values of critical areas. An applicant may be required to provide compensatory mitigation through an aquatic resource restoration, establishment, enhancement and/or preservation activity.
I. Protection. All mitigation areas whether on-site or off-site shall be permanently protected and managed to prevent degradation and ensure protection of critical area functions and values into perpetuity. Permanent protection shall be achieved through deed restriction or other protective covenant in accordance with Sections 14.100.080 and 14.100.081.
J. Timing. Mitigation activities shall be timed to occur in the appropriate season based on weather and moisture conditions and shall occur as soon as possible after the permitted alteration.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.916 Wetland critical areas and wetland buffers – Regulated activities.
A. The following activities are regulated if they occur in a regulated wetland or its buffer:
    1. The removal, excavation, grading or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter or material of any kind;
    2. The dumping of, discharging of or filling with any material;
    3. The draining, flooding or disturbing of the water level or water table;
    4. Pile driving;
    5. The placing of obstructions;
    6. The construction, reconstruction, demolition or expansion of any structure;
    7. The destruction or alteration of wetland vegetation through clearing, harvesting, shading, intentional burning or planting of vegetation that would alter the character of a regulated wetland;
    8. Class IV – General Forest Practices, under the authority of the “1992 Washington State Forest Practices Act Rules and Regulations,” WAC 222-12-030 or as thereafter amended; and
    9. Activities that result in:
        a. A significant change of water temperature;
        b. A significant change of physical or chemical characteristics of the sources of water to the wetland;
        c. A significant change in the quantity, timing or duration of the water entering the wetland; or
        d. The introduction of pollutants.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.917 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Water bodies – Performance standards – Specific activities.
A. The following activities may be permitted by the shoreline administrator in water bodies or their buffers; provided, that:
    1. The specified requirements for the activities have been included in the design and implementation of the proposal;
    2. The applicant has taken all reasonable measures to avoid adverse effects on water body and water body buffer functions and values;
    3. The applicant has provided compensatory mitigation for all adverse impacts to water bodies and their buffers that cannot be avoided;
    4. The applicant has demonstrated that the amount and degree of alteration are limited to the minimum needed to accomplish the project purpose; and
    5. The activities and uses are not prohibited by any other applicable law.
B. Restoration of streams previously piped or channeled into a new or relocated stream bed when part of a restoration plan that will result in equal or better habitat and water quality and quantity and that will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream or other natural stream processes; provided, that the relocation has a state hydraulic project approval and all other applicable permits.
C. Road, trail, bridge and right-of-way crossings, provided they meet the following criteria:
    1. Development is completed in accordance with design guidelines found in Section 14.50.596, Transportation facilities.
    2. There is no other feasible alternative route with less impact on critical areas.
    3. The crossing minimizes interruption of natural processes such as the downstream movement of wood and gravel and the movement of all fish and wildlife.
        a. Bridges are preferred for all stream crossings and should be designed to maintain the existing stream gradient and substrate, provide adequate horizontal clearance on each side of the OHWM and adequate vertical clearance above the OHWM for animal passage.
        b. If a bridge crossing is not feasible, culverts shall be designed according to applicable state and federal guidance criteria for fish passage as identified in Fish Passage Design at Road Culverts, WDFW March 1999 and/or the NMFS Service Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings, 2000 (and subsequent revisions) and in accordance with a state hydraulic project approval.
        c. The applicant or property owner shall maintain fish passage through the bridge or culvert.
    4. The city may require that existing culverts be removed, repaired or modified as a condition of approval if the culvert is detrimental to fish habitat or water quality and a feasible alternative exists.
    5. Crossings shall be limited to the minimum width necessary. Common crossings are the preferred approach where multiple properties can be accessed by one (1) crossing.
    6. Access to private development sites may be permitted to cross streams, if there are no feasible alternative alignments. Alternative access shall be pursued to the maximum extent feasible, including through the provisions of Chapter 8.24 RCW. Exceptions or deviations from technical standards for width or other dimensions and specific construction standards to minimize impacts may be specified, including placement on elevated structures as an alternative to fill, if feasible.
D. Passive outdoor recreational or educational activities which do not significantly affect the function of the water body or regulated buffer (including wildlife management or viewing structures, outdoor scientific or interpretive facilities, trails, hunting blinds, etc.) and meet the following criteria:
    1. Trails shall not exceed four (4) feet in width and shall be surfaced with gravel or pervious material, including boardwalk.
    2. The trail or facility shall be located in the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer area, unless a location closer to the water body edge is required for interpretive purposes.
    3. The trail or facility shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that minimizes disturbance of the water body or buffer.
E. Utility lines and facilities providing local delivery service, not including facilities such as electrical substations, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, petroleum products pipelines and transformers or other facilities containing hazardous substances, may cross water bodies or be located in buffers, if the following criteria are met:
    1. Utility construction is in accordance with design guidelines found in Section 14.50.597, Utilities.
    2. There is no reasonable location or route that does not cross the water body or can be located outside the buffer based on analysis of system needs, available technology and alternative routes. Location within a buffer shall be preferred over a location within a water body. Crossings shall be contained within the footprint of an existing road or utility crossing, where possible.
    3. Impacts to fish and wildlife habitat shall be avoided to the maximum extent possible and mitigated when avoidance is not feasible.
    4. Utilities that cross water bodies shall be as close to perpendicular to the channel as possible, to minimize disturbance. Boring under the water body may be required.
    5. If not a crossing, the utility line shall be located as far from the water body as possible.
    6. The utility installation shall maintain the existing stream gradient and substrate.
    7. Clearing, grading, and excavation activities shall be limited to the minimum necessary to install the utility line, and the area must be restored following utility installation.
F. Stormwater conveyance or discharge facilities such as infiltration systems, dispersion trenches, level spreaders and outfalls may be permitted in a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area buffer on a case-by-case basis when all of the following are met:
    1. Facilities are constructed in accordance with design guidelines found in Section 14.50.597, Utilities;
    2. Due to topographic or other physical constraints, there are no feasible locations for these facilities outside the buffer;
    3. The discharge is located as far from the OHWM as possible and in a manner that minimizes disturbance of soils and vegetation;
    4. The discharge outlet is in an appropriate location and is designed to prevent erosion and promote infiltration; and
    5. The discharge meets stormwater flow and water quality standards as provided in Chapter 13.70, Storm and Surface Water Management.
G. Stream bank stabilization, shoreline protection and public or private launching ramps may be permitted subject to all of the following standards:
    1. Stream bank stabilization, shoreline protection and public or private launching ramps are constructed in accordance with design guidelines found in Sections 14.50.610, General shoreline modification provisions, 14.50.660, Shoreline stabilization and 14.50.560, Boating and water access facilities;
    2. Natural shoreline processes will be maintained to the maximum extent feasible. The activity will not result in increased erosion and will not alter the size or distribution of shoreline or stream substrate or eliminate or reduce sediment supply from feeder bluffs;
    3. Adverse impacts to fish or wildlife habitat conservation areas, specifically juvenile and adult fish migration corridors, and/or associated wetlands will be mitigated;
    4. Nonstructural measures, such as placing or relocating the development further from the shoreline, planting vegetation or installing on-site drainage improvements, are not feasible or not sufficient;
    5. Stabilization is achieved through bioengineering or soft armoring techniques in accordance with applicable hydraulic project approval issued by the WDFW; and
    6. Hard bank armoring may occur only when the property contains an existing permanent structure(s) that is in danger from shoreline erosion caused by riverine processes and not erosion caused by upland conditions, such as the alteration of natural vegetation or drainage, and the armoring shall not increase erosion on adjacent properties and shall not eliminate or reduce sediment supply.
H. New public flood protection measures and expansion of existing measures may be permitted; provided, that bioengineering or soft armoring techniques shall be used where feasible. Hard bank armoring may occur only in situations where soft approaches do not provide adequate protection and shall be subject to requirements in Section 14.50.660, Shoreline stabilization, where applicable, in addition to hydraulic project approval and other permits.
I. New docks shall be permitted only for public access, as an accessory to water-dependent uses or associated with a single-family residence; provided, that they are consistent with design guidelines found in Section 14.50.560, Boating and water access facilities, and designed and used only as a facility for access to watercraft.
    1. To limit the effects on ecological functions, the number of docks should be limited and new subdivisions should employ shared moorage, whenever feasible. Docks on shorelines of the state must comply with policies and regulations of the city’s SMP.
    2. Docks shall be located and designed to minimize adverse effects on ecological processes where the location could interfere with fluvial and limnal processes including gradient and substrate; recruitment of woody debris; and fish habitat, including that related to anadromous fish.
    3. Docks shall be designed to minimize reduction in ambient light level by limiting width to the minimum necessary and shall not exceed four (4) feet in width, except where specific information on use patterns justifies a greater width. Materials that will allow light to pass through the deck may be required including grating on walkways or gangplanks in nearshore areas.
    4. Approaches shall utilize piers or other structures to span the entire upper foreshore to the point of intersection with stable upland soils and they shall be designed to avoid interfering with stream processes.
    5. Pile spacing shall be the maximum feasible to minimize shading and avoid a wall effect that would block or baffle currents, sediment movement, or movement of aquatic life forms or result in structure damage from driftwood impact or entrapment.
    6. Docks should be constructed of materials that will not adversely affect water quality or aquatic plants and animals in the long term.
J. Launch ramps may be permitted for access to the water for the public or for residents of a development or for water-dependent use subject to the following criteria:
    1. Launch ramps shall be located and designed in accordance with Section 14.50.560, Boating and water access facilities.
    2. Launch ramps shall be located and designed to minimize adverse effects on fluvial and limnal processes including stream gradient and substrate; recruitment of woody debris; and fish habitat, including that related to anadromous fish.
    3. Ramps shall be placed and maintained near flush with the bank slope. Preferred ramp designs, in order of priority, are:
        a. Open grid designs with minimum coverage of beach substrate;
        b. Seasonal ramps that can be removed and stored upland;
        c. Structures with segmented pads and flexible connections that leave space for natural shoreline substrate and can adapt to changes in shoreline profile.
K. In-stream structures such as, but not limited to, high flow bypasses, dams and weirs, other than those regulated exclusively by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), shall be permitted only when the multiple public benefits are provided and ecological impacts are fully mitigated. Dams on shorelines of the state shall be regulated in accordance with the SMP. Dams on other streams that are within the shoreline jurisdiction but are not shorelines of the state shall require a variance as provided by Section 14.50.730.03, Shoreline variances.
    1. In-stream facility locations shall avoid areas of high habitat value for aquatic organisms, specifically anadromous fish.
    2. In-stream facilities shall be designed to produce the least feasible effect on fluvial processes and shall minimize change in gradient.
    3. In-stream facilities shall provide mitigation of all impacts on aquatic species and habitat.
    4. In-stream facilities shall provide fish passage, in accordance with Chapter 77.57 RCW.
    5. A construction bond for one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the structure and all mitigation measures shall be filed prior to construction and a maintenance agreement shall specify responsibility for maintenance, shall incorporate the maintenance schedule specified by the design engineer, shall require annual inspections by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Washington and shall stipulate abandonment procedures which shall include, where appropriate, provisions for site restoration.
L. Facilities that are water-dependent or water-oriented and facilities for necessary access may be located in water bodies and buffers; and provided, that the facility is located, designed, constructed and operated to minimize and, where possible, avoid critical area disturbance to the maximum extent feasible. The shoreline administrator may require the submittal of a critical area report for facilities that are not associated with residential uses.
M. Clearing and grading, when allowed as part of an authorized use or activity or as otherwise allowed in these standards, may be permitted; provided, that the following shall apply:
    1. Clearing and grading are conducted in accordance with Section 14.50.620, Clearing, grading, and fill;
    2. Grading is allowed only during the designated dry season, which is typically regarded as May 1st to October 1st of each year; provided, that the city may extend or shorten the designated dry season on a case-by-case basis, based on actual weather conditions;
    3. Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be used at all times; the soil duff layer shall remain undisturbed to the maximum extent possible; where feasible, disturbed topsoil shall be redistributed to other areas of the site; and
    4. The moisture-holding capacity of the topsoil layer shall be maintained by minimizing soil compaction or reestablishing natural soil structure and infiltrative capacity on all areas of the project area not covered by impervious surfaces.
N. Repairs to Existing On-Site Sewage Systems. Repairs to failing on-site sewage systems associated with an existing structure shall be accomplished by utilizing one (1) of the following methods that result in the least impact:
    1. Connection to an available public sanitary sewer system;
    2. Replacement with a new on-site sewage system located in a portion of the site that has already been disturbed by development and is located landward as far as possible, provided the proposed sewage system is in compliance with Grays Harbor County Environmental Health Department; or
    3. Repair to the existing on-site septic system.
O. Activities in water bodies or water body buffers not expressly allowed by Section 14.100.050, Exempt and Allowed Activities, shall require review by the shoreline administrator and shall require submittal of a critical area report. The shoreline administrator may modify critical area report requirements according to Section 14.100.061, Critical Area Reports – Modifications to Requirements.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.918 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Water bodies – Buffers.
The shoreline administrator shall have the authority to require buffers from the edges of all streams in accordance with the following:
A. Buffers shall be established for activities as necessary to protect the integrity, functions and values of the resource. Buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the species or habitat and the type and intensity of the adjacent human use or activity.
B. The buffer widths required by this section are based on scientific studies of the conditions necessary to sustain ecological functions and values to support anadromous and resident fish and presume the existence of a dense native vegetation community in the buffer zone adequate to protect the stream functions and values at the time of the proposed activity. Buffers shall be measured as follows:
    1. Type S Water. Buffers for all waters, as inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under the jurisdiction of the SMA, except associated wetlands, shall be regulated in accordance with Section 14.50.430.02.
    2. Type F-A Water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are greater than ten (10) feet in width: buffer width of one hundred fifty (150) feet.
    3. Type F-B Water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are less than ten (10) feet in width: buffer width of one hundred (100) feet.
    4. Type Np Water. Segments of natural waters that are perennial non-fish habitat streams: buffer width of seventy-five (75) feet.
    5. Type Ns Water. Segments of natural waters within defined channels that are seasonal, non-fish habitat streams: buffer width of fifty (50) feet.
    6. Non-Fish-Bearing Streams in Existing Subdivisions. 
        a. Where streams have been placed in separate tracts, buffers will be provided by the tract, provided a minimum dimension of twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the stream is provided;
        b. Where streams have not been placed in separate tracts, or if a minimum dimension of twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of the stream is not provided, buffers will meet the dimensional requirements in subsection (B)(4) of this section, unless existing structures are located within the buffer. In that case, the following provisions shall apply:
            (1) An inner riparian buffer shall be provided with a dense community of native trees, shrubs and ground cover. The dimension of this buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, and may be expanded if sufficient clearance is available between the stream and existing primary structures;
            (2) An outer riparian buffer may be provided to extend within ten (10) feet of an existing primary structure. Within the outer buffer, a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the zone may be used as grass turf, with the balance a dense community of native trees, shrubs and ground cover.
C. Buffer Measurement. 
    1. The buffer shall be measured landward horizontally on both sides of the water body from the OHWM as identified in the field perpendicular to the alignment of the stream or lake/pond bank.
    2. The required buffer shall be extended to include any adjacent regulated wetland(s), landslide hazard areas, and/or erosion hazard areas and required buffers, but shall not be extended across roads or other lawfully established structures or hardened surfaces that are disconnected functionally and effectively from the stream.
    3. Where lands adjacent to a stream display an average continuous slope of twenty (20) percent to thirty-five (35) percent and the required buffer is less than one hundred (100) feet, the buffer shall extend to a thirty (30) percent greater dimension.
    4. In all cases, where slopes within the required buffer exceed thirty-five (35) percent, the buffer shall extend to a minimum dimension of twenty-five (25) feet from the top of said slopes or, if a buffer associated with a geological hazard is present, to whichever extent is greater.
D. Buffers in Conjunction with Other Critical Areas. Where other critical areas defined in this chapter fall within the water body buffer, the buffer area shall be the most expansive of the buffers applicable to any applicable critical area.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

14.50.919 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Additional requirements for critical saltwater habitats.
A. Critical saltwater habitats require a higher level of protection due to the important ecological functions they provide.
B. Where inventory of critical saltwater habitat has not been completed, over-water and nearshore developments in marine and estuarine waters shall be required to complete a habitat assessment of site and adjacent beach sections to assess the presence of critical saltwater habitats and functions. The methods and extent of the inventory shall be consistent with WAC 173-26-221(2)(c)(iii)(C). The city will work with WDFW to define this area.
C. Policies for critical saltwater habitats include:
    1. Critical saltwater habitats shall be protected and restored.
    2. The management of shorelands as well as submerged areas shall be integrated by the city, as ecological functions of marine shorelands can affect the viability of critical saltwater habitats.
    3. The city should include state resource agencies, the Port of Grays Harbor, Grays Harbor County and affected tribes in critical saltwater habitat planning efforts and determine which habitats and species are of local importance.
    4. The city shall protect kelp and eelgrass beds, forage fish spawning and holding areas and priority species habitat identified by WDNR’s aquatic resources division, the WDFW, Ecology and affected tribes as critical saltwater habitats.
    5. Comprehensive saltwater habitat management planning should identify methods for monitoring conditions and adapting management practices to new information.
    6. The inclusion of commercial aquaculture in the critical saltwater habitat definition does not limit its regulation as a use.
D. Docks, piers, bulkheads, bridges, fill, floats, jetties, utility crossings and other human-made structures shall not intrude into or over critical saltwater habitats except when all of the conditions below are met:
    1. Public need is clearly demonstrated and the proposal is consistent with protection of the public trust, as embodied in RCW 90.58.020;
    2. Avoidance of impacts to critical saltwater habitats by an alternative alignment or location is not feasible or would result in unreasonable or disproportionate cost to accomplish the same general purpose;
    3. The project and any required mitigation will result in no net loss of ecological functions associated with critical saltwater habitat; and
    4. The project is consistent with the state’s interest in resource protection and species recovery.
E. Private, noncommercial docks for individual residential or joint use (community use) may be permitted if it is infeasible to avoid impacts by an alternative alignment or location and the project including any required mitigation will result in no net loss of ecological functions associated with the critical saltwater habitat.
F. Until an inventory of critical saltwater habitat has been done, the SMP shall condition all over-water and nearshore developments in marine and estuarine waters with the requirement for an inventory of the site and adjacent beach sections to assess the presence of critical saltwater habitats and functions.
    1. The methods and extent of the inventory shall be consistent with accepted research methodology.
    2. At a minimum, the city should consult with Ecology technical assistance materials for guidance.
(Ord. 6611 § 1, Amended, 08/09/2017)

Chapter 14.100 CRITICAL AREA PROTECTION

Sections:
14.100.010   Purpose.
14.100.011   Authority.
14.100.012   Applicability.
14.100.013   Definitions.
14.100.014   Severability.
14.100.015   Effective Date.
14.100.020   Critical Areas.
14.100.021   Critical Area Maps.
14.100.022   Best Available Science.
14.100.030   Administrative Procedures.
14.100.031   Fees.
14.100.032   Administrative Rules.
14.100.034   Permit Processing.
14.100.035   Appeals.
14.100.040   Interpretation.
14.100.041   Relationship to Other Regulations.
14.100.042   Multiple Designations.
14.100.050   Exempt and Allowed Activities.
14.100.051   Reasonable Use.
14.100.052   Nonconforming Development.
14.100.053   Variances.
14.100.054   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
14.100.060   Critical Area Reports - General Requirements.
14.100.061   Critical Area Reports - Modifications to Requirements.
14.100.070   Mitigation Requirements.
14.100.071   Mitigation Sequencing.
14.100.072   Mitigation Plan Requirements.
14.100.074   Bonds to Ensure Mitigation, Maintenance and Monitoring.
14.100.080   Notice on Title.
14.100.081   Critical Area Tracts.
14.100.083   Building Setbacks.
14.100.084   Temporary Marking, Permanent Signs and Fencing.
14.100.090   Critical Area Inspections.
14.100.091   Unauthorized Critical Area Alteratios and Enforcement.
14.100.100   Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas - Designation.
14.100.200   Wetlands Critical Areas - Designation.
14.100.210   Mapping of Wetlands Areas.
14.100.220   Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Wetland Areas.
14.100.230   Exempt and Allowed Activities in Wetland Critical Areas.
14.100.240   Wetland Critical Areas - General Requirements.
14.100.241   Additional Requirements for Specific Activities.
14.100.242   Additional Requirements for Subdivisions.
14.100.250   Wetland Buffers - Dimensions.
14.100.251   Requirements for Wetland Buffer Averaging.
14.100.252   Requirements for Wetland Buffer Increase.
14.100.253   Requirements for Wetland Buffer Decrease.
14.100.254   Requirements for a Buffer Management Plan.
14.100.260   Mitigation Requirements.
14.100.261   Wetland Mitigation Plan Requirements.
14.100.262   Wetland Mitigation Monitoring Requirements.
14.100.263   Wetland Mitigation Banks.
14.100.300   Frequently Flooded Areas - Designation.
14.100.310   Mapping of Frequently Flooded Areas.
14.100.320   Frequently Flooded Areas - Regulation.
14.100.400   Geologically Hazardous Areas - Designation.
14.100.410   Mapping of Geologially Hazardous Areas.
14.100.420   Activities Allowed in Geologically Hazardous Areas.
14.100.430   Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Geologically Hazardous Areas.
14.100.440   Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Specific Hazards.
14.100.450   Geologically Hazardous Areas - General Requirements.
14.100.460   Additional Requirements for Specific Hazards.
14.100.500   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Designation.
14.100.510   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Mapping.
14.100.520   Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Conservation Habitat Areas.
14.100.530   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas-Water bodies-Additional Requirements for Specific Activities.
14.100.540   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas - General Requirements.
14.100.541   Additional Requirements for Subdivisions.
14.100.542   Additional Requirements for Specific Habitats.
14.100.550   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffers.
14.100.551   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas-Water Bodies-Buffer Averaging.
14.100.552   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffer Increase.
14.100.553   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffer Decrease.
14.100.554   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Other Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Buffers.
14.100.560   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Mitigation Standards.
14.100.570   Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Piped Streams.

14.100.010 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to designate and classify ecologically sensitive and hazardous areas and to protect these areas and their functions and values, while also allowing for reasonable use of private property.
B. This Chapter implements the goals, policies, guidelines, and requirements of the city of Aberdeen (city) Comprehensive Plan and the Growth Management Act.
C. The city finds that critical areas provide a variety of valuable and beneficial biological and physical functions that benefit the city and its residents and/or may pose a threat to human safety or to public and private property. The beneficial functions and values provided by critical areas include, but are not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement; fish and wildlife habitat; food chain support; flood storage; conveyance and attenuation of flood waters; ground water recharge and discharge; erosion control; wave attenuation; protection from hazards; historical, archaeological, and aesthetic value protection; and recreation. These beneficial functions are not listed in order of priority.
D. Goals. By limiting development and alteration of critical areas, this Chapter seeks to:
    1. Protect members of the public and public resources and facilities from injury, loss of life, or property damage due to landslides and steep slope failures, erosion, seismic events, or flooding;
    2. Maintain healthy, functioning ecosystems through the protection of unique, fragile, and valuable elements of the environment, including ground and surface waters, wetlands, and fish and wildlife and their habitats, and to conserve the biodiversity of plant and animal species;
    3. Direct activities not dependent on critical areas resources to less ecologically sensitive sites and mitigate unavoidable impacts to critical areas by regulating alterations in and adjacent to critical areas; and
    4. Prevent cumulative adverse environmental impacts to water quality, wetlands, and fish and wildlife habitat, and the overall net loss of wetlands, frequently flooded areas, and habitat conservation areas.
E. The regulations of this Chapter are intended to protect critical areas in accordance with the Growth Management Act and through the application of the best available science, as determined according to WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925 and in consultation with state and federal agencies and other qualified professionals.
F. This Chapter is to be administered with flexibility and attention to site-specific characteristics. It is not the intent of this Chapter to make a parcel of property unusable by denying its owner reasonable economic use of the property or to prevent the provision of public facilities and services necessary to support existing and planned development.
G. The city’s enactment or enforcement of this Chapter shall not be construed for the benefit of any individual person or group of persons other than the general public.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.011 Authority.
A. As provided herein, the Community Development Director is given the authority to interpret and apply, as well as the responsibility to enforce this Chapter to accomplish the stated purpose.
B. The city may withhold, condition, or deny development permits or activity approvals to ensure that the proposed action is consistent with this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.012 Applicability.
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all lands, all land uses and development activity, and all structures and facilities in the city, whether or not a permit or authorization is required, and shall apply to every person, firm, partnership, corporation, group, governmental agency, or other entity that owns, leases, or administers land within the city. No person, company, agency, or applicant shall alter a critical area or buffer except as consistent with the purposes and requirements of this Chapter.
B. The city shall not approve any permit or otherwise issue any authorization to alter the condition of any land, water, or vegetation or to construct or alter any structure or improvement in, over, or on a critical area or associated buffer, without first ensuring compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, including but not limited to the following:
    1. Binding site plan;
    2. Boundary line adjustment;
    3. Building permit;
    4. Conditional use permit;
    5. Grading and fill permit
    6. Planned unit development;
    7. Shoreline conditional use permit;
    8. Shoreline substantial development permit;
    9. Shoreline exemption;
    10. Shoreline variance;
    11. Short subdivision (Short Plat);
    12. Subdivision;
    13. Zoning conditional use;
    14. Zoning variance; or
    15. Any other adopted permit or required approval not expressly exempted by this Chapter.
C. Approval or denial of a permit or development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter does not discharge the obligation of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.013 Definitions.
Words not defined in this Chapter shall be as defined in the city of Aberdeen Municipal Code, the Washington Administrative Code, or the Revised Code of Washington. Words not found in either code shall be as defined in the Webster's Third New International Dictionary, latest edition.
Active fault – A fault that is considered likely to undergo renewed movement within a period of concern to humans. Faults are commonly considered to be active if the fault has moved one or more times in the last 10,000 years, but faults may also be considered active in some cases if movement has occurred in the last 500,000 years.
Adaptive management – Adaptive management relies on scientific methods to evaluate how well regulatory and non-regulatory actions protect the critical area. An adaptive management program is a formal and deliberate scientific approach to taking action and obtaining information in the face of uncertainty.
Adjacent – Immediately adjoining (in contact with the boundary of the influence area) or within a distance that is less than that needed to separate activities from critical areas to ensure protection of the functions and values of the critical areas. Adjacent shall mean any activity or development located:
    A. On a site immediately adjoining a critical area.
    B. A distance equal to or less than the required critical area buffer width and building setback.
    C. A distance equal to or less than one-half mile (2,640 feet) 1 1. Distance of 2,640 feet is based on the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Management Recommendations for Washington’s Priority Species, Volume IV: Birds, 2000. from a bald eagle nest.
    D. A distance equal to or less than three hundred (300) feet 2 2 Distance of 300 feet is based on maximum recommended riparian habitat area width from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s Management Recommendations for Washington’s Priority Habitats: Riparian, 1997. upland from a stream, wetland, or water body.
    E. Bordering or within the floodway, floodplain or channel migration zone.
    F. A distance equal to or less than two hundred (200) feet 3 3 Distance of 200 feet is a suggested distance to ensure that activities within the critical aquifer recharge area are included in this Title, even when the exact boundaries of a critical aquifer recharge area are not known at the time of application. from a critical aquifer recharge area.
Advance mitigation – Mitigation of an anticipated critical area impact or hazard completed according to an approved report or other applicable information and prior to site development.
Agricultural land – Land primarily devoted to the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, or livestock, and or that has been designated as long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.
Alteration - Any human-induced change in an existing condition of a critical area or its buffer. Alterations include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, channelizing, dredging, clearing (vegetation), construction, compaction, excavation, or any other activity that changes the character of the critical area.
Applicant - A person who files an application for a permit under this Chapter and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located, a contract purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person.
Aquifer – A geological formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding a significant amount of water to a well or spring.
Aquifer, confined – An aquifer bounded above and below by beds of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and that contains ground water under sufficient pressure for the water to rise above the top of the aquifer.
Aquifer recharge areas - Areas that, due to the presence of certain soils, geology, and surface water, act to recharge ground water by percolation.
Aquifer, sole source – An area designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, Section 1424(e). The aquifer(s) must supply fifty percent or more of the drinking water for an area without a sufficient replacement available.
Aquifer susceptibility – The ease with which contaminants can move from the land surface to the aquifer based solely on the types of surface and subsurface materials in the area. Susceptibility usually defines the rate at which a contaminant will reach an aquifer unimpeded by chemical interactions with the vadose zone media.
Aquifer, unconfined – An aquifer not bounded above by a bed of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and containing ground water under pressure approximately equal to that of the atmosphere. This term is synonymous with the term "water table aquifer."
Area of shallow flooding – An area designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance map(s). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
Base flood - A flood event having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one hundred-year flood. Designations of base flood areas on flood insurance map(s) always include the letters A or V.
Best available science - Current scientific information used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas that is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 925. Sources of best available science are included in “Citations of Recommended Sources of Best Available Science for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas” published by the state Office of Community Development.
Best management practices (BMPs) - Conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that:
    A. Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by high concentrations of nutrients, animal waste, toxics, and sediment.
    B. Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and ground water flow, circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of wetlands.
    C. Protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site construction.
    D. Provide standards for proper use of chemical herbicides within critical areas.
The city of Aberdeen shall monitor the application of best management practices to ensure that the standards and policies of this Chapter are adhered to.
Biodiversity – The variety of animal and plant life and its ecological processes and interconnections - represented by the richness of ecological systems and the life that depends on them, including human life and economies.
Breakaway wall – A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Buffer or buffer zone - An area contiguous to and protects a critical habitat that is required for the continued maintenance, functioning, and/or structural stability of a critical area.
Compensation project - Actions necessary to replace project-induced critical area and buffer losses, including land acquisition, planning, construction plans, monitoring, and contingency actions.
Compensatory mitigation - Replacing project-induced critical wetland habitat losses or impacts, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
    Restoration: Actions performed to reestablish wetland functional characteristics and processes that have been lost by alterations, activities, or catastrophic events within an area that no longer meets the definition of a wetland.
    Creation: Actions performed to intentionally establish a wetland at a site where it did not formerly exist.
    Enhancement: Actions performed to improve the condition of existing degraded wetlands so that the functions they provide are of a higher quality.
    Preservation: Actions taken to ensure the permanent protection of existing, high-quality wetlands.
Conservation easement – A legal agreement that the property owner enters into to restrict uses of the land. Such restrictions can include, but are not limited to, passive recreation uses such as trails or scientific uses and fences or other barriers to protect habitat. The easement is recorded on a property deed, runs with the land, and is legally binding on all present and future owners of the property, therefore, providing permanent or long-term protection.
Critical aquifer recharge area – Areas designated by WAC 365-190-080(2) that are determined to have a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(2).
Critical areas - Critical areas include any of the following areas or ecosystems: aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, and wetlands as defined in RCW 36.70A and this Chapter.
Critical area tract – Land held in private ownership and retained in an open condition in perpetuity for the protection of critical areas. Lands within this type of dedication may include, but are not limited to, portions and combinations of forest habitats, grasslands, shrub steppe, on-site watersheds, one hundred-year floodplains, shorelines or shorelines of statewide significance, riparian areas, and wetlands.
Critical facility – A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding, inundation, or impact from a hazard event might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools; nursing homes; hospitals; police, fire and emergency response installations; and installations that produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Critical species – All animal and plant species listed by the state or federal government as threatened or endangered.
Cumulative impacts or effects – The combined, incremental effects of human activity on ecological or critical areas functions and values. Cumulative impacts result when the effects of an action are added to or interact with other effects in a particular place and within a particular time. It is the combination of these effects, and any resulting environmental degradation, that should be the focus of cumulative impact analysis and changes to policies and permitting decisions.
Developable area - A site or portion of a site that may be utilized as the location of development, in accordance with the rules of this Chapter.
Development - Any activity upon the land consisting of construction or alteration of structures; earth movement; dredging; dumping; grading; filling; mining; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; driving of piles; drilling operations; bulk heading; clearing of vegetation; or other land disturbance. Development includes the storage or use of equipment or materials inconsistent with the existing use. Development also includes approvals issued by the city of Aberdeen that binds land to specific patterns of use, including but not limited to, subdivisions, short subdivisions, zone changes, conditional use permits, and binding site plans. Development activity does not include the following activities:
    A. Interior building improvements.
    B. Exterior structure maintenance activities, including painting and roofing.
    C. Routine landscape maintenance of established, ornamental landscaping, such as lawn mowing, pruning, and weeding.
    D. Maintenance of the following existing facilities that does not expand the affected area: septic tanks (routine cleaning), wells, individual utility service connections, and individual cemetery plots in established and approved cemeteries.
Development permit – Any permit issued by the city of Aberdeen, or other authorized agency, for construction, land use, or the alteration of land.
Director – The director of the city of Aberdeen community development department, or other city staff granted by the Director the authority to act on behalf of the Director.
Eco-connectivity - Eco-connectivity is a physical feature of the land as well as a functional one. It is the geo-physical connection between natural habitat areas that allow fish and animals to move between feeding, reproductive, rearing, and resting areas. The functional connection is dependent on the physical connection.
Elevated building – A building that has no basement and its lowest elevated floor is raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.
Emergent wetland – A wetland with at least thirty percent of the surface area covered by erect, rooted, herbaceous vegetation extending above the water surface as the uppermost vegetative strata.
Erosion – The process whereby wind, rain, water, and other natural agents mobilize and transport particles.
Erosion hazard areas – At least those areas identified by the United State Department of Agriculture National Resources Conservation Service as having a “severe” rill and inter-rill erosion hazard.
Estuary – The zero-gradient sector of a watercourse where it flows into a standing body of water together with associated natural wetlands; tidal flows reverse flow in the wetland twice daily, determining its upstream limit. It is characterized by low bank channels (distributaries) branching off the main stream to form a broad, near-level delta; bank, bed and delta materials are silt and clay, banks are stable, vegetation ranges from marsh to forest, and water is usually brackish due to daily mixing and layering of fresh and salt water.
Exotic - Any species of plants or animals, which are (not listed on the state plant list) foreign to the planning area.
Extreme slope hazard areas – Those areas with pre-development slope greater than thirty percent.
Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas – Areas necessary for maintaining species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created as designated by WAC 365-190-080(5). These areas are guided by the state’s Priority Habitats and Species list and include the following:
    A. Areas with which state or federally designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association.
    B. Habitats of local importance, including but not limited to, areas designated as priority habitat by the Department of Fish and Wildlife.
    C. Naturally occurring ponds under twenty acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat, including those artificial ponds intentionally created from dry areas in order to mitigate impacts to ponds.
    D. Waters of the state, including lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington.
    E. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity.
    F. State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas.
    G. Land essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and open spaces.
Fish habitat – Habitat that is used by fish at any life stage at any time of the year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish that could be recovered by restoration or management and includes off-channel habitat.
Flood or flooding - A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance map – The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and include the risk premium zones applicable to the community. Also known as “flood insurance rate map” or “FIRM.”
Flood insurance study – The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain - The total land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake subject to inundation by the base flood.
Flood protection elevation – The elevation that is one foot above the base flood elevation.
Flood resistant material – Materials designed to be resistant to the impacts associated with flooding and defined and described in detail in the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Technical Bulletin #2-93, 1993 and FEMA publication FEMA-348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage.
Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the surface water elevation more that one foot. Also known as the "zero rise floodway."
Forested wetland – A wetland with at least thirty percent of the surface area covered by woody vegetation greater than twenty feet in height that is at least partially rooted within the wetland.
Formation – An assemblage of earth materials grouped together into a unit that is convenient for description or mapping.
Formation, confining – The relatively impermeable formation immediately overlying a confined aquifer.
Frequently flooded areas – Lands in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year and those lands that provide important flood storage, conveyance and attenuation functions, as determined by the Director in accordance with WAC 365-190-080(3). Frequently flooded areas perform important hydrologic functions and may present a risk to persons and property. Classifications of frequently flooded areas include, at a minimum, the one hundred-year floodplain designations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the National Flood Insurance Program.
Functions and values – The beneficial roles served by critical areas including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement, fish and wildlife habitat, food chain support, flood storage, conveyance and attenuation, ground water recharge and discharge, erosion control, wave attenuation, protection from hazards, historical and archaeological and aesthetic value protection, and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority.
Geologically hazardous areas - Areas that may not be suited to development consistent with public health, safety or environmental standards because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events as designated by WAC 365-190-080(4). Types of geologically hazardous areas include: erosion, landslide, seismic, mine, and volcanic hazards.
Ground water - Water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land or a surface water body.
Ground Water Management Area – A specific geographic area or subarea designated pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC for which a ground water management program is required.
Ground water management program – A comprehensive program designed to protect ground water quality, to ensure ground water quantity, and to provide for efficient management of water resources while recognizing existing ground water rights and meeting future needs consistent with local and state objectives, policies, and authorities within a designated ground water management area or subarea and developed pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC.
Growth Management Act - RCW 36.70A and 36.70B, as amended.
Habitat conservation areas – Areas designated as fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.
Habitats of local importance – These areas include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a given species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long-term. These might include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These might also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alterations such as cliffs, talus, and wetlands (WAC 365-190-030).
Hazard areas – Areas designated as frequently flooded areas or geologically hazardous areas due to potential for erosion, landslide, seismic activity, extreme slopes, or other geological condition.
Hazardous substances – Any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the physical, chemical, or biological properties described in WAC 173-303-090 or 173-303-100.
High intensity land use – Land uses which are associated with high levels of human disturbance or substantial habitat impacts including, but not limited to, commercial uses, industrial uses, and residential uses with five or more units per acre.
High quality wetlands – Those wetlands that meet the following criteria:
    A. No, or isolated, human alteration of the wetland topography.
    B. No humancaused alteration of the hydrology or the wetland appears to have recovered from the alteration.
    C. Low cover and frequency of exotic plant species.
    D. Relatively little humanrelated disturbance of the native vegetation, or recovery from past disturbance.
    E. If the wetland system is degraded, it still contains a viable and high quality example of a native wetland community.
    F. No known major water quality problems.
Historic condition – Condition of the land, including flora, fauna, soil, topography, and hydrology, that existed before the area and vicinity were developed or altered by human activity.
Hydraulic project approval (HPA) – A permit issued by the state Department of Fish and Wildlife for projects that affect the bed or flow of waters of the state in accordance with Chapter 77.55 RCW and WAC 220.110.
Hydric soil – A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. The presence of hydric soil shall be determined following the methods described in the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual.
Hydrologic soil groups – Soils grouped according to their runoff-producing characteristics under similar storm and cover conditions. Properties that influence runoff potential are depth to seasonally high water table, intake rate and permeability after prolonged wetting, and depth to a low permeable layer. Hydrologic soil groups are normally used in equations that estimate runoff from rainfall but can be used to estimate a rate of water transmission in soil. There are four hydrologic soil groups:
    A. Low runoff potential and a high rate of infiltration potential.
    B. Moderate infiltration potential and a moderate rate of runoff potential.
    C. Slow infiltration potential and a moderate to high rate of runoff potential.
    D. High runoff potential and very slow infiltration and water transmission rates.
Hydrophytic vegetation – Macrophytic plant life growing in water or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. The presence of hydrophytic vegetation shall be determined following the methods described in the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual.
Hyporheic zone – The saturated zone located beneath and adjacent to streams that contains some portion of surface waters, serves as a filter for nutrients, and maintains water quality.
Impervious surface – A hard surface area that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater.
Inkind compensation – Same species, habitat type, and function impacted. If the impacted habitat is disturbed, it means replacement with the natural habitat that would occur. It does not mean replacement "incategory."
Isolated wetlands – Those wetlands that are outside of and not contiguous to any one hundred-year floodplain of a lake, river or stream, and have no contiguous hydric soil or hydrophytic vegetation between the wetland and any surface water.
Infiltration – The downward entry of water into the immediate surface of soil.
Injection well(s)
    A. Class I. A well used to inject industrial, commercial, or municipal waste fluids beneath the lowermost formation containing, within one quarter mile of the well bore, an underground source of drinking water.
    B. Class II. A well used to inject fluids
        1. Brought to the surface in connection with conventional oil or natural gas exploration or production and may be commingled with wastewaters from gas plants that are an integral part of production operations, unless those waters are classified as dangerous wastes at the time of injection;
        2. For enhanced recovery of oil or natural gas; or
        3. For storage of hydrocarbons that are liquid at standard temperature and pressure.
    C. Class III. A well used for extraction of minerals, including but not limited to the injection of fluids for:
        1. In-situ production of uranium or other metals that have not been conventionally mined;
        2. Mining of sulfur by Frasch process; or
        3. Solution mining of salts or potash.
    D. Class IV. A well used to inject dangerous or radioactive waste fluids.
    E. Class V. All injection wells not included in Classes I, II, III, or IV.
Inter-rill - Inter-rills are areas subject to sheetwash.
Joint Aquatic Resource Permits Application (JARPA) – A single application form that may be used to apply for hydraulic project approvals, shoreline management permits, approvals of exceedance of water quality standards, water quality certifications, Coast Guard bridge permits, Department of Natural Resources use authorization, and Army Corps of Engineers permits.
Land use, high intensity – See “High intensity land use.”
Land use, low intensity – See “Low intensity land use.”
Land use, moderate intensity – See “Moderate intensity land use.”
Landslide hazard areas – Areas that are potentially subject to risk of mass movement due to a combination of geologic landslide resulting from a combination of geologic, topographic, and hydrologic factors. These areas are typically susceptible to landslides because of a combination of factors including: bedrock, soil, slope gradient, slope aspect, geologic structure, ground water, or other factors.
Levee – A levee is a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Long-term commercial significance - Includes the growing capacity, productivity, and soil composition of the land for long-term commercial production, in consideration with the land’s proximity to population areas, and the possibility of more intense uses of the land. (RCW 36.70A.030(10); WAC 365-190-030(11)).
Low intensity land use – Land uses which are associated with low levels of human disturbance or low habitat impacts, including, but not limited to, passive recreation uses, open space uses, and residential uses with four or fewer units per acre.
Lowest floor – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, which is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable requirements of this Chapter.
Manufactured home – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision – A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Minerals – Materials including gravel, sand, and valuable metallic substances. (RCW 36.70A.030(11); WAC 365-190-030(12)).
Mitigation - Avoiding, minimizing or compensating for adverse critical areas impacts. Mitigation, in the following order of preference, is:
    A. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action
    B. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts.
    C. Rectifying the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project.
    D. Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through engineered or other methods.
    E. Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action.
    F. Compensating for the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat or critical areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments.
    G. Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation and taking remedial action when necessary.
Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures.
Moderate intensity land use – Land uses which are associated with moderate levels of human disturbance or substantial habitat impacts including, but not limited to, low density residential (no more than one home per five acres), active recreation, and moderate agricultural land uses.
Monitoring - Evaluating the impacts of development proposals on the biological, hydrological, and geological elements of such systems and assessing the performance of required mitigation measures throughout the collection and analysis of data by various methods for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems and features and includes gathering baseline data.
Native vegetation - Plant species that are indigenous to the area in question. Plants that are not listed in Chapter 16-750 WAC.
Native growth habitat area – An area where native vegetation is preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including, but not limited to, controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering and protecting plants and animal habitat;
Natural waters – Waters, excluding water conveyance systems, that are artificially constructed and actively maintained for irrigation, or any waters of the state.
Non-conformity – A legally established existing use or legally constructed structure that is not in compliance with current regulations.
Non-indigenous – See “exotic.”
Off-site mitigation – To replace critical areas away from the site on which a critical area has been impacted.
On-site mitigation – On or adjacent to the project impact site or in the same stream reach, based on resource needs.
Ordinary high water mark (OHM) - OHM on all lakes, streams, and tidal water is that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the department: PROVIDED, That in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining salt water shall be the line of mean higher high tide and the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water (RCW 90.58.030).
Outofkind replacement – To replace critical areas with substitute critical areas whose functions and values do not closely approximate those destroyed or degraded. It does not refer to replacement "outofcategory."
Permeability – The capacity of an aquifer or confining bed to transmit water. It is a property of the aquifer or confining bed and is independent of the force causing movement.
Porous soil types – Soils, as identified by the National Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, that contain voids, pores, interstices, or other openings which allow the passing of water.
Potable water – Water that is safe and palatable for human use.
Practical alternative – An alternative that is available and capable of being carried out after taking into consideration, cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes, and having fewer impacts to critical areas.
Primary association area – The area used on a regular basis by, is in close association with, or is necessary for the proper functioning of the habitat of a critical species. Regular basis means that the habitat area is normally, or usually known to contain a critical species, or based on known habitat requirements of the species, the area is likely to contain the critical species. Regular basis is species and population dependent. Species that exist in low numbers may be present infrequently yet rely on certain habitat types.
Priority habitat - Habitat type or elements with unique or significant value to one or more species as classified by the Department of Fish and Wildlife. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type or dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element (WAC 173-26-020(34)).
Project area – All areas within fifty feet of the area proposed to be disturbed, altered, or used by the proposed activity or the construction of any proposed structures.
Qualified professional – A person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology or related field, and two years of related work experience.
    A. A qualified professional for habitats or wetlands must have a degree in biology and professional experience related to the subject species.
    B. A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional geologist (preferred) or engineer, licensed in the state of Washington.
    C. A qualified professional for critical aquifer recharge areas means a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments.
Recharge – The process involved in the absorption and addition of water to ground water.
Reclaimed water – Municipal wastewater effluent that has been adequately and reliability treated so that it is suitable for beneficial use. Following treatment, it is no longer considered wastewater (treatment levels and water quality requirements are given in the water reclamation and reuse standards adopted by the state Departments of Ecology and Health).
Recreation vehicle – A vehicle that is:
    A. Built on a single chassis.
    B. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection.
    C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck.
    D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal. use.
Regulatory flood – A level of flooding that a regulatory agency’s design regulations apply to.
Repair or maintenance - An activity that restores the character, scope, size, and design of a serviceable area, structure, or land use to its previously authorized and undamaged condition. Activities that change the character, size, or scope of a project beyond the original design and drain, dredge, fill, flood, or otherwise alter critical areas are not included in this definition.
Restoration – Measures taken to restore an altered or damaged natural feature including:
A. Active steps taken to restore damaged wetlands, streams, protected habitat, or their buffers to the functioning condition that existed prior to an unauthorized alteration.
B. Actions performed to reestablish structural and functional characteristics of the critical area that have been lost by alteration, past management activities, or catastrophic events.
Rills - Steep-sided channels resulting from accelerated erosion. A rill is generally a few inches deep and not wide enough to be an obstacle to farm machinery. Rill erosion tends to occur on slopes, particularly steep slopes with poor vegetative cover.
Riparian habitat – Any area adjacent to surface water which possesses elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems that mutually influence each other. The width of these areas extends from the OHW to that portion of the terrestrial landscape that directly influences the aquatic ecosystem by providing shade, fine or large woody material, nutrients, organic and inorganic debris, terrestrial insects, or habitat for riparian-associated wildlife. It includes the entire extent of the floodplain and the extent of vegetation adapted to wet conditions as well as adjacent upland plant communities that directly influence aquatic ecosystem. Riparian habitat areas include those riparian areas severely altered or damaged due to human development activities.
River – See “Watercourse.”
Scientific process – A valid scientific process is one that produces reliable information useful in understanding the consequences of a decision. The characteristics of a valid scientific process are as follows:
    A. Peer review. The information has been critically reviewed by other qualified scientific experts in that scientific discipline.
    B. Methods. The methods that were used are standardized in the pertinent scientific discipline or the methods have been appropriately peer-reviewed to assure their reliability and validity.
    C. Logical conclusions and reasonable inferences. The conclusions presented are based on reasonable assumptions supported by other studies and are logically and reasonably derived from the assumptions and supported by the data presented.
    D. Quantitative analysis. The data have been analyzed using appropriate statistical or quantitative methods.
    E. Context. The assumptions, analytical techniques, data, and conclusions are appropriately framed with respect to the prevailing body of pertinent scientific knowledge.
    F. References. The assumptions, techniques, and conclusions are well referenced with citations to pertinent existing information.
Section 404 Permit – A permit issued by the Corps of Engineers for the placement of dredge or fill material or clearing in waters of the U.S., including wetlands, in accordance with 33 USC § 1344.
Seeps - A spot where water oozes from the earth, often forming the source of a small stream.
Seismic hazard areas – Areas that are subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction.
Serviceable - Presently usable.
SEPA – Washington State Environmental Policy Act, Chapter 43.21C RCW .
Shorelines - All of the water areas of the state as defined in RCW 90.58.030, including reservoirs and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them except:
    A. Shorelines of statewide significance.
    B. Shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is twenty cubic feet per second or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments.
    C. Shorelines on lakes less than twenty acres in size and wetlands associated with such small lakes.
Shorelines of the state - The total of all “shorelines,” as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(d), and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the state, as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(c).
Shorelines of statewide significance - Those areas defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e).
Shorelands or shoreland areas - Those lands extending landward for two hundred feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters which are subject to the provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW.
Significant portion of its range - That portion of a species range likely to be essential to the long-term survival of the population in Washington.
Soil survey – The most recent soil survey for the local area or county by the National Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Sole source aquifer – See “Aquifer, sole source.”
Special flood hazard areas – The land in the floodplain within an area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designations of special flood hazard areas on flood insurance map(s) always include the letters A or V.
Special protection areas – Aquifer recharge areas defined by WAC 173-200-090 that require special consideration or increased protection because of unique characteristics, including, but not limited to:
    A. Ground waters that support an ecological system requiring more stringent criteria than drinking water standards.
    B. Ground water recharge areas and wellhead protection areas that are vulnerable to pollution because of hydrogeologic characteristics.
    C. Sole source aquifer status.
Species - Any group of animals classified as a species or subspecies as commonly accepted by the scientific community.
Species, endangered - Any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed by the state or federal government as an endangered species.
Species of local importance – Those species of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or that are game species.
Species, priority - Any fish or wildlife species requiring protective measures and/or management guidelines to ensure their persistence as genetically viable population levels as classified by the Department of Fish and Wildlife, including endangered, threatened, sensitive, candidate and monitor species, and those of recreational, commercial, or tribal importance.
Species, threatened - Any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats and is listed by the state or federal government as a threatened species.
Stream – See “Watercourse.”
Sub-drainage basin or subbasin - The drainage area of the highest order stream containing the subject property impact area. Stream order is the term used to define the position of a stream in the hierarchy of tributaries in the watershed. The smallest streams are the highest order (first order) tributaries. These are the upper watershed streams and have no tributaries of their own. When two first order streams meet, they form a second order stream, and when two second order streams meet they become a third order stream, and so on.
Substantial damage – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement – Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: before the improvement or repair is started; or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
Take – To harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.
Tsunami – A series of waves produced when a water of body is rapidly displaced, especially as ocean waves generated by submarine earth movement or volcanic eruption.
Unavoidable – Adverse impacts that remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and minimization have been achieved.
Vulnerability – The combined effect of susceptibility to contamination and the presence of potential contaminants.
Watercourse – Any portion of a channel, bed, bank, or bottom waterward of the ordinary high water line of waters of the state including areas in which fish may spawn, reside, or through which they may pass, and tributary waters with defined beds or banks, which influence the quality of fish habitat downstream. This definition includes watercourses that flow on an intermittent basis or which fluctuate in level during the year and applies to the entire bed of such watercourse whether or not the water is at peak level. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, stormwater run-off devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses, except where they exist in a natural watercourse that has been altered by humans.
Water dependent – A use or portion of a use that cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water, but is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. A use that can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water. Examples of water dependent uses include ship cargo terminal loading areas; fishing; ferry and passenger terminals; barge loading, ship building, and dry docking facilities; marinas, moorage, and boat launching facilities; aquaculture; float plane operations; surface water intake; and sanitary sewer and storm drain outfalls.
Water resource inventory area (WRIA) – One of sixty-two watersheds in the state of Washington, each composed of the drainage areas of a stream or streams, as established in Chapter 173-500 WAC as it existed on January 1, 1997.
Water table – That surface in an unconfined aquifer at which the pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the aquifer just far enough to hold standing water.
Water table aquifer – see “Aquifer, unconfined.”
Water typing system - Waters classified according to WAC 222-16-030 including the following:
    A. "Type S Water" means all waters, within their bankfull width, as inventoried as "shorelines of the state" under chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to chapter 90.58 RCW including periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands.
    B. "Type F Water" means segments of natural waters other than Type S Waters, which are within the bankfull widths of defined channels and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of one half acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat or are described by one of the following four categories:
        1. Waters, which are diverted for domestic use by more than ten residential or camping units or by a public accommodation facility licensed to serve more than ten persons, where such diversion is determined by the department to be a valid appropriation of water and the only practical water source for such users. Such waters shall be considered to be Type F Water upstream from the point of such diversion for one thousand five hundred feet or until the drainage area is reduced by fifty percent, whichever is less.
        2. Waters, which are diverted for use by federal, state, tribal, or private fish hatcheries. Such waters shall be considered Type F Water upstream from the point of diversion for one thousand five hundred feet, including tributaries if highly significant for protection of downstream water quality. The department may allow additional harvest beyond the requirements of Type F Water designation provided the department determines after a landowner-requested on-site assessment by the Department of Fish and Wildlife, Department of Ecology, the affected tribes, and interested parties that:
            (a) The management practices proposed by the landowner will adequately protect water quality for the fish hatchery; and
            (b) Such additional harvest meets the requirements of the water type designation that would apply in the absence of the hatchery.
        3. Waters, which are within a federal, state, local, or private campground having more than ten camping units provided that the water shall not be considered to enter a campground until it reaches the boundary of the park lands available for public use and comes within one hundred feet of a camping unit, trail or other park improvement.
        4. Riverine ponds, wall-based channels, and other channel features that are used by fish for off-channel habitat. These areas are critical to the maintenance of optimum survival of fish. This habitat shall be identified based on the following criteria:
            (a) The site must be connected to a fish habitat stream and accessible during some period of the year; and
            (b) The off-channel water must be accessible to fish.
    C. "Type Np Water" means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial nonfish habitat streams. Perennial streams are flowing waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall and include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow.
    D. "Type Ns Water" means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of the defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np Waters. These are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np Water. Ns Waters must be physically connected by an above-ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np Waters.
    E. For purposes of this Section:
        1. "Residential unit" means a home, apartment, residential condominium unit, or mobile home, serving as the principal place of residence.
        2. "Camping unit" means an area intended and used for:
            (a) Overnight camping or picnicking by the public containing at least a fireplace, picnic table and access to water and sanitary facilities; or
            (b) A permanent home or condominium unit or mobile home not qualifying as a "residential unit" because of part time occupancy.
        3. "Public accommodation facility" means a business establishment open to and licensed to serve the public, such as a restaurant, tavern, motel or hotel.
        4. "Natural waters" only excludes water conveyance systems which are artificially constructed and actively maintained for irrigation.
        5. “Seasonal low flow" and "seasonal low water" mean the conditions of the seven-day, two-year low water situation, as measured or estimated by accepted hydrologic techniques recognized by the department.
        6. "Channel width and gradient" means a measurement over a representative section of at least five hundred linear feet with at least ten evenly spaced measurement points along the normal stream channel but excluding unusually wide areas of negligible gradient such as marshy or swampy areas, beaver ponds and impoundments. Channel gradient may be determined utilizing stream profiles plotted from United States Geological Survey topographic maps (see Board Manual Section 23).
        7. "Intermittent streams" means those segments of streams that normally go dry.
        8. "Fish habitat" means habitat which is used by any fish at any life stage at any time of the year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish which could be recovered by restoration or management and includes off-channel habitat.
        Well – A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole whose depth is greater that the largest surface dimension for the purpose of withdrawing or injecting water or other liquids.
        Wellhead protection area (WHPA) – The portion of a zone of contribution for a well, wellfield, or spring, as defined using criteria established by the state Department of Ecology.
        Wetlands – Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. For identifying and delineating a wetland, local government shall use the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual.
        Wetland category – Wetlands that are categorized into Category I, II, III or IV based upon the categorization procedures in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington (Hruby T. 2004).
        Wetland classes, classes of wetlands, or wetland types – The descriptive classes of the wetlands taxonomic classification system of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cowardin, et al. 1979).
        Wetland edge – The boundary of a wetland as delineated based on the definitions contained in this Chapter.
        Wetlands mitigation bank – A site where wetlands are restored, created, enhanced, or in exceptional circumstances, preserved expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts to similar resources.
        Zone of contribution – The area surrounding a well or spring that encompasses all areas or features that supply ground water recharge to the well or spring.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.014 Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be judged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered. The decision shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any part thereof and to this end the provisions of each clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this law are hereby declared to be severable.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.015 Effective Date.
After passage by the City Council of Aberdeen, this Chapter shall take effect on March 2, 2009.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.020 Critical Areas.
A. The city shall regulate all uses, activities, and developments within, adjacent to, or likely to affect, one or more critical areas, consistent with the best available science and the provisions herein.
B. Critical areas regulated by this Chapter include:
    1. Critical aquifer recharge areas as designated in Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas [Chapter 14.100.100];
    2. Wetlands as designated in Wetlands Critical Areas [Chapter 14.100.200];
    3. Frequently flooded areas as designated in Frequently Flooded Areas [Chapter 14.100.300];
    4. Geologically hazardous areas as designated in Geologically Hazardous Areas [Chapter 14.100.400]; and
    5. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas as designated in Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas [Chapter 14.100.500].
C. All areas within the city meeting the definition of one or more critical areas, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
D. Areas Adjacent to Critical Areas Subject to Regulation. Areas adjacent to critical areas shall be considered to be within the jurisdiction of these requirements and regulations to support the intent of this Chapter and ensure protection of the functions and values of critical areas. Adjacent shall mean any activity located:
    1. On a site immediately adjoining a critical area;
    2. A distance equal to or less than the required critical area buffer width and building setback;
    3. A distance equal to or less than one-half mile (2,640 feet) from a bald eagle nest;
    4. A distance equal to or less than three hundred (300) feet upland from a stream, wetland, or water body;
    5. Within the floodway, floodplain, or channel migration zone; or
    6. A distance equal to or less than two hundred (200) feet from a critical aquifer recharge area.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.021 Critical Area Maps.
A. The approximate location and extent of critical areas will be displayed on various inventory maps available at the city Community Development Department. The Director shall have the authority to update these maps or add additional maps as inventories are completed in compliance with the requirements of the Growth Management Act. These maps include:
    1. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 1. Wetlands;
    2. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 2. Frequently Flooded Areas;
    3. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 3. Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas;
    4. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 4. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas;
    5. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 5: Geologic Hazard Areas. Liquefaction and Landslide;
    6. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 6: Geologic Hazard Areas. Seismic/Shaking Potential;
    7. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 6: Geologic Hazard Areas. Erosion Potential;
    8. City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 6: Geologic Hazard Areas. Steep Slopes.
B. Maps and inventory lists are not complete and are to be considered only as guides to the general location and extent of critical areas. Maps will be used for a preliminary determination to suggest the presence or absence of a critical area. However, where additional properties containing features meeting the definitions of critical areas contained in this Chapter are identified by the city, properties containing such critical areas shall be subjected to the requirements of this Chapter. Where mapped areas are confirmed through an advance determination under this Chapter or through site visits and analysis of other available data as part of a permit application to not actually contain critical areas, the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.022 Best Available Science.
A. Protect functions and values of critical areas with special consideration to anadromous fish. Critical area reports and decisions to alter critical areas shall rely on the best available science to protect the functions and values of critical areas and must give special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish, such as salmon and bull trout, and their habitat.
B. Best available science to be consistent with criteria. The best available science is that scientific information applicable to the critical area prepared by local, state, or federal natural resource agencies, a qualified scientific professional, or team of qualified scientific professionals that is consistent with criteria established in WAC 365-195-900 through WAC 365-195-925.
C. Characteristics of a valid scientific process. In the context of critical areas protection, a valid scientific process is one that produces reliable information useful in understanding the consequences of a local government’s regulatory decisions and in developing critical areas policies and development regulations that will be effective in protecting the functions and values of critical areas. To determine whether information received during the permit review process is reliable scientific information, the Director shall determine whether the source of the information displays the characteristics of a valid scientific process. Such characteristics are as follows:
    1. Peer review. The information has been critically reviewed by other persons who are qualified scientific experts in that scientific discipline. The proponents of the information have addressed the criticism of the peer reviewers. Publication in a refereed scientific journal usually indicates that the information has been appropriately peer-reviewed.
    2. Methods. The methods used to obtain the information are clearly stated and reproducible. The methods are standardized in the pertinent scientific discipline or, if not, the methods have been appropriately peer-reviewed to ensure their reliability and validity.
    3. Logical conclusions and reasonable inferences. The conclusions presented are based on reasonable assumptions supported by other studies and consistent with the general theory underlying the assumptions. The conclusions are logically and reasonably derived from the assumptions and supported by the data presented. Any gaps in information and inconsistencies with other pertinent scientific information are adequately explained.
    4. Quantitative analysis. The data have been analyzed using appropriate statistical or quantitative methods.
    5. Context. The information is placed in proper context. The assumptions, analytical techniques, data, and conclusions are appropriately framed with respect to the prevailing body of pertinent scientific knowledge.
    6. References. The assumptions, analytical techniques, and conclusions are well referenced with citations to relevant, credible literature and other pertinent existing information.
D. Nonscientific information. Nonscientific information may supplement scientific information, but it is not an adequate substitute for valid and available scientific information. Common sources of nonscientific information include the following:
    1. Anecdotal Information. One or more observations that are not part of an organized scientific effort (for example, “I saw a grizzly bear in that area while I was hiking”);
    2. Non-Expert Opinion. Opinion of a person who is not a qualified scientific expert in a pertinent scientific discipline (for example, “I do not believe there are grizzly bears in that area”); and
    3. Hearsay. Information repeated from communication with others (for example, “At a lecture last week, Dr. Smith said there were no grizzly bears in that area”).
E. Absence of valid scientific information. Where there is an absence of valid scientific information or incomplete scientific information relating to a critical area leading to uncertainty about the risk to critical area function of permitting an alteration of or impact to the critical area, the Director shall:
    1. Take a “precautionary or a no-risk approach,” that strictly limits development and land use activities until the uncertainty is sufficiently resolved; and
    2. Require application of an effective adaptive management program that relies on scientific methods to evaluate how well regulatory and non-regulatory actions protect the critical area. An adaptive management program is a formal and deliberate scientific approach to taking action and obtaining information in the face of uncertainty. An adaptive management program shall:
        a. Address funding for the research component of the adaptive management program;
        b. Change course based on the results and interpretation of new information that resolves uncertainties; and
        c. Commit to the appropriate timeframe and scale necessary to reliably evaluate regulatory and non-regulatory actions affecting protection of critical areas and anadromous fisheries.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.030 Administrative Procedures.
The administrative procedures followed during the critical area review process shall conform to the standards and requirements of the city. This shall include, but not be limited to, timing, appeals, and fees associated with applications covered by this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.031 Fees.
A. The city may, by resolution establish fees for preparation of a critical area identification form, critical area review processing, and other services provided by the city as required by this Chapter. If the City chooses to charge fees, these fees shall be based on the anticipated sum of direct costs incurred by the city for any individual development or action and may be established as a sliding scale that will recover all of the city costs including the enforcement of these code provisions. Basis for these fees shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of engineering and planning review time, cost of inspection time, costs for administration, and any other special costs attributable to the critical area review process.
B. Unless otherwise indicated in this Chapter, the applicant shall be responsible for the initiation, preparation, submission, and expense of all required reports, assessment(s), studies, plans, reconnaissance(s), peer review(s) by qualified consultants, and other work prepared in support of or necessary to review the application.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.032 Administrative Rules.
The city of Aberdeen Department of Community Development is authorized to adopt such administrative rules and regulations as necessary and appropriate to perform critical area review, implement this Chapter, and to prepare and require the use of such forms as necessary for its administration. The Director may grant the authority to perform critical area review, and compliance and enforcement activities pursuant to this Chapter to other City staff.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.034 Permit Processing.
A. The approval or denial of an activity or modification within a critical area shall be an administrative action of the Director for actions requiring only a building permit or other permit action requiring only ministerial action as defined by relevant city codes. The review process will be integrated with the review of the underlying permit.
B. Public notice. Review of a proposal under this Chapter will require public notice if any of the following criteria are met:
    1. If a project requires another permitting action by the city that requires a public hearing, consideration of critical areas will be integrated with the underlying permitting process. If the Director determines that critical areas may be affected by the proposal and a critical area report is required, public notice of the application shall include a description of the critical area that might be affected and state that a critical area report(s) is required.
    2. Approval of a reasonable use exception under Section 14.100.051 or variance under Section 14.100.053 will require public notice, provided that the Director may waive this requirement for additions or alterations to:
        a. Existing single-family residential units;
        b. Existing commercial and mixed-use units with a footprint of less than 4,000 square feet prior to the alteration or addition.
C. Preliminary consultation. Any person preparing to submit an application for development or use of land that may be regulated by the provisions of this Chapter may conduct an optional consultation meeting with the Director prior to submitting an application for development or other approval. At this meeting, the Director shall discuss the requirements of this Chapter; provide critical area maps, scientific information, and other source materials; outline the review process; and work with the activity proponent to identify any potential concerns that might arise during the review process, in addition to discussing other permit procedures and requirements.
D. The city shall perform the process discussed below as part of the critical area review:
    1. Verify the information submitted by the applicant for the applicable permit;
    2. Evaluate the project area and vicinity for critical areas. Such evaluation may include a site visit if the Director has reason to believe that a project may involve a critical area;
    3. For wetland and/or fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, the city may require that boundaries be verified and mapped by a qualified professional. The scale of the boundary information shall be the same as the city maps, and such boundaries shall be submitted to the city as part of the application for the applicable permit if the project is:
        a. Within two hundred feet of a wetland, or fish and wildlife critical area; and
        b. Will not be receiving a no impact-waiver as provided in Section 14.100.034.E below.
    4. The Director may require that the applicant mark the following boundaries on the site to reflect the proposed construction plan: the location of the building footprint, critical area(s) boundaries, the outer extent of required critical area buffers, areas to remain undisturbed, and trees and vegetation to be removed.
        a. Field markings are intended to prevent disturbance of critical areas and buffers and may include such items such as temporary fences;
        b. If field markings are required by the Director, the applicant shall obtain the Director’s approval on the field markings before beginning any permitted activities;
        c. The applicant shall maintain the field markings for critical area(s), critical area buffers, and areas to remain undisturbed throughout the duration of the permit.
    5. Determine whether the proposed project is likely to impact the functions or values of critical areas.
    6. Determine if the proposed project adequately addresses the impacts and avoids impacts to the critical area associated with the project.
E. Critical areas present, but no impact - waiver. If the Director determines that there are critical areas within or adjacent to the project area, but that the proposed activity is unlikely to degrade the functions or values of the critical area, the Director may waive the requirement for a critical area report or other applicable information. If the waiver involves a wetland, the Director may require a wetland category rating be completed prior to determining whether a waiver can be granted. A waiver may be granted if there is substantial evidence that all of the following requirements will be met:
    1. There will be no alteration of the critical area or buffer;
    2. The development proposal will not impact the critical area in a manner contrary to the purpose, intent, and requirements of this Chapter; and
    3. The proposal is consistent with other applicable regulations and standards.
    A summary of this analysis and the findings shall be included in any staff report or decision on the underlying permit.
F. Independent Review. Based on a review of the information contained in the critical area report and the conditions of the development proposal site, the Director may require independent review of any such study. This independent review shall be performed by a qualified professional selected by the city and paid for by the applicant. The purpose of such independent review is to assist the city in evaluating the effects on critical areas that may be caused by a development proposal and to facilitate the decision making process. Independent review may also include a request for consultation with the state of Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Washington State Department of Ecology, state Department of Natural Resources, or other appropriate local, state, federal, or tribal agency.
G. Critical Areas Present and Potential Impact Likely. If the Director determines that the proposed project is within, adjacent to, or is likely to impact a critical area, the Director shall:
    1. Assign the appropriate level of review for the activity
        a. Notification Required. Activities and uses that require prior notification to the Director must comply with the standards of this Chapter, and may be required to comply with additional requirements as deemed necessary by the Director. The Director may require review and submittal of a critical area report following notification of emergency actions undertaken under Section 14.100.050.C.
        b. Review Required. Activities and uses that require review by the Director, but that are not required to submit a Critical Areas Report.
        c. Critical Areas Report Required. Activities and uses that require review by the Director and that are required to submit a critical areas report.
    2. Notify the applicant if a critical area report, SEPA checklist, and other applicable information must be submitted prior to further review of the project and indicate each of the critical area types that should be addressed.
    3. Review and evaluate the critical area report and other applicable information to determine whether the development proposal conforms to the purposes and performance standards and requirements of this Chapter.
    4. Assess potential impacts to the critical area and determine if they are necessary and unavoidable.
    5. Determine if any mitigation, monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the functions and values of the critical area and public health, safety, and welfare concerns consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives, and requirements of this Chapter.
    6. Prepare a Determination. A summary of this analysis and the findings shall be included in any decision on the underlying permit(s). Critical area review findings may result in: a) no adverse impacts to critical area(s), b) list of applicable critical area(s) protection conditions for the underlying permit(s), or c) denial of permit based upon unavoidable impacts to critical area(s) functions and values.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.035 Appeals.
Any decision to approve, condition, or deny a development proposal or other activity based on the requirements of this Chapter may be appealed according to, and as part of, the appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 17.76 of the Municipal Code for the permit or approval involved. Construction under any critical area review approval issued by the city shall be stayed until the expiration of any appeal period or the final resolution by the city of any appeal which has been filed under this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.040 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, the provisions of this Chapter shall be considered to be the minimum requirements necessary, shall be liberally construed to serve the purpose of this ordinance, and shall be deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other provisions under state statute.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.041 Relationship to Other Regulations.
A. These critical area regulations shall apply as an overlay to the city’s zoning code (Title 17) and other applicable regulations adopted by the city, including but not limited to permitting processes, construction standards, building code, shorelines management program, and environmental review (SEPA) procedures. In the case of conflict among regulations, whichever provision or regulation provides the greater protection to the critical area involved shall apply.
B. These critical area regulations shall apply concurrently with review conducted under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), as locally adopted.
C. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter does not constitute compliance with other federal, state, and local regulations and permit requirements that may be required (for example, Shoreline Substantial Development Permits, Hydraulic Project Approvals permits, Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 permits, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits). The applicant is responsible for complying with these requirements, apart from the process established in this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.042 Multiple Designations.
Where any parcel may be designated as having more than one critical area designation, the development standards for each category of critical area must be met. Where there is conflict between development standards of critical area categories, the most restrictive standards shall apply.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.050 Exempt and Allowed Activities.
A. Exempt activities. The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
    1. Maintenance of existing, lawfully established landscaping and gardens within a regulated critical area or its buffer, including but not limited to mowing lawns, weeding, removal of noxious and invasive species, harvesting and replanting of garden crops, pruning and planting of ornamental vegetation or indigenous native species to maintain the condition and appearance of such areas as they existed prior to adoption of this code provided that native growth protection areas, mitigation sites, or other areas protected via conservation easements or similar restrictive covenants are not covered by this exception.
    2. Maintenance, repair, or replacement of an existing nonconforming structure pursuant to Section 14.100.052 that does not further alter or increase the impact to the sensitive area or buffer and results in no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed modification or replacement.
    3. Low impact activities such as hiking, canoeing, nature study, photography, fishing, education, or scientific research.
    4. The removal of noxious weed species designated by Washington State or the local weed control authority, and the following species, with hand labor and light equipment: English ivy (Hedera helix); Himalayan blackberry (Rubus discolor, R. procerus); and Evergreen blackberry (Rubus laciniatus).
    5. Minor site investigative work necessary for land use submittals, such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests, and other related activities, where such activities do not require construction of new roads, removal of native trees or shrubs, or displacement of more than five cubic yards of material. Investigations involving displacement of more than five cubic yards of material, including geotechnical soil borings, ground water monitoring wells, percolation tests, and similar activities shall require submittal of specific plans and restoration plans. In every case, impacts to the sensitive area shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored.
    6. The application of herbicides, pesticides, organic or mineral-derived fertilizers, or other hazardous substances, if necessary, in critical area buffers, provided that their use shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state and federal law.
    7. Public and private pedestrian trails provided they are subject to the following:
        a. The trail surface shall not exceed four feet in width;
        b. The trail surface shall consist of gravel or pervious materials, including boardwalks;
        c. The trail shall meet all other city requirements including water quality standards;
        d. Sensitive area and/or buffer widths shall be increased, where possible, equal to the width of the trail corridor, including disturbed areas;
        e. No state or local permits are required for the activity;
        f. The trail is not located in a wetland or fish and wildlife habitat critical area; and
        g. Trails proposed to be located in landslide or erosion hazard areas shall be constructed in a manner that does not increase the risk of landslide or erosion and in accordance with an approved geotechnical report.
    8. Forest practices governed by a valid forest practices permit granted by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources, except where:
        a. The lands have been or are proposed to be converted under a conversion option harvest plan to a use other than commercial forest product production as provided in RCW 76.09.050 and 76.09.240; or
        b. On lands which have been platted after January 1, 1960, as provided in RCW 76.09.050 and 76.09.240.
    9. Activities undertaken to comply with a United States Environmental Protection Agency superfund related order, or a Washington Department of Ecology order pursuant to the Model Toxics Control Act that specifically preempts local regulations in the findings of the order.
    10. Exempt activities in wetland critical areas according to Section 14.100.230.A.
B. Allowed activities requiring prior notification to the Director. Allowed activities are authorized within critical areas and buffers provided that the applicant provides a written notification to the Director, and the activity is conducted in accordance with the applicable standards noted below.
    1. Allowed activities shall avoid impacts to critical areas. All allowed activities shall use mitigation sequencing to avoid potential impacts to critical areas, using best management practices that result in the least amount of impact to the critical areas where practicable. Designation as an allowed activity does not give permission to degrade a critical area or ignore risk from natural hazards. Best management practices shall be used for tree and vegetation protection, construction management, erosion and sedimentation control, water quality protection, fish and wildlife protection, and regulation of chemical applications. The city may monitor the use of best management practices to ensure that the activity does not result in degradation to the critical area. Any incidental damage to, or alteration of, a critical area that is not a necessary outcome of the allowed activity shall be restored, rehabilitated, or replaced at the responsible party’s expense within one growing season.
    2. Form of notification. Submittal of drawings, plans or other documentation necessary to obtain city permits or approvals to conduct the work will satisfy the notification requirements. If no other city permits or approvals are required to conduct the work, notification containing the following information will be submitted to the Director:
        a. The name of the property owner and the person(s) doing the work;
        b. The address and location of where the work will be performed;
        c. Phone number where the persons conducting the work can be reached;
        d. The proposed start and end dates when the work will be performed;
        e. The type of critical area to be affected;
        f. Specific information describing the activity and the mitigation to be implemented to document that the activity will not result in increased risk to public health, safety and welfare, that adverse impacts to critical areas are minimized, and that disturbed areas are restored;
        g. The notification will be signed and dated by the person doing the work.
    3. The notification will be submitted at least ten full business days prior to initiating work. Unless otherwise specified, notification shall be valid for one year per activity provided that there is no change in the scope of the project including, but not limited to, the location and/or extent of the activity allowed under the notification process.
    4. Upon receipt of the notification, the Director may provide guidance on best management practices for tree and vegetation protection, construction management, erosion and sedimentation control, water quality protection, and use of chemical applications to be used in the execution of the following activities:
    5. The following activities as specified are authorized within critical areas and buffers provided that the applicant provides a written notification to the Director as described above.
        a. Replacement, modification, installation, or construction of utility facilities, lines, pipes, mains, equipment, or appurtenances, not including substations, when such facilities are located within the existing improved portion of the public right-of-way (road surface, shoulder, sidewalks, and fill slopes) or the improved portion of city-authorized private roadway provided that no fill or discharge occurs outside the existing improved area and with appropriate best management practices to control erosion, sedimentation and other potential impacts. Excluded is work within a water body or wetland, including but not limited to, culverts or bridge replacement or construction.
        b. Utility projects that have minor or short-duration impacts to critical areas and buffers, as determined by the Director in accordance with the criteria below, and which do not significantly impact the functions or values of a sensitive area(s) provided that such projects are constructed with best management practices, and appropriate restoration measures are provided. These activities shall not result in the transport of sediment or increased stormwater. Such allowed minor utility projects shall meet the following criteria:
            (i) There is no practical alternative to the proposed activity with less impact on sensitive areas;
            (ii) The activity involves the placement of a utility pole, street signs, anchor, or vault or other small component of a utility facility; and
            (iii) The activity involves disturbance of less than seventy-five square feet of the sensitive area and/or buffer.
        c. The removal of hazard trees from sensitive areas and buffers that are posing a threat to public safety, or an imminent risk of damage to a permanent structure provided that:
            (i) The applicant submits a report from a certified arborist or professional forester that documents the hazard provided that the Director may waive this requirement for any trees that are clearly dead, or dying, and provides a replanting schedule for the replacement trees.
            (ii) Tree cutting shall be limited to pruning and crown thinning, unless otherwise justified by a qualified professional. Where pruning or crown thinning is not sufficient to address the hazard, trees should be removed or converted to wildlife snags.
            (iii) If native vegetation is cut or removed from a sensitive area or buffer, it shall be left within the sensitive area or buffer where practicable unless removal is warranted due to safety considerations, the presence of an established disease infestation or other hazard, or because of access or maintenance needs if the area is a utility or access right-of-way.
            (iv) The landowner shall replace any trees that are removed with new trees at a ratio of two replacement trees for each tree removed (two-to-one) within one year in accordance with an approved restoration plan. Replacement trees shall be species that are native and indigenous to the site and a minimum of one inch in diameter-at-breast height (dbh) for deciduous trees and a minimum of three feet in height for evergreen trees as measured from the top of the root ball; provided, that the Director may allow smaller replacement trees with a higher replacement ratio.
            (v) Hazard trees that constitute an emergency may be removed or pruned by the landowner prior to receiving written approval from the city; provided, that within fourteen days following such action, the landowner shall submit a restoration plan that demonstrates compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
        d. Measures to control a fire or halt the spread of disease or damaging insects consistent with the state Forest Practices Act, Chapter 76.09 RCW provided that the removed vegetation shall be replaced in-kind or with similar native species within one year in accordance with an approved restoration plan.
        e. Maintenance, operation and/or repair of existing rights-of-way, trails, roads, utilities, dikes, ditches, levees, buildings and other facilities within critical areas and buffers provided that the activity does not further alter, impact, or encroach upon the sensitive area or buffer or further affect the functions of sensitive areas, and there is no increased risk to life or property as a result of the proposed operation, maintenance, or repair. Notification to the Director shall also include:
            (i) Type, timing, frequency and sequence of maintenance activity to be conducted;
            (ii) Type of equipment to be used (hand or mechanical);
            (iii) Manner in which the equipment will be used; and
            (iv) Best management practices to be used.
        f. Project and facilities for restoration and enhancement of ecological functions of critical areas and related resources may be allowed within critical areas and buffers, upon approval of a restoration and mitigation plan in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or for restoration of enhancement programs in an adopted shoreline restoration plan pursuant to Chapter 173-26 WAC, a watershed planning document prepared and adopted pursuant to Chapter 90.82 RCW, a watershed restoration project pursuant to RCW 89.08.460, a salmonid recovery plan, the salmon recovery board habitat project list, or identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife as essential for fish and wildlife habitat enhancement pursuant to RCW 77.55.290.
        g. Allowed activities in wetland critical areas according to Section 14.100.230.B.
        h. Allowed activities in geologically hazardous areas according to Section 14.100.420.A.
        i. Allowed activities in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas according to Section 14.100.530.A through M.
C. Emergency actions. Emergency actions are those activities necessary to prevent an immediate threat to life, to public health, safety, or welfare, or that pose an immediate risk of damage to private structures or improvements and that require remedial or preventative action in a time frame too short to allow for compliance with the procedural requirements of this Chapter.
    1. Emergency actions that create an impact on a critical area or its buffer shall be limited to those actions that are required to address the emergency and generally are limited to the actions necessary to remove the immediate threat. Additional actions to permanently address a deficiency generally do not qualify as emergency actions and require full compliance with the procedural requirements of this Chapter. Emergency actions also must be carried out in a manner that has the least feasible impact on the critical area or its buffer.
    2. The person or agency undertaking emergency action shall notify the Director within one working day following commencement of the emergency activity. Within fourteen days, the Director shall determine if the action taken was within the scope of the emergency actions allowed in this Subsection. If the Director determines that the action taken, or any part of the action taken, was beyond the scope of an allowed emergency action, then the enforcement provisions of Section 14.100.091 shall apply.
    3. After the emergency, the person or agency undertaking the action shall submit a critical area report to assess effects on critical areas and conduct necessary restoration and/or mitigation for any impacts to the critical area and buffers resulting from the emergency action in accordance with an approved critical area report and mitigation plan. The person or agency undertaking the action shall apply for all approvals required by this Chapter. Restoration and/or mitigation activities must be initiated within sixty days of the date of the emergency, unless an extension is approved by the Director, and completed in a timely manner.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.051 Reasonable Use.
A. If the application of this Chapter would deny all reasonable use of the subject property, the property owner may apply for an exception pursuant to this Section.
B. Exception request and review process. An application for a reasonable use exception shall be made to the city and shall include a critical area report, including mitigation plan, if necessary; and any other related project documents, such as permit applications to other agencies, special studies, and environmental documents prepared pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act (Chapter 43.21C RCW) (SEPA documents). The Director shall determine whether an exception request shall be granted based on review of the submitted information, a site inspection, and the proposal’s ability to comply with reasonable use exception criteria. The Director shall approve with conditions, or deny the request based on the proposal’s ability to comply with the following reasonable use exception review criteria:
    1. The application of this Chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;
    2. No other reasonable use of the property has less impact on the critical area;
    3. The proposed impact to the critical area is the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable economic use of the property;
    4. The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant after the effective date of this Chapter or its predecessor; and
    5. The proposal meets the review criteria set forth in this Chapter.
    6. The proposal does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public health, safety, or welfare on or off the development proposal site;
    7. The proposal will result in no net loss of critical area functions and values consistent with the best available science through on and off-site mitigation actions.
C. Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to bring forth evidence in support of the application and to provide sufficient information on which any decision has to be made on the application.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.052 Nonconforming Development.
Nonconforming uses shall be governed in accordance with the provisions of the zoning code in Title 17 of this code or in accordance with the shoreline management program in Chapter 16.20 of this code, subject to additional provisions in this Chapter. Such use may not be altered or expanded except in compliance with standards provided in said codes and this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.053 Variances.
A. Variances from the standards of this Chapter may be authorized by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 17.68.050 of the city Municipal Code, and other procedures in the municipal code cited by Section 17.68.050. The Planning Commission shall review the request and make a written finding that the request meets or fails to meet the variance criteria.
B. Variance criteria. A variance may be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that the requested action conforms to all of the criteria set forth as follows:
    1. Special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land, the lot, or something inherent in the land, and that are not applicable to other lands in the same district;
    2. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
    3. A literal interpretation of the provisions of this Chapter would deprive the applicant of all reasonable economic uses and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and zone of the subject property under the terms of this Chapter, and the variance requested is the minimum necessary to provide the applicant with such rights;
    4. Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings under similar circumstances;
    5. The granting of the variance is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Chapter and will not further degrade the functions or values of the associated critical areas or otherwise be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity of the subject property;
    6. The decision to grant the variance includes the best available science and gives special consideration to conservation or protection measures necessary to preserve or enhance anadromous fish habitat; and
    7. The granting of the variance is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the city of Aberdeen Comprehensive Plan and adopted development regulations.
C. Conditions may be required. In granting any variance, the Planning Commission may prescribe such conditions and safeguards as are necessary to secure adequate protection of critical areas from adverse impacts, and to ensure conformity with this Chapter.
D. Time limit. The board of adjustment shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be begun, completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete such action within the established time limit shall void the variance.
E. Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to bring forth evidence in support of the application and upon which any decision has to be made on the application.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.054 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of hazard protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Catastrophic natural disasters can, and will, occur on rare occasions. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the critical areas or activities permitted within such areas will be free from exposure or damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Aberdeen, and officers or employees thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.060 Critical Area Reports - General Requirements.
A. Prepared by qualified professional. If required by Section 14.100.034.G.1(c), the applicant shall submit a report prepared by a qualified professional as defined herein.
B. Incorporating best available science. The report shall use scientifically valid methods and studies in the analysis of data and field reconnaissance and reference the source of science used. The report shall evaluate the proposal and all probable impacts to critical areas in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Minimum report contents. At a minimum, the report shall contain the following:
    1. The name and contact information of the applicant, a description of the proposal, and identification of the permit requested;
    2. A copy of the site plan for the development proposal showing:
        a. Identified critical areas, buffers, and the development proposal with dimensions;
        b. Limits of any areas to be cleared; and
        c. A description of the proposed stormwater management plan for the development and consideration of impacts to drainage alterations, consistent with the current edition of the city of Aberdeen building standards.
    3. The names and professional qualifications of the persons preparing the report and documentation of any fieldwork performed on the site;
    4. Identification and characterization of all critical areas, wetlands, water bodies, and buffers adjacent to the proposed project area;
    5. A statement specifying the accuracy of the report, and all assumptions made and relied upon;
    6. An assessment of the probable cumulative impacts to critical areas resulting from development of the site and the proposed development;
    7. An analysis of site development alternatives;
    8. A description of reasonable efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to Section 14.100.071 to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas;
    9. Plans for adequate mitigation, as needed, to offset any impacts, in accordance with Section 14.100.070 through 14.100.074, including, but not limited to:
        a. The impacts of any proposed development within or adjacent to a critical area or buffer on the critical area; and
        b. The impacts of any proposed alteration of a critical area or buffer on the development proposal, other properties and the environment.
    10. A discussion of the performance standards and requirements applicable to the critical area and proposed activity;
    11. Financial guarantees to ensure compliance, if applicable; and
    12. Any additional information required for the critical area as specified in the corresponding chapter.
D. Unless otherwise provided, a report may be supplemented by or composed, in whole or in part, of any reports or studies required by other laws and regulations or previously prepared for and applicable to the development proposal site, as approved in advance by the Director.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.061 Critical Area Reports - Modifications to Requirements.
A. Limitations to study area. The Director may limit the required geographic area of the critical area report as appropriate if:
    1. The applicant, with assistance from the city, cannot obtain permission to access properties adjacent to the project area; or
    2. The proposed activity will affect only a limited part of the subject site.
B. Modifications to required contents. The applicant may consult with the Director prior to or during preparation of the critical area report to obtain city approval of modifications to the required contents of the report where, in the judgment of a qualified professional, more or less information is required to adequately address the potential critical area impacts and required mitigation.
C. Additional information requirements. The Director may require additional information to be included in the critical area report when determined to be necessary to the review of the proposed activity in accordance with this Chapter. Additional information that may be required, includes, but is not limited to:
    1. Historical data, including original and subsequent mapping, aerial photographs, data compilations and summaries, and available reports and records relating to the site or past operations at the site;
    2. Grading and drainage plans; and
    3. Information specific to the type, location, and nature of the critical area.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.070 Mitigation Requirements.
A. The applicant shall avoid all impacts that degrade the functions and values of a critical area or areas. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, if alteration to the critical area is unavoidable, all adverse impacts to or from critical areas and buffers resulting from a development proposal or alteration shall be mitigated using the best available science in accordance with an approved critical area report and SEPA documents.
B. Mitigation shall be in-kind and on-site, when possible, and sufficient to maintain the functions and values of the critical area, and to prevent risk from a hazard posed by a critical area.
C. The Director may approve off-site mitigation if the applicant demonstrates that no viable on-site mitigation opportunities exist. Compensatory mitigation proposed off-site shall be provided in the location that will provide the greatest ecological benefit and have the greatest likelihood of success. Preference will be given to off-site mitigation as close as possible to the impact area and within the same watershed subbasin as the permitted alteration provided that off-site mitigation may occur within the watershed of a stream or river flowing into the Grays Harbor estuary and within WRIA 22 upon demonstration through a watershed- or landscape-based analysis that mitigation within an alternative subbasin of the watershed would have greater ecological benefit. Off-site mitigation sites preference shall be given to sites and restoration activities identified in an adopted shoreline restoration plan pursuant to Chapter 173-26 WAC, a watershed planning document prepared and adopted pursuant to Chapter 90.82 RCW, a watershed restoration project pursuant to RCW 89.08.460, a salmonid recovery plan, the salmon recovery board habitat project list, or identified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife as essential for fish and wildlife habitat enhancement pursuant to RCW 77.55.290.
D. The city may approve mitigation banking as a form of compensatory mitigation for wetlands and fish and wildlife habitat conservation area impacts when the provisions of this Chapter require mitigation and when it is clearly demonstrated that the use of a mitigation bank will provide equivalent or greater replacement of critical area functions and values when compared to conventional on-site mitigation provided that all of the following criteria are met:
    1. Mitigation banks shall only be used when they provide significant ecological benefits including long-term conservation of critical areas, important species, habitats and/or habitat linkages, and when they are consistent with the city’s Comprehensive Plan and create a viable alternative to the piecemeal mitigation for individual project impacts to achieve ecosystem-based conservation goals.
    2. The mitigation bank shall be established in accordance with the Washington State Draft Mitigation Banking Rule, Chapter 173-700 WAC or as revised, and Chapter 90.84 RCW and the federal mitigation banking guidelines as outlined in the Federal Register, Volume 60, No. 228, November 28, 1995. These guidelines establish the procedural and technical criteria that banks must meet to obtain state and federal certification.
    3. Preference shall be given to mitigation banks that implement restoration actions that have been identified in an adopted shoreline restoration plan, watershed planning document prepared and adopted pursuant to Chapter 90.82 RCW, a salmonid recovery plan or project that has been identified on the Salmon Recovery Board habitat project list or by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife as essential for fish and wildlife habitat enhancement.
E. Mitigation shall not be implemented until a) after city receipt of a report or other applicable information that includes a mitigation plan, and mitigation shall be in accordance with the provisions of the report or other applicable information and b) city approval of the underlying permit(s).
F. Mitigation monitoring shall be required for a minimum of five years. If a scrub-shrub or forested vegetation community is proposed, monitoring may be required for ten years or more. The project mitigation plan shall include monitoring elements that ensure certainty of success for the project natural value and functions. If the mitigation goals are not obtained within the initial five year period, the applicant remains responsible for restoration of the natural values and functions until the mitigation goals agreed to in the mitigation plan are achieved.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.071 Mitigation Sequencing.
Applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been examined with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, such alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or compensated for in the following order of preference:
A. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
B. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts;
C. Rectifying the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, and habitat conservation areas by repairing, enhancing, or restoring the affected environment to the historical conditions, or pre-development, or the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project;
D. Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through approved engineering or other methods;
E. Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;
F. Compensating for the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, and fish and wildlife habitat, and vegetation conservation areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;
G. Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation for a reasonable period of time and taking remedial action when necessary; and
H. Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.072 Mitigation Plan Requirements.
When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit to the city a mitigation plan as part of the critical area report or other applicable information. The goals and objectives will be related to the functions and values of the impacted critical area, they include:
A. Environmental goals and objectives. The mitigation plan shall include a written report identifying environmental goals and objectives of the compensation proposed including:
    1. A description of the anticipated impacts to the critical areas and the mitigating actions proposed and the purposes of the compensation measures, including the site selection criteria; identification of compensation goals; identification of resource functions; and dates for beginning and completion of site compensation construction activities.
    2. A review of the best available science supporting the proposed mitigation and a description of the report author’s experience to date in restoring or creating the type of critical area proposed; and
    3. An analysis of the likelihood of success of the compensation project.
B. Performance standards and requirements. The mitigation plan shall address the applicable performance standards and requirements identified in this Chapter.
C. Detailed construction plans. The mitigation plan shall include written specifications and descriptions of the mitigation proposed, such as:
    1. The proposed construction sequence, timing, and duration;
    2. Grading and excavation details;
    3. Erosion and sediment control features;
    4. A vegetation planting plan specifying plant species, quantities, locations, size, spacing, and density; and
    5. Measures to protect and maintain plants until established.
These written specifications shall be accompanied by detailed site diagrams, scaled crosssectional drawings, topographic maps showing slope percentage and final grade elevations, and any other drawings appropriate to show construction techniques or anticipated final outcome.
D. Monitoring program. The mitigation plan shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project, and for assessing a completed project. A protocol shall be included outlining the schedule for site monitoring in years one, three, and five after site construction, and how the monitoring data will be evaluated to determine if the performance standards are being met. A monitoring report shall be submitted as needed to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. At a minimum, a monitoring report shall be submitted to document mitigation plan performance in year five after site construction.
E. Contingency plan. The mitigation plan shall include identification of potential courses of action, and any corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates project performance standards are not being met.
F. Financial guarantees. The mitigation plan shall include financial guarantees, if necessary, to ensure that the mitigation plan is fully implemented. Financial guarantees ensuring fulfillment of the compensation project, monitoring program, and any contingency measures shall be posted in accordance with Section 14.100.074.
G. Other Permits. Other local, state, and federal regulatory jurisdictions may require permits for habitat mitigation projects. The applicant shall comply with all other appropriate regulatory permits, agreements, and authority, as required by each respective jurisdiction.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.074 Bonds to Ensure Mitigation, Maintenance and Monitoring.
A. When mitigation required pursuant to a development proposal is not completed prior to the city final permit approval, such as final plat approval or final building inspection, the city shall require the applicant to post a performance bond or other security in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the city. If the development proposal is subject to mitigation, the applicant shall post a mitigation bond or other security in a form and amount deemed acceptable by the city to ensure mitigation is fully functional.
B. The bond shall be in the amount of one hundred and twenty-five percent of the estimated cost of the uncompleted actions or the estimated cost of restoring the functions and values of the critical area that are at risk, whichever is greater.
C. The bond shall be in the form of a surety bond, performance bond, assignment of savings account, or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the city attorney.
D. Bonds or other security authorized by this Section shall remain in effect until the city determines, in writing, that the standards bonded for have been met. Bonds or other security shall be held by the city for a minimum of five years to ensure that the required mitigation has been fully implemented and demonstrated to function, and may be held for longer periods when necessary.
E. Depletion, failure, or collection of bond funds shall not discharge the obligation of an applicant or violator to complete required mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration.
F. Public development proposals shall be relieved from having to comply with the bonding requirements of this Section if public funds have previously been committed for mitigation, maintenance, monitoring, or restoration.
G. Any failure to satisfy critical area requirements established by law or condition including, but not limited to, the failure to provide a monitoring report within thirty days after it is due or comply with other provisions of an approved mitigation plan shall constitute a default, and the city may demand payment of any financial guarantees or require other action authorized by the city code or any other law.
H. Any funds recovered pursuant to this Section shall be used to complete the required mitigation.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.080 Notice on Title.
A. In order to inform subsequent purchasers of real property of the existence of critical areas, the owner of any property containing a wetlands critical area, geologically hazardous area, or fish and wildlife habitat conservation area or associated buffer to this type of area on which a development proposal has been approved shall file a notice with the Grays Harbor County Auditor’s office recordings section according to the direction of the city. The notice shall state the presence of these critical areas or buffers on the property, the application of this Chapter to the property, and the fact that limitations on actions in or affecting the critical areas or buffers may exist. The notice shall “run with the land.”
B. This notice on title shall not be required for the following activities:
    1. Activities that are exempt or allowed under Section 14.100.050, except for emergency actions under 14.100.050.C for which the Director requires restoration or mitigation.
    2. Activities that are allowed in wetland areas under Section 14.100.230.
    3. Activities that are allowed in geologically hazardous areas under Section 14.100.420.
    4. Activities for which the Director has made a determination that critical areas are present but there is no impact under Section 14.100.034.E.
    5. For a development proposal by a public agency or public or private utility:
        a. Within a recorded easement or right-of-way;
        b. Where the agency or utility has been adjudicated the right to an easement or right-of-way; or
        c. On the site of a permanent public facility.
C. The director may require that a notice on title be filed in accordance with the procedures of Section 14.100.080 for a development activity in a seismic hazard area defined under Section 14.100.400.D or a tsunami hazard area defined under Section 14.100.E if, as a condition of the approval, the development activity must incorporate design or mitigation requirements that go beyond typical applicable building and construction codes.
D. The applicant shall submit proof to the city that the notice has been filed for public record before any site development or construction for the property begins or, in the case of subdivisions, short subdivisions, planned unit developments, and binding site plans, at or before recording.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.081 Critical Area Tracts.
A. Critical area tracts shall be used in development proposals for subdivisions, short subdivisions, planned unit developments, and binding site plans to delineate and protect those contiguous critical areas and buffers listed below that total five thousand or more square feet:
    1. All landslide hazard areas and buffers;
    2. All wetlands and buffers;
    3. All habitat conservation areas; and
    4. All other lands to be protected from alterations as conditioned by project approval.
B. Critical area tracts shall be recorded on all documents of title of record for all affected lots.
C. Critical area tracts shall be designated on the face of the plat or recorded drawing in a format approved by the city attorney. The designation shall include the following restriction:
    1. An assurance that native vegetation will be preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including, but not limited to, controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering, and protecting plants, fish, and animal habitat; and
    2. The right of the city to enforce the terms of the restriction.
D. The city may require that any required critical area tract be dedicated to the city, held in an undivided interest by each owner of a building lot within the development with the ownership interest passing with the ownership of the lot, or held by an incorporated homeowner’s association or other legal entity (such as a land trust, which ensures the ownership, maintenance, and protection of the tract).
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.083 Building Setbacks.
Unless otherwise provided, buildings and other structures shall be set back a distance of fifteen feet from the edges of all critical area buffers or from the edges of all critical areas, if no buffers are required. The following may be allowed in the building setback area:
A. Landscaping;
B. Uncovered decks;
C. Building overhangs, if such overhangs do not extend more than eighteen inches into the setback area; and
D. Impervious ground surfaces, such as driveways and patios, provided that such improvements may be subject to water quality regulations as adopted in the Chapter 13.68, Stormwater Management, of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.084 Temporary Marking, Permanent Signs and Fencing.
The Director as a condition of approval of activities or uses under this Chapter may require that the outer boundary of a critical area or buffer be identified with temporary markers or permanent signs when needed to minimize potentially harmful intrusions from temporary construction activities, adjacent land uses, to alert citizens to a potential public health or safety risk associated with a critical area, or to accomplish other objectives specifically provided for elsewhere in this Chapter. The Director shall provide specifications on the type, content, and size of the markers or signs prior to permit approval. Temporary markers will be subject to inspection by the Director prior to the commencement of permitted activities. All temporary marking required by the approval shall be maintained throughout construction and shall not be removed until permanent signs, if required, are in place. Permanent signs, if required, shall be posted near primary access points and approximately every two hundred feet along the critical area boundary unless the Director determines that less frequent spacing is adequate considering the size and location of the site.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.090 Critical Area Inspections.
Reasonable access to the site shall be provided to the city, state, and federal agency review staff for the purpose of inspections during any proposal review, restoration, emergency action, or monitoring period.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.091 Unauthorized Critical Area Alteratios and Enforcement.
A. When a critical area or its buffer has been altered in violation of this Chapter, all ongoing development work shall stop and the critical area shall be restored. The city shall have the authority to issue a stop work order to cease all ongoing development work and order restoration, rehabilitation, replacement or where determined appropriate by the Director, mitigation measures at the owner's or other responsible party's expense to compensate for violation of provisions of this Chapter and other applicable city codes governing the underlying permit(s). Administrative procedures, including but not limited to, review and appeal of city actions related to unauthorized critical area alterations are outlined in Section 14.100.035.
B. Restoration/mitigation plan required. All development work shall remain stopped until a restoration/mitigation plan is prepared and approved by the city. Such a plan shall be prepared by a qualified professional and shall describe how the actions proposed meet the minimum requirements described in Subsection C of this Section and/or mitigation requirements outlined in Sections 14.100.070, 071, 072, and 074, if mitigation is determined to be appropriate by the Director. The Director shall, at the violator’s expense, seek expert advice in determining the adequacy of the plan. Inadequate plans shall be returned to the applicant or violator for revision and resubmittal.
C. Minimum performance standards for restoration or mitigation. 
    1. For alterations to critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, wetlands, and habitat conservation areas, the following minimum performance standards shall be met for the restoration or mitigation of impacts to a critical area, provided that if the violator can demonstrate in a restoration/mitigation plan that greater functional and habitat values can be obtained, these standards may be modified by the Director:
        a. The historic structural and functional values shall be restored, including water quality and habitat functions;
        b. The historic soil types and configuration shall be replicated;
        c. The critical area and buffers shall be replanted with native vegetation that replicates the vegetation historically found on the site in species types, sizes, and densities; and
        d. The historic functions and values should be replicated at the location of the alteration.
    2. For alterations to flood and geological hazards, the following minimum performance standards shall be met for the restoration of a critical area, provided that, if the violator can demonstrate that greater safety can be obtained, these standards may be modified:
        a. The hazard shall be reduced to a level equal to, or less than, the pre-development hazard;
        b. Any risk of personal injury resulting from the alteration shall be eliminated or minimized; and
        c. The hazard area and buffers shall be replanted with native vegetation sufficient to minimize the hazard.
D. Site investigations. The Director is authorized to make site inspections and take such actions as are necessary to enforce this Chapter. The Director shall present proper credentials and make a reasonable effort to contact any property owner before entering onto private property.
E. Penalties. Any person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day or portion of a day during which a violation of this Chapter is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense. “Day” shall have the meaning prescribed in Section 17.96.170.A of the city Municipal Code. Any development carried out contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be enjoined as provided by the statutes of the state of Washington. The city may levy civil penalties against any person, party, firm, corporation, or other legal entity for violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. The civil penalty shall be assessed at a maximum rate of $500 dollars for each day or portion of the day that the violation continues per violation.
F. In addition to enforcement procedures and penalties provided for in this Chapter, the Director may suspend or revoke a permit if (s)he finds that the applicant or permittee has not complied with any or all of the conditions or limitations set forth in accordance with this Chapter, has exceeded the scope of work set forth in the permit, or has failed to undertake the project in the manner set forth in the approved application.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.100 Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas - Designation.
Critical aquifer recharge areas (CARA) are those areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as defined by WAC 365-190-030(2). CARA have prevailing geologic conditions associated with infiltration rates that create a high potential for contamination of ground water resources or contribute significantly to the replenishment of ground water. These areas include the following:
A. Wellhead protection areas. Wellhead protection areas may be defined by the boundaries of the ten year time of ground water travel or boundaries established using alternate criteria approved by the Washington State Department of Health in those settings where ground water time of travel is not a reasonable delineation criterion, in accordance with WAC 246-290-135.
B. Sole source aquifers. Sole source aquifers are areas that have been designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
C. Susceptible ground water management areas. Susceptible ground water management areas are areas that have been designated as moderately or highly vulnerable or susceptible in an adopted ground water management program developed pursuant to WAC 173-100.
D. Special protection areas. Special protection areas are those areas defined by WAC 173-200-090.
E. Moderately or highly vulnerable aquifer recharge areas. Aquifer recharge areas that are moderately or highly vulnerable to degradation or depletion because of hydrogeologic characteristics are those areas delineated by a hydrogeologic study prepared in accordance with the state Department of Ecology guidelines.
F. Moderately or highly susceptible aquifer recharge areas. Aquifer recharge areas moderately or highly susceptible to degradation or depletion because of hydrogeologic characteristics are those areas meeting the criteria established by the state Department of Ecology.
Based on the criteria and descriptions in A through F above, the city concludes that there are no critical aquifer recharge areas within the city limits and its jurisdiction at the time of adoption of this Chapter. The city will enact appropriate provisions for critical aquifer recharge areas should any such areas be identified and designated in the future.
(Ord. 6474, Amended, 02/25/2009; Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.200 Wetlands Critical Areas - Designation.
A. Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from non-wetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands.
B. Wetlands shall be identified in accordance with the requirements of RCW 36.70A.175 and 90.58.380. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, all areas within the city meeting the criteria in the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual (Ecology Publication 96-94) regardless of any formal identification are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Wetlands shall be rated based on categories that reflect the functions and values of each wetland. Wetland categories shall be based on the criteria provided in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, revised August 2004 (Ecology Publication No. 04-06-025). These categories are generally defined as follows:
    1. Category I wetlands. Category I wetlands are those wetlands of exceptional value in terms of protecting water quality, storing flood and stormwater, and/or providing habitat for wildlife as indicated by a rating system score of seventy points or more. These are wetland communities of infrequent occurrence that often provide documented habitat for critical, threatened or endangered species, and/or have other attributes that are very difficult or impossible to replace if altered.
    2. Category II wetlands. Category II wetlands have significant value based on their function as indicated by a rating system score of between fifty-one and sixty-nine points. They do not meet the criteria for Category I rating but occur infrequently and have qualities that are difficult to replace if altered.
    3. Category III wetlands. Category III wetlands have important resource value as indicated by a rating system score of between thirty and fifty points.
    4. Category IV wetlands. Category IV wetlands are wetlands of limited resource value as indicated by a rating system score of less than thirty points. They typically have vegetation of similar age and class, lack special habitat features, and/or are isolated or disconnected from other aquatic systems or high quality upland habitats.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.210 Mapping of Wetlands Areas.
A. The approximate location and extent of known or suspected wetlands are shown in the city of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 1 and the National Wetlands Inventory Map, or their latest revisions. This information is to be used as a guide for the city, project applicants and/or property owners, and may be updated as new information becomes available. Other, unmapped wetlands may exist within the city. These maps are to be used as a reference and do not provide a definitive critical area designation.
B. The approximate location and extent of wetlands that have been pre-assessed in accordance with Section 14.100.250 is shown in the Best Available Science Review dated January 10, 2008 or its latest revision. This information is to be used as a guide for the city, project applicants and/or property owners, and may be updated as new information becomes available.
C. The exact location of a wetland's boundary shall be determined through the performance of a field investigation by a qualified professional applying the Washington State Wetland Identification and Delineation Manual, or as revised, as required by RCW 36.70A.175 (Ecology Publication 96-94).
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.220 Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Wetland Areas.
A. Prepared by a qualified professional. A critical area report for wetlands shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a certified professional wetland scientist or a non-certified professional wetland scientist with a minimum of five years experience in the field of wetland science and with experience preparing wetland reports.
B. The following areas shall be addressed in a critical area report for wetlands:
    1. The project area of the proposed activity;
    2. All wetlands and recommended buffers within three hundred feet of the project area; and
    3. All shoreline areas, water features, flood plains, and other critical areas, and related buffers within three hundred feet of the project area.
C. Wetland analysis. In addition the minimum required contents of critical area reports in Section 14.100.060 and 14.100.061, a critical area report for wetlands shall contain an analysis of the wetlands including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:
    1. A written assessment and accompanying maps of the wetlands and buffers within three hundred feet of the project area, including the following information at a minimum:
        a. Wetland delineation and required buffers;
        b. Existing wetland acreage;
        c. Wetland category;
        d. Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics;
        e. Soil and substrate conditions;
        f. Topographic elevations, at two-foot contours; and
        g. A discussion of the water sources supplying the wetland and documentation of hydrologic regime (locations of inlet and outlet features, water depths throughout the wetland, evidence of recharge or discharge, evidence of water depths throughout the year – drift lines, algal layers, moss lines, and sediment deposits).
    2. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity.
    3. A habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.
    4. Functional evaluation for the wetland and adjacent buffer using a local or state agency staff-recognized method and including the reference of the method and all data sheets.
    5. Proposed mitigation, if needed, including a written assessment and accompanying maps of the mitigation area, including the following information at a minimum:
        a. The information required by Section 14.100.072, Mitigation Plan Requirements, of this Chapter.
        b. Existing wetland acreage and proposed impact area;
        c. Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic conditions;
        d. Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions including an analysis of existing and future hydrologic regime and proposed hydrologic regime for enhanced, created, or restored mitigation areas;
        e. Relationship within watershed and to existing waterbodies;
        f. Soil and substrate conditions and topographic elevations;
        g. Existing and proposed adjacent site conditions;
        h. Required wetland buffers (including any buffer reduction and mitigation proposed to increase the plant densities, remove weedy vegetation, and replant the buffers);
        i. Property ownership; and
        j. Associated wetlands and related wetlands that may be greater than three hundred feet from the subject project.
    6. A scale map of the development proposal site and adjacent area. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect wetlands after the project site has been developed; including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs.
    7. A bond estimate for the installation (including site preparation, plant materials and installation, fertilizers, mulch, stakes) and the proposed monitoring and maintenance work for the required number of years.
    8. A description of how the applicant intends to meet the requirements of Section 14.100.074, Bonds to Ensure Mitigation, Maintenance and Monitoring, or this Chapter.
    9. How the applicant proposes to comply with Section 14.100.080, Notice on Title.
D. Wetlands analysis for activities impacting wetlands that have buffers established according to Section 14.100.250.C. In addition to the minimum required contents of critical area reports in Section 14.100.060 and 14.100.061, a critical area report for wetlands for which buffers have been pre-assessed shall contain an analysis of the wetlands including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:
    1. A written assessment and accompanying maps of the wetlands and buffers within three hundred feet of the project area, including the following information at a minimum:
        a. Wetland delineation and required buffers; and
        b. Topographic elevations, at two-foot contours.
    2. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity.
    3. A habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.
    4. Proposed mitigation, if needed, including a written assessment and accompanying maps of the mitigation area, including the following information at a minimum:
        a. The information required by Section 14.100.072, Mitigation Requirements, of this Chapter;
        b. Existing wetland acreage and proposed impact area;
        c. Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic conditions;
        d. Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions including an analysis of existing and future hydrologic regime and proposed hydrologic regime for enhanced, created, or restored mitigation areas;
        e. Relationship within watershed and to existing waterbodies;
        f. Soil and substrate conditions and topographic elevations;
        g. Existing and proposed adjacent site conditions;
        h. Required wetland buffers (including any buffer reduction and mitigation proposed to increase the plant densities, remove weedy vegetation, and replant the buffers);
        i. Property ownership; and
        j. Associated wetlands and related wetlands that may be greater than three hundred feet from the subject project.
    5. A scale map of the development proposal site and adjacent area. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect wetlands after the project site has been developed; including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs.
    6. A bond estimate for the installation (including site preparation, plant materials and installation, fertilizers, mulch, stakes) and the proposed monitoring and maintenance work for the required number of years.
    7. A description of how the applicant intends to meet the requirements of Section 14.100.074, Bonds to Ensure Mitigation, Maintenance and Monitoring, or this Chapter.
    8. How the Applicant proposes to comply with Section 14.100.080, Notice on Title.
E. Additional information may be required. When appropriate, the city may also require the critical area report to include an evaluation by the Department of Ecology or an independent qualified expert regarding the applicant's analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, and to include any recommendations as appropriate.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.230 Exempt and Allowed Activities in Wetland Critical Areas.
A. The following activities are allowed in wetland areas pursuant to Exempt Activities [Section 14.100.050.A], and do not require notification to the Director, review by the Director or submittal of a critical area report, except where such activities result in a loss to the functions and values of a wetland or wetland buffer, or as otherwise specifically required below:
    1. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife that does not entail changing the structure or functions of the existing wetland.
    2. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, chemical applications, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions, or water sources.
    3. Recreational and educational activities.
    4. Enhancement of a wetland through the removal of non-native invasive species. Weeding shall be restricted to hand removal and weed material shall be removed from the site. Bare areas that remain after weed removal shall be re-vegetated with native shrubs and trees at natural densities. Some hand seeding may also be done over the bare areas with native herbs.
B. The following activities are allowed in wetland areas pursuant to Allowed Activities [Section 14.100.050.B], except where such activities result in a loss to the functions and values of a wetland or wetland buffer. These activities require notification to the Director prior to commencement of the activity, as required by Sections 14.100.050.B.2, and B.3.
    1. Drilling for utilities under a wetland provided that the drilling does not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column is disturbed.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.240 Wetland Critical Areas - General Requirements.
A. The following activities are allowed in wetland areas pursuant to Exempt Activities [Section 14.100.050.A], and do not require notification to the Director, review by the Director or submittal of a critical area report, except where such activities result in a loss to the functions and values of a wetland or wetland buffer, or as otherwise specifically required below:
    1. Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and other wildlife that does not entail changing the structure or functions of the existing wetland.
    2. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, chemical applications, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions, or water sources.
    3. Recreational and educational activities.
    4. Enhancement of a wetland through the removal of non-native invasive species. Weeding shall be restricted to hand removal and weed material shall be removed from the site. Bare areas that remain after weed removal shall be re-vegetated with native shrubs and trees at natural densities. Some hand seeding may also be done over the bare areas with native herbs.
B. The following activities are allowed in wetland areas pursuant to Allowed Activities [Section 14.100.050.B], except where such activities result in a loss to the functions and values of a wetland or wetland buffer. These activities require notification to the Director prior to commencement of the activity, as required by Sections 14.100.050.B.2, and B.3.
    1. Drilling for utilities under a wetland provided that the drilling does not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column is disturbed.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.241 Additional Requirements for Specific Activities.
The following activities and uses require review by the Director but do not require submittal of a critical areas report. These activities may be permitted by the Director in wetlands and/or wetland buffers provided that the specified requirements for the activities have been included in the design and implementation of the proposal; the applicant has taken all reasonable measures to avoid adverse effects on wetland functions and values; the applicant has provided compensatory mitigation for all adverse impacts to wetlands that cannot be avoided; the applicant has demonstrated that the amount and degree of alteration is limited to the minimum needed to accomplish the project purpose; and the activities and uses are not prohibited by any other applicable law.
A. Wetland mitigation activities reviewed and conducted in accordance with Section 14.100.260;
B. Passive outdoor recreational or educational activities which do not significantly affect the function of the wetland or regulated buffer (including wildlife management or viewing structures, outdoor scientific or interpretive facilities, trails, hunting blinds, etc.) may be permitted within a Category II, III, or IV wetlands or their buffers and within a Category I wetland buffer if the following criteria are met:
    1. Trails shall not exceed four feet in width and shall be surfaced with gravel or pervious material, including boardwalks;
    2. The trail or facility is located in the outer twenty-five percent of the buffer area unless a location closer to the wetland edge or within the wetland is required for interpretive purposes;
    3. The trail or facility is constructed and maintained in a manner that minimizes disturbance of the wetland or buffer. Trails or facilities within wetlands shall be placed on an elevated structure as an alternative to fill.
C. Stormwater conveyance or discharge facilities such as dispersion trenches, level spreaders, and outfalls may be permitted within a Category II, III, or IV wetland and its buffers or within a Category I wetland buffer on a case-by-case basis if the following are met:
    1. Due to topographic or other physical constraints, there are no feasible locations for these facilities to discharge to surface water through existing systems or outside the buffer. Locations and designs that infiltrate water shall be preferred over a design that crosses the buffer.
    2. The discharge is located as far from the wetland edge as possible and in a manner that minimizes disturbance of soils and vegetation and avoids long-term rill or channel erosion.
D. Public and private roadways and railroad facilities, including bridge construction and culvert installation, if the following criteria are met:
    1. There is no reasonable location or route outside the wetland or wetland buffer based on analysis of system needs, available technology and alternative routes. Location within a wetland buffer shall be preferred over a location within a wetland.
    2. Facilities parallel to the wetland edge are located as far from the wetland edge as possible and in a manner that minimizes disturbance of soils and vegetation.
    3. Clearing, grading, and excavation activities are limited to the minimum necessary, which may include placement on elevated structures as an alternative to fill, where feasible.
    4. Impacts on wetland functions are mitigated in accordance with Section 14.100.260.
E. Access to private development sites may be permitted to cross Category II, III, or IV wetlands or their buffers, pursuant to the criteria in Subsection F of this Section provided that alternative access shall be pursued to the maximum extent feasible, including through the provisions of Chapter 8.24 RCW. Exceptions or deviations from technical standards for width or other dimensions, and specific construction standards to minimize impacts may be specified, including placement on elevated structures as an alternative to fill, if feasible.
F. Utility lines and facilities providing local delivery service, not including facilities such as electrical substations, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, petroleum products pipelines and not including transformers or other facilities containing hazardous substances, may be located in Category II, III, and IV wetlands and their buffers and/or Category I wetland buffers if the following criteria are met:
    1. There is no reasonable location or route outside the wetland or wetland buffer based on analysis of system needs, available technology and alternative routes. Location within a wetland buffer shall be preferred over a location within a wetland.
    2. The utility line is located as far from the wetland edge as possible and in a manner that minimizes disturbance of soils and vegetation.
    3. Clearing, grading, and excavation activities are limited to the minimum necessary to install the utility line, which may include boring, and the area is restored following utility installation.
    4. Buried utility lines shall be constructed in a manner that prevents adverse impacts to subsurface drainage. This may include the use of trench plugs or other devices as needed to maintain hydrology.
    5. Impacts on wetland functions are mitigated in accordance with Section 14.100.260.
G. Wildlife viewing structures.
H. Fishing access areas down to the water’s edge that shall be no larger than six feet.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.242 Additional Requirements for Subdivisions.
The subdivision and short subdivision of land in wetlands and associated buffers is subject to the following:
A. Land that is located wholly within a wetland or its buffer may not be subdivided;
B. Land that is located partially within a wetland or its buffer may be divided provided that an accessible and contiguous portion of each new lot is:
    1. Located outside of the wetland and its buffer; and
    2. Meets the minimum lot size requirements of the city zoning code (Title 17).
C. Access roads and utilities serving the proposed subdivision may be permitted within the wetland and associated buffers only if the city determines that no other feasible alternative exists in and when consistent with this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.250 Wetland Buffers - Dimensions.
A. Wetland buffer zones shall be required for all regulated activities adjacent to regulated wetlands. Any wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall also include the standard buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland. Buffers shall not include areas that are functionally and effectively disconnected from the wetland by a road or other substantially developed surface of sufficient width and with use characteristics such that buffer functions are not provided.
B. The buffer standards required by this Chapter presume the existence of a dense vegetation community in the buffer adequate to protect the wetland functions and values. When a buffer lacks adequate vegetation, the Director may increase the standard buffer, require buffer planting or enhancement, and/or deny a proposal for buffer reduction or buffer averaging.
C. The Director has the authority to pre-assess certain wetlands and establish buffer widths for such wetlands. The Director will prepare maps of wetlands that have been pre-assessed in this manner.
D. Buffer dimensions. 
    1. The wetland buffer widths are based on wetland category, intensity of impacts, and wetland functions or special characteristics. Wetland buffer widths shall be determined according to whether a buffer has been pre-assessed for the specific wetland or not.
        a. When wetland buffers have not been pre-assessed, wetland buffer widths shall be determined according to the land-use intensities and wetland characteristics of Tables 14.100.250.C.1a and C.1b; and
        b. When wetland buffer widths have been pre-assessed for specific wetlands, the buffer widths shall be determined according to the location and application of best management practices of Table 14.100.250.C.2.
    2. The buffer is to be vegetated with native plant communities that are appropriate for the site conditions. If vegetation in the buffer is disturbed (grazed or mowed) proponent’s planning changes to land that will increase impacts to wetlands need to rehabilitate the buffer with native plant communities that are appropriate for the site conditions. The width of the buffer is measured in horizontal distance. All buffers shall be measured from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field.
    3. Buffer widths for wetlands that have not been pre-assessed. The buffer for a wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for wetland alterations shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland.
    4. Buffer widths for wetlands that have been pre-assessed. The buffer for a wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for wetland alterations shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland.
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Level of Impact from Proposed |                 Types of Land Uses                 |
|      Change in Land Use       |                                                    |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Low                           | • Forestry                                         |
|                               | • Low-intensity open space (hiking, bird-watching, |
|                               | preservation of natural resources, etc)            |
|                               | • Unpaved trails                                   |
|                               | • Utility corridor without maintenance road        |
|                               | and little to no vegetation management             |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Moderate                      | • Residential (one unit/acre or less)              |
|                               | • Moderate-intensity open space (parks with        |
|                               | biking, jogging, etc.)                             |
|                               | • Paved driveways and gravel driveways serving     |
|                               | 3 or more residences                               |
|                               | • Paved trails                                     |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| High                          | • Commercial                                       |
|                               | • Urban                                            |
|                               | • Industrial                                       |
|                               | • Institutional                                    |
|                               | • Retail sales                                     |
|                               | • Residential (more than one unit/acre)            |
|                               | • High-intensity recreation (golf courses, ball    |
|                               | fields, etc.)                                      |
+-------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------+
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
|      Wetland Characteristics      |  Buffer Width by Impact of  |    Other Measures Recommended    |
|                                   |      Proposed Land Use      |          for Protection          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Category IV Wetlands (For wetlands scoring less than thirty points or more for                     |
| all functions)                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Score for all 3 basic functions   | Low – 25 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
| is less than 30 points            | Moderate – 40 ft            | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 50 ft                |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Category III Wetlands (For wetlands scoring 30-50 points or more for all functions)                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Moderate level of function        | Low – 75 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
| for habitat (score for            | Moderate – 110 ft           | this time                        |
| habitat 20-28 points)             | High – 150 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristic  | Low – 40 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
|                                   | Moderate – 60 ft            | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 80 ft                |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Category II Wetlands (For wetlands that score 51-69 points or more for all functions               |
| or having the “Special Characteristics” identified in the rating system)                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| High level of function for        | Low – 150 ft                | Maintain connections to          |
| habitat (score for habitat        | Moderate – 225 ft           | other habitat areas              |
| 29-36 points)                     | High – 300 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Moderate level of function        | Low – 75 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
| for habitat (score for            | Moderate – 110 ft           | this time                        |
| habitat 20-28 points)             | High – 150 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| High level of function for        | Low – 50 ft                 | No additional surface discharges |
| water quality improvement         | Moderate – 75 ft            | of untreated runoff              |
| and low for habitat (score        | High – 100 ft               |                                  |
| for water quality 24-32           |                             |                                  |
| points; habitat less than         |                             |                                  |
| 20 points)                        |                             |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Estuarine                         | Low – 75 ft Moderate – 110  | No additional measures at        |
|                                   | ft                          | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 150 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristic  | Low – 50 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
|                                   | Moderate – 75 ft            | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 100 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Category I Wetlands (For wetlands that score 70 points or more for all functions                   |
| or having the “Special Characteristics” identified in the rating system)                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Natural Heritage Wetlands         | Low – 125 ft                | No additional surface discharges |
|                                   | Moderate – 190 ft           | to wetland or its tributaries.   |
|                                   | High – 250 ft               | No septic systems within         |
|                                   |                             | 300 ft of wetland.               |
|                                   |                             | Restore degraded parts of        |
|                                   |                             | buffer.                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Bogs                              | Low – 125 ft                | No additional surface discharges |
|                                   | Moderate – 190 ft           | to wetland or its tributaries.   |
|                                   | High – 250 ft               | Restore degraded parts of        |
|                                   |                             | buffer.                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Forested                          | Buffer width based on score | If forested wetland scores       |
|                                   | for habitat functions or    | high for habitat, need           |
|                                   | water quality functions     | to maintain connections          |
|                                   |                             | to other habitat areas           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Estuarine                         | Low – 100 ft                | No additional measures at        |
|                                   | Moderate – 150 ft           | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 200 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| High level of function for        | Low – 150 ft                | Restore degraded parts of        |
| habitat (score for habitat        | Moderate – 225 ft           | buffer                           |
| 29-36 points)                     | High – 300 ft               | Maintain connections to          |
|                                   |                             | other habitat areas              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Moderate level of function        | Low – 75 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
| for habitat (score for            | Moderate – 110 ft           | this time                        |
| habitat 20-28 points)             | High – 150 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| High level of function for        | Low – 50 ft                 | No additional surface discharges |
| water quality improvement         | Moderate – 75 ft            | of untreated runoff              |
| (24-32 points) and low            | High – 100 ft               |                                  |
| for habitat (less than            |                             |                                  |
| 20 points)                        |                             |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Not meeting above characteristics | Low – 50 ft                 | No additional measures at        |
|                                   | Moderate – 75 ft            | this time                        |
|                                   | High – 100 ft               |                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------+----------------------------------+
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
|   Wetland   | Category | Habitat Score | High Land Use Intensity Proposed Buffer |
|             |          |               |                 Widths                  |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| "           | "        | "             |   Without BMPs1    |     With BMPs      |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA3         | II       | 20            | 150                | 110                |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA4         | III      | 20            | 150                | 110                |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA5         | III      | 18            | 80                 | 60                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA6 North   | III      | 16            | 80                 | 60                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA6 North-A | IV       | 12            | 50                 | 40                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA6 South   | III      | 14            | 80                 | 60                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA7         | III      | 12            | 80                 | 60                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA9         | III      | 17            | 80                 | 60                 |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| SA10        | III      | 21            | 150                | 110                |
+-------------+----------+---------------+--------------------+--------------------+
1The best management practices (BMPs) are defined in Section 14.100.253.(E)
E. Where lands within the wetland buffer have an average continuous slope of twenty percent to thirty-five percent, and the required buffer width is less than one hundred feet, the buffer shall extend to a thirty percent greater dimension. In all cases, where slopes within the buffers exceed thirty-five percent, the buffer shall extend twenty-five feet beyond the top of the bank of the sloping area or, if a buffer associated with a geological hazard is present, to whichever extent is greater.
F. Because there is a large increase in width associated with a one point increase in the habitat score, the Director may deviate from the buffer requirements outlined in 14.100.250.C.1b and increase the buffer widths in increments of twenty feet for every one point increase in the habitat score in accordance with guidance developed by the Department of Ecology in Wetlands in Washington State - Volume 2: Guidance for Protecting and Managing Wetlands (Publication #05-06-008).
G. Where other critical areas defined in this Chapter fall within the wetland buffer, the buffer dimension shall be the most expansive of the buffers applicable to any applicable critical area.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.251 Requirements for Wetland Buffer Averaging.
The Director may average wetland buffer widths on a case-by-case basis when the applicant demonstrates through a critical area study to the satisfaction of the Director that all the following criteria are met:
A. Averaging to improve wetland protection may be permitted when all of the following conditions are met as demonstrated by a critical area report pursuant to Section 14.100.220:
    1. The wetland has significant differences in characteristics that affect its habitat functions, such as a wetland with a forested component adjacent to a degraded emergent component or a “dual-rated” wetland with a Category I area adjacent to a lower rated area;
    2. The buffer is increased adjacent to the higher-functioning area of habitat or more sensitive portion of the wetland and decreased adjacent to the lower-functioning or less sensitive portion;
    3. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging and all increases in buffer dimension for averaging are generally parallel to the wetland edge;
    4. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than seventy-five percent of the required width.
B. Averaging to allow reasonable use of a parcel may be permitted when all of the following are met as demonstrated by a critical area report pursuant to Section 14.100.220:
    1. There are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished without buffer averaging;
    2. The averaged buffer will not result in degradation of the wetland’s functions and values;
    3. The total buffer area after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging and all increases in buffer dimension for averaging are generally parallel to the wetland edge;
    4. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than three-quarters of the required width except where the Director finds that there is an existing feature such as a roadway that limits buffer dimension or an essential element of a proposed development such as access that must be accommodated for reasonable use and requires a smaller buffer.
C. The applicant implements all reasonable measures to reduce the adverse effects of adjacent land uses and ensure no net loss of wetland functions and values in conjunction with a wetland critical area study and mitigation plan.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.252 Requirements for Wetland Buffer Increase.
The Director may increase the width of the standard buffer width on a case-by-case basis, based on a critical area report, when a larger buffer is required to protect critical habitat areas as outlined in Section 14.100.500, or such increase is necessary to:
A. Protect the function and value of that wetland from proximity impacts of adjacent land use, including noise, light and other disturbance not sufficiently limited by buffers provided above;
B. Maintain viable populations of priority species of fish and wildlife; or
C. Protect wetlands or other critical areas from landslides, erosion or other hazards.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.253 Requirements for Wetland Buffer Decrease.
The Director shall have the authority to reduce the standard buffer widths identified in Section 14.100.250, provided that the general standards for avoidance and minimization per Section 14.100.071.A and B shall apply and provided further that all of the following apply:
A. The buffer reduction shall not adversely affect the functions and values of the adjacent wetlands;
B. The buffer of a Category I or II wetland that has not been pre-assessed shall not be reduced to less than seventy-five percent of the required buffer or fifty feet, whichever is greater;
C. The buffer of a Category III or IV wetland that has not been pre-assessed shall not be reduced to less than seventy-five percent of the required buffer, or twenty-five feet, whichever is greater;
D. The buffer of a wetland that has been pre-assessed according to Section 14.100.250.C shall not be reduced to a value lower than that shown in the column titled Buffer Width with BMPs in Table 14.100.250.C.2 for the specific wetland under consideration;
E. The applicant implements all reasonable measures to reduce the adverse effects of adjacent land uses and ensure no net loss of buffer functions and values. The specific measures that shall be implemented include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Direct lights away from the wetland and buffer;
    2. Locate facilities that generate substantial noise (such as some manufacturing, industrial and recreational facilities) away from the wetland and buffer;
    3. Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within one hundred-fifty feet of wetland;
    4. Implement integrated pest management programs;
    5. Infiltrate or treat, detain and disperse runoff into buffer;
    6. Post signs at the outer edge of the critical area or buffer to clearly indicate the location of the critical area according to the direction of the city;
    7. Plant buffer with native vegetation appropriate for the region to create screens or barriers to noise, light, human intrusion and discourage domestic animal intrusion;
    8. Use low impact development where appropriate;
    9. Establish a permanent conservation easement to protect the wetland and the associated buffer.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.254 Requirements for a Buffer Management Plan.
In order to maintain effective buffer conditions and functions, a vegetation management plan shall be required for all buffer areas, to include:
A. Maintaining adequate cover of native vegetation including trees and understory; if existing tree cover is less than a relative density of twenty, planting shall be required consisting of seedlings at a density of three hundred stems per acre or the equivalent.
B. Provide a dense screen of native evergreen trees at the perimeter of the buffer, if existing vegetation is not sufficient to prevent viewing adjacent development from within the buffer. Planting shall be required equivalent to two rows of three-foot high stock of native evergreens at a triangular spacing of fifteen feet, or three rows of gallon containers at a triangular spacing of eight feet. Fencing may be required if needed to block headlights or other sources of light or to provide an immediate effective visual screen.
C. Provide a plan for control of invasive weeds, and remove existing invasive species.
D. Provide for a monitoring and maintenance plan for a period of at least five years, except this provision may be waived for single-family residential lots.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.260 Mitigation Requirements.
Activities that adversely affect wetlands and/or wetland buffers shall include mitigation sufficient to achieve no net loss of wetland function and values in accordance with Section 14.100.070 and this Section.
A. Wetland Alterations. Compensatory mitigation shall be provided for all wetland alteration and shall re-establish, create, rehabilitate, enhance, and/or preserve equivalent wetland functions and values. Compensation for wetland alterations shall occur in the following order of preference:
    1. Re-establishing wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands;
    2. Rehabilitating wetlands for the purposes of repairing or restoring natural and/or historic functions;
    3. Creating wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those consisting primarily of nonnative, invasive plant species;
    4. Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands;
    5. Preserving Category I or II wetlands that are under imminent threat provided that preservation shall only be allowed in combination with other forms of mitigation and when the Director determines that the overall mitigation package fully replaces the functions and values lost due to development.
B. Mitigation ratios. Compensatory mitigation for wetland alterations shall be based on the wetland category and the type of mitigation activity proposed. The replacement ratio shall be determined according to the ratios provided in the table below provided that replacement ratio for preservation shall be determined by the Director on a case-by-case basis. The created, re-established, rehabilitated, or enhanced wetland area shall at a minimum provide a level of function equivalent to the wetland being altered and shall be located in an appropriate landscape setting.
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| Wetland Category |     Creation      |   Rehabilitation   |   Re-establishment   |   Re-establishment   |    Enhancement    |
|                  |                   |       Only1        |     or Creation      |     or Creation      |       Only1       |
|                  |                   |                    |      (R/C) and       |      (R/C) and       |                   |
|                  |                   |                    |    Rehabilitation    |     Enhancement      |                   |
|                  |                   |                    |        (RH)1         |         (E)1         |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| IV               | 1.5:1             | 3:1                | 1:1 R/C and          | 1:1 R/C and          | 6:1               |
|                  |                   |                    | 1:1 RH               | 2:1 E                |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| III              | 2:1               | 4:1                | 1:1 R/C and          | 1:1 R/C and          | 8:1               |
|                  |                   |                    | 2:1 RH               | 4:1 E                |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| II (Estuarine)   | On a case-by-case | 4:1 Rehabilitation | On a case-by-case    | On a case-by-case    | On a case-by-case |
|                  | basis             | of an estuarine    | basis                | basis                | basis             |
|                  |                   | wetland            |                      |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| II (Interdunal)  | 2:1 Compensation  | 4:1 Compensation   | 1:1 R/C and          | Not recommended2     | Not recommended2  |
|                  | has to be         | has to be          | 2:1 RH compensation  |                      |                   |
|                  | interdunal        | interdunal         | has to be            |                      |                   |
|                  | wetland           | wetland            | interdunal           |                      |                   |
|                  |                   |                    | wetland              |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| II               | 3:1               | 6:1                | 1:1 R/C and          | 1:1 R/C and          | 12:1              |
|                  |                   |                    | 4:1 RH               | 8:1 E                |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Forested)     | 6:1               | 12:1               | 1:1 R/C and          | 1:1 R/C and          | 24:1              |
|                  |                   |                    | 10:1 RH              | 20:1 E               |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Based on      | 4:1               | 8:1                | 1:1 R/C and          | 1:1 R/C and          | 16:1              |
| score for        |                   |                    | 6:1 RH               | 12:1 E               |                   |
| functions)       |                   |                    |                      |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Natural       | Not recommended3  | 6:1 Restoration    | R/C not recommended3 | R/C not recommended3 | On a case-by-case |
| Heritage)        |                   | of a Natural       |                      |                      | basis             |
|                  |                   | Heritage site      |                      |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Coastal       | Not recommended3  | 6:1 Rehabilitation | R/C not recommended3 | R/C not recommended3 | On a case-by-case |
| lagoon)          |                   | of a coastal       |                      |                      | basis             |
|                  |                   | lagoon             |                      |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Bog)          | Not recommended3  | 6:1 Rehabilitation | R/C not recommended3 | R/C not recommended3 | On a case-by-case |
|                  |                   | of a bog           |                      |                      | basis             |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
| I (Estuarine)    | On a case-by-case | 6:1 Rehabilitation | On a case-by-case    | On a case-by-case    | On a case-by-case |
|                  | basis             | of an estuarine    | basis                | basis                | basis             |
|                  |                   | wetland            |                      |                      |                   |
+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+----------------------+----------------------+-------------------+
1These ratios are based on the assumption that the rehabilitation or enhancement actions implemented represent the average degree of improvement possible for the site. Proposals to implement more effective rehabilitation or enhancement actions may result in a lower ratio, while less effective actions may result in a higher ratio. The distinction between rehabilitation and enhancement is not clear-cut. Instead, rehabilitation and enhancement actions span a continuum. Proposals that fall within the gray area between rehabilitation and enhancement will result in a ratio that lies between the ratios for rehabilitation and the ratios for enhancement (see Appendix H for further discussion).
2Due to the dynamic nature of interdunal systems, enhancement is not considered an ecologically appropriate action.
3Natural Heritage sites, coastal lagoons, and bogs are considered irreplaceable wetlands because they perform some functions that cannot be replaced through compensatory mitigation. Impacts to such wetlands would therefore result in a net loss of some functions no matter what kind of compensation is proposed.
C. Compensation for wetland buffer impacts shall occur at a minimum one-to-one ratio. Compensatory mitigation for buffer impacts shall include enhancement of degraded buffers by planting native species, removing structures and impervious surfaces within buffers, and other measures.
D. Mitigation banks shall not be subject to the replacement ratios outlined in the replacement ratio table above, but shall be determined as part of the mitigation banking agreement and certification process.
E. Buffers. Replacement wetlands established pursuant to these mitigation provisions shall have adequate buffers to ensure their protection and sustainability. The buffer shall be based on the category and land-use intensity in Section 14.100.250C.1b provided that the Director shall have the authority to approve a smaller buffer when existing site constraints (such as a road) prohibit attainment of the standard buffer.
F. Adjustment of ratios. The Director shall have the authority to adjust these ratios when a combination of mitigation approaches is proposed. In such cases, the area of altered wetland shall be replaced at a one-to-one ratio through re-establishment or creation, and the remainder of the area needed to meet the ratio can be replaced by enhancement at a two-to-one ratio. For example, impacts to one acre of a Category II wetland requiring a three-to-one ratio for creation can be compensated by creating one acre and enhancing four acres (instead of the additional two acres of creation that would otherwise be required).
G. Location. Compensatory mitigation shall be provided on-site or off-site in the location that will provide the greatest ecological benefit and have the greatest likelihood of success provided that mitigation occurs as close as possible to the impact area and within the same watershed subbasin as the permitted alteration. Compensatory mitigation shall use a landscape-based approach sufficient to maintain the functions and values of critical areas. A permittee may be required to provide compensatory mitigation through an aquatic resource restoration, establishment, enhancement and/or preservation activity.
H. Protection. All mitigation areas whether on- or off-site shall be permanently protected and managed to prevent degradation and ensure protection of critical area functions and values into perpetuity. Permanent protection shall be achieved through deed restriction or other protective covenant in accordance with Section 14.100.080 and 14.100.081.
I. Timing. Mitigation activities shall be timed to occur in the appropriate season based on weather and moisture conditions and shall occur as soon as possible after the permitted alteration.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.261 Wetland Mitigation Plan Requirements.
In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 14.100.072, a compensatory mitigation plan for wetland and wetland buffer impacts shall meet the following requirements:
A. The plan shall be based on applicable portions of the Washington State Department of Ecology’s Wetland Mitigation in Washington State Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans, 2006, or other appropriate guidance document that is consistent with best available science.
B. The plan shall contain sufficient information to demonstrate that the proposed activities are logistically feasible, constructible, ecologically sustainable, and likely to succeed. Specific information to be provided in the plan shall include:
    1. The rationale for site selection;
    2. General description and scaled drawings of the activities proposed including, but not limited to, clearing, grading/excavation, drainage alterations, planting, invasive plant management, installation of habitat structures, irrigation, and other site treatments associated with the development activities and proposed mitigation action(s);
    3. A description of the ecological functions and values that the proposed alteration will affect and the specific ecological functions and values the proposed mitigation area(s) shall provide, together with a description of required or recommended mitigation ratios and an assessment of factors that may affect the success of the mitigation program;
    4. Overall goals of the plan, including wetland function, value, and acreage;
    5. Description of baseline (existing) site conditions including topography, vegetation, soils, hydrology, habitat features (i.e., snags), surrounding land use, and other pertinent information;
    6. Field data confirming the presence of adequate hydrology (surface and/or ground water) to support existing and compensatory wetland area(s);
    7. Nature of mitigation activities, including area of restored, created, enhanced and preserved wetland, by wetland type;
    8. Detailed grading and planting plans showing proposed post-construction topography; general hydrologic patterns; spacing and distribution of plant species, size and type of proposed planting stock, watering or irrigation plans, and other pertinent information;
    9. A description of site treatment measures including invasive species removal, use of mulch and fertilizer, placement of erosion and sediment control devices, and best management practices that will be used to protect existing wetlands and desirable vegetation;
    10. A demonstration that the site will have adequate buffers sufficient to protect the wetland functions into perpetuity.
C. Specific measurable performance standards that the proposed mitigation action(s) shall achieve together with a description of how the mitigation action(s) will be evaluated and monitored to determine if the performance standards are being met and identification of potential courses of action, and any corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates that project performance standards are not being met. The performance standards shall be tied to and directly related to the mitigation goals and objectives.
D. Cost estimates for the installation of the mitigation program, monitoring, and potential corrective actions if project performance standards are not being met.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.262 Wetland Mitigation Monitoring Requirements.
A. All compensatory mitigation projects shall be monitored in accordance with the Monitoring Program developed in accordance with Section 14.100.072.D for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met, but generally not for a period less than five years. Reports shall be submitted annually for the first three years following construction and at the completion of years five, seven, and ten if applicable to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensatory mitigation. The Director shall have the authority to modify or extend the monitoring period and require additional monitoring reports for up to ten years when any of the following conditions apply:
    1. The project does not meet the performance standards identified in the mitigation plan;
    2. The project does not provide adequate replacement for the functions and values of the impacted critical area;
    3. The project involves establishment of forested plant communities, which require longer time for establishment.
B. Mitigation monitoring reports shall include information sufficient to document and assess the degree of mitigation success or failure as defined by the performance standards contained in the approved mitigation plan. Information to be provided in annual monitoring reports shall include the following:
    1. Number and location of vegetation sample plots used to document compliance with performance standards;
    2. Measurements of the percent survival of planted material, plant cover, stem density, presence of invasive species, or other attributes;
    3. For sites that involve wetland creation, re-establishment or rehabilitation, hydrologic observations of soil saturation/inundation as needed to demonstrate that a site meets the wetland hydrology criterion;
    4. Representative photographs of the site;
    5. A written summary of overall site conditions and recommendations for maintenance actions if needed;
    6. Other information that the Director deems necessary to ensure the success of the site.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.263 Wetland Mitigation Banks.
A. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:
    1. The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC;
    2. The Director determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and
    3. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification.
B. Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification.
C. Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, bank service areas may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.300 Frequently Flooded Areas - Designation.
A. All areas within the city that have been accurately delineated based on hydrologic and hydraulic studies completed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in 1984, and as subsequently revised and amended are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The flood areas are classified as either one of two types:
    1. Floodway. Floodways are defined as the channel of a stream and adjacent land areas which are required to carry and discharge the flood water or flood flows of any river or stream associated with a regulatory flood;
    2. Floodway fringe. The flood fringe is defined as that land area which is outside a stream’s floodway but is subject to periodic inundation due to flooding associated with a regulatory flood.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.310 Mapping of Frequently Flooded Areas.
A. The approximate location and extent of frequently flooded areas are shown on the following adopted critical areas map: City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 2: Frequently Flooded Areas. This map is based on data obtained from:
    1. Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps, July 1984, or as later revised.
B. These maps are to be used as a guide for the city, project applicants, and/or property owners and may be continuously updated as new critical areas are identified. They are a reference and do not provide a final critical area designation.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.320 Frequently Flooded Areas - Regulation.
“Frequently flooded areas” are those same areas regulated by the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, Chapter 15.55 of the Aberdeen Municipal Code, and are protected through regulations provided in that Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.400 Geologically Hazardous Areas - Designation.
A. Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events. The following regulations, in combination with the performance standards for development, will guide development in these critical areas. The purpose of these regulations is to maintain the natural integrity of hazardous areas and their buffers in order to protect adjacent lands from the impacts of landslides, mudslides, subsidence, excessive erosion and seismic events, and to safeguard the public from these threats to life or property. Geologically hazardous areas are designated as those areas that are susceptible to one of more of the following types of hazards:
    1. Erosion hazard;
    2. Landslide hazard;
    3. Seismic hazard;
    4. Other geological events including tsunamis, mass wasting, debris flows, rock falls, and differential settlement.
B. Erosion hazard areas. Erosion hazard areas are those areas of Aberdeen which:
    1. Contain soils or soils complexes identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resource Conservation Service or the Soil Survey for Grays Harbor County as having “moderate to severe,” “severe” or “very severe” erosion hazard potential;
    2. Are impacted by shore land and/or stream bank erosion; or
    3. Areas with a slope greater than fifteen percent.
C. Landslide hazard areas. Landslide hazard areas are those areas susceptible to landslides because of any combination of bedrock, soil, slope (gradient), slope aspect, structure, hydrology, or other physical factors. Potential landslide hazard areas exhibit one or more of the following characteristics:
    1. Sensitive sloped areas. Slopes exceeding thirty-five percent with a vertical relief of ten or more feet except areas composed of competent rock and properly engineered slopes designed and approved by a geotechnical engineer licensed in the state of Washington and experienced with the site;
    2. Areas mapped by the Washington State Department of Ecology (Coastal Zone Atlas) or the Washington State Department of Natural Resources (slope stability mapping) as unstable (“U”), unstable old slides (“UOS”), or unstable recent slides (“URS”);
    3. Areas designated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural Resource Conservation Service as having “severe” limitation for building site development;
    4. Areas that have shown evidence of historic failure or instability, including but not limited to, back-rotated benches on slopes; areas with structures that exhibit structural damage such as settling and racking of building foundations; and areas that have toppling, leaning, or bowed trees caused by ground surface movement;
    5. Slopes greater than fifteen percent that have a relatively permeable geologic unit overlying a relatively impermeable unit and having springs or ground water seepage;
    6. Areas potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action;
    7. Areas located in a canyon or active alluvial fan, presently or potentially subject to inundation by debris flows or catastrophic flooding;
    8. Areas designated as quaternary slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, or landslides on maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey or Washington State Department of Natural Resources;
    9. Areas that are at risk of mass wasting due to seismic forces; and
    10. Slopes having gradients steeper than eighty percent subject to rock fall during seismic shaking.
D. Seismic hazard areas. Seismic hazard areas are those areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, soil liquefaction or surface faulting including:
    1. Areas subject to surface faulting during a seismic event;
    2. Areas with underlying deposits indicative of a risk of liquefaction during a seismic event, including those areas mapped as “moderate,” “moderate to high,” and “high” by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources;
    3. Areas subject to slope failure during a seismic event;
    4. Areas that are at risk of mass wasting due to seismic forces.
Seismic hazards shall be as identified in Washington State Department of Natural Resources seismic hazard and liquefaction susceptibility maps for Western Washington and other geologic resources.
E. Tsunami hazard areas. Tsunami hazard areas are coastal areas susceptible to flooding and inundation as the result of excessive wave action derived from seismic or other geologic events, and include those areas mapped within the Tsunami Hazard Map of the Southern Washington Coast by the Washington Department of Natural Resources.
F. Other hazard areas. Geologically hazardous areas shall also include areas determined by the Director as those areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of other geological events including mass wasting, debris flows, rock falls and differential settlement.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.410 Mapping of Geologially Hazardous Areas.
A. The approximate location and extent of geologically hazardous areas containing known or suspected risk are shown on the following adopted Critical Areas Maps: City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 5: Geologic Hazard Areas: Landslide, Liquefaction and Seismic; and City of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 6: Geologic Hazard Areas: Erosion and Steep Slopes. The hazard areas outlined on these maps are based on the following data:
    1. USGS ten meter digital elevation model (slope);
    2. USDA Soil Survey of Grays Harbor County Area, Washington;
    3. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Liquefaction Susceptibility Map of Grays Harbor County, Washington;
    4. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Tsunami Hazard Map of the Southern Washington Coast;
    5. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Site Class Map of Grays Harbor County, Washington; and
    6. Grays Harbor County Landslide Hazards.
B. These maps are to be used as a guide for the city, project applicants and/or property owners, and may be updated as new information becomes available. They are a reference and do not provide a final critical area designation.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.420 Activities Allowed in Geologically Hazardous Areas.
A. The following activities are allowed in geologically hazardous areas pursuant to Section 14.100.050.B, require notification to the Director, but do not require review or submission of a critical area report provided that the activity will not increase the risk of the hazard:
    1. Extreme slope hazard areas. Installation of fences may be allowed within an extreme slope hazard area.
    2. Seismic, tsunami and other hazard areas. 
        a. Additions to existing residences that are two hundred-fifty square feet or less, provided the additions conform with building and construction codes adopted by the city; and
        b. Installation of fences.
B. Except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter, all other activities, with the exception of those defined in Section 14.100.420.A, 14.100.050.A, 14.100.050.B, and 14.100.050.C, may be permitted by the Director consistent with the review process described in this Chapter and the submittal of a critical area report.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.430 Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Geologically Hazardous Areas.
A. Prepared by a qualified professional. A critical areas report for a geologically hazardous area shall be prepared by a geotechnical engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington, with experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems or by a geologist who earns his or her livelihood from the field of geology and/or geotechnical analysis, with experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic and ground water flow systems, who has experience preparing reports for the relevant type of hazard. Preparation of these reports by a state of Washington registered geologist is preferred.
B. Area addressed in critical area report. The following areas shall be addressed in a critical area report for geologically hazardous areas:
    1. The project area of the proposed activity; and
    2. All geologically hazardous areas within two hundred feet of the project area or that have potential to be affected by the proposal.
C. Geotechnical assessment. A critical area report for a geologically hazardous area shall contain an assessment of geological hazards including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:
    1. Site and construction plans. The report shall include a copy of the site plans for the proposal showing:
        a. The type and extent of geologic hazard areas and any other critical areas and buffers on, adjacent to, within two hundred feet of, or that are likely to impact the proposal;
        b. Proposed development, including the location of existing and proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities, with dimensions indicating distances to the floodplain;
        c. The topography, in two-foot contours, of the project area and all hazard areas addressed in the report; and
        d. Clearing limits.
    2. Assessment of geological characteristics. The report shall include an assessment of the geologic characteristics and engineering properties of the soils, sediments, and/or rock of the project area and potentially affected adjacent properties, and a review of the site history regarding landslides, erosion, and prior grading. Soils analysis shall be accomplished in accordance with accepted taxonomic classification systems in use in the region. The assessment shall include, but not be limited to:
        a. A description of the surface and subsurface geology, hydrology, soils, and vegetation found in the project area and in all hazard areas addressed in the report;
        b. A detailed overview of the field investigations, published data and references; data and conclusions from past assessments of the site; and site specific measurements, test, investigations, or studies that support the identification of geologically hazardous areas; and
        c. A description of the vulnerability of the site to seismic and other geologic events.
    3. Analysis of proposal. The report shall contain a geotechnical analysis including a detailed description of the project, its relationship to the geologic hazard(s), and its potential impact upon the hazard area, the subject property, and affected adjacent properties; and
    4. Minimum buffer and building setback. The report shall make a recommendation for the minimum no-disturbance buffer and minimum building setback from any geologic hazard based upon the geotechnical analysis.
D. Incorporation of previous study. Where a valid geotechnical report has been prepared within the last five years for a specific site and where the proposed land use activity and surrounding site conditions are unchanged, said report may be incorporated into the required critical area report. The applicant shall submit a geotechnical assessment detailing any changed environmental conditions associated with the site.
E. Mitigation of long-term impacts. When hazard mitigation is required, the mitigation plan shall specifically address how the activity maintains or reduces the pre-existing level of risk to the site and adjacent properties on a long-term basis (equal to or exceeding the projected lifespan of the activity or occupation). Proposed mitigation techniques shall be considered to provide long-term hazard reduction only if they do not require regular maintenance or other actions to maintain their function. Mitigation may also be required to avoid any increase in risk above the pre-existing conditions following abandonment of the activity.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.440 Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Specific Hazards.
In addition to the general critical area report requirements of Section 14.100.060, critical area reports for geologically hazardous areas must meet the requirements of this Section. Critical area reports for two or more types of critical areas must meet the report requirements for each relevant type of critical area.
A. Erosion, landslide and extreme slope hazard areas. In addition to the basic critical area report requirements, a critical area report for an erosion hazard or landslide hazard area shall include the following information at a minimum:
    1. Site plan. The report shall include a copy of the site plan for the proposal showing:
        a. The height of slope, slope gradient, and cross section of the project area;
        b. The location of springs, seeps, or other surface expressions of ground water on or within two hundred feet of the project area or that have potential to be affected by the proposal; and
        c. The location and description of surface water runoff.
    2. Geotechnical analysis. The geotechnical analysis shall specifically include:
        a. A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover;
        b. An estimate of load capacity including surface and ground water conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural development;
        c. An estimate of slope stability and the effect construction and placement of structures will have on the slope over the estimated life of the structure;
        d. An estimate of the bluff retreat rate that recognizes and reflects potential catastrophic events such as seismic activity or a one hundred year storm event;
        e. Consideration of the run-out hazard of landslide debris and/or the impacts of landslide run-out on down slope properties;
        f. A study of slope stability including an analysis of proposed angles of cut and fill and site grading;
        g. Recommendations for building limitations, structural foundations, and an estimate of foundation settlement;
        h. An analysis of proposed surface and subsurface drainage and the vulnerability of the site to erosion;
    3. Hazards analysis. The hazards analysis component of the critical areas report shall specifically include:
        a. A description of the extent and type of vegetative cover;
        b. A description of subsurface conditions based on data from site-specific explorations;
        c. Descriptions of surface and ground water conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations, and all structural improvements;
        d. An estimate of slope stability and the effect construction and placement of structures will have on the slope over the estimated life of the structure;
        e. An estimate of the bluff retreat rate that recognizes and reflects potential catastrophic events such as seismic activity or a one hundred year storm event;
        f. Consideration of the run-out hazard of landslide debris and/or the impacts of landslide run-out on down slope properties;
        g. A study of slope stability including an analysis of proposed cuts, fills, and other site grading;
        h. Recommendations for building siting limitations; and
        i. An analysis of proposed surface and subsurface drainage, and the vulnerability of the site to erosion;
    4. Geotechnical engineering report. The technical information for a project within a landslide hazard area shall include a geotechnical engineering report prepared by a licensed engineer that presents engineering recommendations for the following:
        a. Parameters for design of site improvements including appropriate foundations and retaining structures. These should include allowable load and resistance capacities for bearing and lateral loads, installation considerations, and estimates of settlement performance.
        b. Recommendations for drainage and subdrainage improvements.
        c. Earthwork recommendations including clearing and site preparation criteria, fill placement and compaction criteria, temporary and permanent slope inclinations and protection, and temporary excavation support, if necessary.
        d. Mitigation of adverse site conditions including slope stabilization measures and seismically unstable soils, if appropriate.
    5. Erosion and sediment control plan. For any development proposal on a site containing an erosion hazard area, an erosion and sediment control plan shall be required. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared in compliance with requirements set forth in the city’s construction standards.
    6. Drainage plan. The report shall include a drainage plan for the collection, transport, treatment, discharge and/or recycle of water. The drainage plan should consider on-site septic system disposal volumes where the additional volume will affect the erosion or landslide hazard area.
    7. Mitigation plans. Hazard and environmental mitigation plans for erosion and landslide hazard areas shall include the location and methods of drainage, surface water management, locations and methods of erosion control, a vegetation management and/or replanting plan and/or other means for maintaining long term soil stability.
    8. Monitoring surface waters. If the Director determines that there is a significant risk of damage to downstream receiving waters due to potential erosion from the site based on the size of the project, the proximity to the receiving waters, or the sensitivity of the receiving waters, the critical area report shall include a plan to monitor the surface water discharge from the site. The monitoring plan shall include a recommended schedule for submitting monitoring reports to the city.
B. Seismic Hazard Areas. A Critical Area Report will be required for a proposal within a seismic hazard area if the city deems a report is necessary to determine that the proposal conforms with applicable building and construction codes, especially as these apply to protection of structures from seismic events. In addition to the basic report requirements, a critical area report for a seismic hazard area shall also meet the following requirements:
    1. The site map shall show all known and mapped faults within two hundred feet of the project area or that have potential to be affected by the proposal;
    2. The hazards analysis shall include a complete discussion of the potential impacts of seismic activity on the site (for example, forces generated and fault displacement);
    3. A geotechnical engineering report shall evaluate the physical properties of the subsurface soils, especially the thickness of unconsolidated deposits and their liquefaction potential. If it is determined that the site is subject to liquefaction, mitigation measures appropriate to the scale of the development shall be recommended and implemented.
C. Tsunami hazard areas. A tsunami hazard area critical area report will not be required for activities related to the development or modification of a single-family residence in a tsunami hazard area. For all other activities that are not otherwise exempt or allowed by this title, a critical area report for a tsunami hazard area shall also meet the following requirements in addition to the basic report requirements:
    1. Site plan. The site plan shall show all areas within two hundred feet of the project area that have potential to be inundated by wave action derived from a seismic event;
    2. Hazards analysis. The hazards analysis shall include a complete discussion of the potential impacts of the tsunami hazard on the site; and
    3. Emergency management plan. The emergency management plan shall include plans for emergency building exit routes, site evacuation routes, emergency training, notification of local emergency management officials, and an emergency warning system.
D. Other geologically hazardous areas. In addition to the basic report requirements, the Director may require additional information to be included in the critical area report when determined to be necessary to the review the proposed activity and the subject hazard. Additional information that may be required, includes, but is not limited to:
    1. Site plan. The site plan shall show all hazard areas located within two hundred feet of the project area or that have potential to be affected by the proposal; and
    2. Geotechnical analysis. The geotechnical analysis shall include a complete discussion of the potential impacts of the hazard on the project area and of the proposal on the hazard.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.450 Geologically Hazardous Areas - General Requirements.
A. Alterations of geologically hazardous areas or associated buffers may only occur for activities that:
    1. Will not increase the threat of the geological hazard to adjacent properties beyond pre-development conditions;
    2. Will not adversely impact other critical areas;
    3. Are designed so that the hazard to the project is eliminated or mitigated to a level equal to or less than pre-development conditions; and
    4. Are determined to be safe as designed and under anticipated conditions by a qualified engineer or geologist, licensed in the state of Washington.
B. Critical facilities shall not be sited within geologically hazardous areas unless there is no other practical alternative.
C. In addition to the provisions of this Chapter, alterations of geologically hazardous areas or associated buffers must conform to city construction standards and building codes.
D. Seismic hazard areas standards. Development may be allowed in seismic hazard areas when all of the following apply:
    1. If evaluation of site-specific subsurface conditions by a qualified professional demonstrates that the proposed development site is not subject to the conditions indicating seismic risk, the provisions of this Subsection shall not apply.
    2. If a site is subject to seismic risk, the applicant shall implement appropriate engineering design based on analysis by a qualified professional of the best available engineering and geological practices that either eliminates or minimizes the risk of structural damage or injury resulting from seismically induced settlement or soil liquefaction including compliance with the following criteria:
        a. Subdivision within a seismic hazard areas shall assure that each resulting lot has sufficient buildable area outside of the hazard area or that appropriate limitations on building and reference to appropriate standards are incorporated into subdivision approval and may be placed as restrictions on the face of the plat;
        b. Structures in seismic hazard areas shall conform to applicable analysis and design criteria and provisions of building and construction codes as currently adopted by the city. The city may require the submission of a geotechnical analysis to determine that the proposal conforms with applicable building and construction codes.
        c. Public roads, bridges, utilities and trails shall be allowed when there are no feasible alternative locations and geotechnical analysis and design are provided that ensure the roadway, bridge and utility structures and facilities will not be susceptible to damage from seismic induced ground deformation. Mitigation measures shall be designed in accordance with the most recent version of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual or other appropriate document(s) adopted for use by the city.
        d. Critical facilities shall not be located in seismic hazard areas unless mitigation shall be provided which renders the proposed development as a stable as if it were not located within a seismic hazard area. The Director may waive or reduce engineering study and design requirements for alterations in seismic hazard areas for:
            (i) Mobile homes;
            (ii) Additions or alterations to existing structures that do not increase occupancy or significantly affect the risk of structural damage or injury; and
            (iii) Buildings that are not dwelling units or used as places of employment or public assembly.
E. Tsunami hazard areas standards. Activities on sites containing areas susceptible to inundation due to tsunami hazards shall require an evacuation and emergency management plan. The city may use the performance standards for frequently flooded areas (see Chapter 15.55) as guidance in reviewing new structures proposed in tsunami hazard areas.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.460 Additional Requirements for Specific Hazards.
A. Erosion and landslide hazard areas. Activities on sites containing erosion or landslide hazards shall meet the following requirements:
    1. Buffer required. A buffer shall be established from all edges of erosion or landslide hazard areas. The size of the buffer shall be determined by the Director to eliminate or minimize the risk of property damage, death or injury resulting from erosion and landslides caused in whole or part by the development, based upon review of and concurrence with a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional.
        a. Minimum buffer. The minimum buffer shall be equal to the height of the slope or fifty feet, whichever is greater.
        b. Buffer reduction. The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of ten feet when a qualified professional demonstrates to the Director’s satisfaction that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development, adjacent developments and uses, and the subject critical area.
        c. Increased buffer. The buffer may be increased if the Director determines a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed and existing development.
    2. Alterations. Alterations of an erosion or landslide hazard area and/or buffer may only occur for activities for which a geotechnical analysis is submitted and determines that:
        a. The development will not increase surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond pre-development conditions;
        b. The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties; and
        c. Such alterations will not adversely impact other critical areas.
    3. Construction standards. Development within an erosion or landslide hazard area and/or buffer shall be designed to meet the following basic requirements unless it can be demonstrated that an alternative design that deviates from one or more of these standards provides greater long-term slope stability while meeting all other provisions of this Chapter. The requirement for long-term slope stability shall exclude designs that require regular and periodic maintenance to maintain their level of function. In addition to those requirements outlined in Section 14.100.450, the basic development construction standards within geologically hazardous areas are:
        a. The proposed development shall not decrease the factor of safety for landslide occurrences below the limits of 1.5 for static conditions and 1.2 for dynamic conditions. Analysis of dynamic conditions shall be based on a minimum horizontal acceleration as established by the current version of the Uniform Building Code.
        b. Structures and improvements shall be clustered to avoid geologically hazardous areas and other critical areas.
        c. Structures and improvements shall minimize alterations to the natural contour of the slope and foundations shall be tiered where possible to conform to existing topography.
        d. Structures and improvements shall be located to preserve the most critical portion of the site and its natural landforms and vegetation.
        e. The proposed development shall not result in greater risk or a need for increased buffers on neighboring properties.
        f. The use of retaining walls that allow the maintenance of existing natural slope area is preferred over graded artificial slopes.
        g. Development shall be designed to minimize impervious lot coverage.
    4. Vegetation shall be retained. Unless otherwise provided or as part of an approved alteration, removal of vegetation from an erosion or landslide hazard area or related buffer shall be prohibited.
    5. Seasonal restriction. Clearing shall be allowed only from May 1 to October 1 of each year provided that the city may extend or shorten the dry season on a case-by-case basis depending on actual weather conditions, except that timber harvest, not including brush clearing or stump removal, may be allowed pursuant to an approved forest practice permit issued by the city or the Washington State Department of Natural Resources.
    6. Utility lines and pipes. Utility lines and pipes shall be permitted in erosion and landslide hazard areas only when the applicant demonstrates that no other practical alternative is available. The line or pipe shall be located above ground and properly anchored and/or designed so that it will continue to function in the event of an underlying slide. Stormwater conveyance shall be allowed only through a high-density polyethylene pipe with fuse-welded joints, or similar product that is technically equal or superior.
    7. Point discharges. Point discharges from surface water facilities and roof drains onto or upstream from an erosion or landslide hazard area shall be prohibited except as follows:
        a. Conveyed via continuous storm pipe downslope to a point where there are no erosion hazards areas downstream from the discharge;
        b. Discharged at flow durations matching predeveloped conditions, with adequate energy dissipation into existing channels that previously conveyed stormwater runoff in the predeveloped state; or
        c. Dispersed discharge upslope of the steep slope onto a low-gradient undisturbed buffer demonstrated to be adequate to infiltrate all surface and stormwater runoff, and where it can be demonstrated that such discharge will not increase the saturation of the slope;
    8. Subdivisions. The division of land in erosion and landslide hazard areas and associated buffers is subject to the following:
        a. Land that is located wholly within an erosion or landslide hazard area or its buffer may not be subdivided. Land that is located partially within an erosion or landslide hazard area or its buffer may be divided provided that each resulting lot has sufficient buildable area outside of, and will not affect, the erosion or landslide hazard or its buffer.
        b. Access roads and utilities may be permitted within the erosion or landslide hazard area and associated buffers if the city determines that no other feasible alternative exists.
    9. Prohibited development. On-site sewage disposal systems, including drain fields, shall be prohibited within erosion and landslide hazard areas and related buffers.
B. Extreme slope hazard areas. Activities on sites containing extreme slope hazards shall be considered unbuildable. This includes, but is not limited to, construction of buildings, sewage disposal systems, and roads. Construction of facilities shall not be permitted in extreme slope hazard areas unless under an exception provided consistent with Section 14.100.051 of this Chapter. If an exception is granted, the provisions of Sections 14.100.450 must be satisfied.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.500 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Designation.
A. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas are those areas identified as being of critical importance to the maintenance of certain fish, wildlife, and/or plant species. Theses areas are typically identified either by known point locations of specific species (such as a nest or den) or by habitat areas or both. All areas within the city meeting these criteria are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
B. For purposes of this Chapter, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall include all of the following:
    1. The Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife priority habitats and species recommendations for species and habitats, for:
        a. Endangered species listed in WAC 232-12-014;
        b. Threatened species listed in WAC 232-12-001;
        c. Sensitive species listed in WAC 232-12-011;
    2. Bald eagle habitat pursuant to WAC 232-12-292;
    3. Endangered or threatened species listed in accordance with the federal Endangered Species Act together with the areas with which they have a primary association;
    4. State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas including:
        a. Department of Natural Resources designated Natural Areas Preserves and Natural Resource Conservation Areas;
        b. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife designated Wildlife Recreation Areas;
    5. Waters of the state as defined in RCW 77.55.011 and 90.56.010 including shorelines of the state as defined in RCW 90.58.010;
    6. Streams shall be designated in accordance with the Washington State Department of Natural Resources stream type as provided in WAC 222-16-030 with the following revisions:
        a. Type S water. All waters, as inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under Chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW, including periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands.
        b. Type F-A water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are within defined channels greater than ten feet in width, as defined by the OHWM and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of one-half acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat.
        c. Type F-B water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are within defined channels less than ten feet in width, as defined by the OHWM, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of less than one-half acre at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat.
        d. Type Np water. All segments of natural waters within defined channels that are perennial nonfish habitat streams. Perennial streams are waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall. However, for the purpose of water typing, Type Np waters include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow.
        e. Type Ns water. All segments of natural waters within defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np waters. These are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np water. Type Ns waters must be physically connected by an above ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np waters.
        f. Nonfish habitat streams are those streams that have no known or potential use by anadromous or resident fish based on the stream character, hydrology and gradient provided that human-made barriers shall not be considered a limit on fish use except when the Director makes the following findings:
            (i) The human-made barrier is located beneath public infrastructure that is unlikely to be replaced and it is not feasible to remove the barrier without removing the public infrastructure provided that the infrastructure is not identified for future modification in the capital facility or other plans of the public agency responsible for the infrastructure, and the facility will not exceed its design life within the foreseeable future;
            (ii) The human-made barrier is located beneath one or more occupied structures and it is not feasible to remove the barrier without removing the structure, and the structure is of a size and condition that removal or substantial remodel is not likely;
            (iii) The human-made barrier is not identified for removal by a public agency or in an adopted watershed plan.
    7. Naturally occurring ponds under twenty acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat;
    8. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity;
    9. Areas open to shellfish gathering under applicable health regulations and any “shellfish protection district” that may be established in accordance with Chapter 90.72 RCW;
    10. Kelp and eelgrass beds and herring and smelt spawning areas;
    11. Areas of rare plant species and high quality ecosystems that are identified by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources through the natural heritage program.
    12. Land useful or essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and open spaces.
C. In addition to the species and habitats identified in Subsection B of this Section, the city may designate additional species and/or habitats of local importance as follows:
    1. In order to nominate an area or a species to the category of locally important, an individual or organization must:
        a. Demonstrate a need for special consideration based on:
            (i) Declining population;
            (ii) High sensitivity to habitat manipulation; or
            (iii) Demonstrated commercial, recreational, cultural, or other special value;
        b. Propose relevant management strategies considered effective and within the scope of this Chapter; and
        c. Provide a map showing the species or habitat location(s).
    2. Submitted proposals shall be reviewed by the city and may be forwarded to the state Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Natural Resources, and/or other local, state, federal, and/or tribal agencies or experts for comments and recommendations regarding accuracy of data and effectiveness of proposed management strategies.
    3. If the proposal is found to be complete, accurate, and consistent with the purposes and intent of this Chapter, the city commission will hold a public hearing to solicit comment. Approved nominations will become designated locally important habitats or species and will be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
    4. Those portions of the hemispheric significant reserve designated by the Western Shorebird Reserve Network lying within city boundaries are designated as habitat of local importance.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.510 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Mapping.
A. The approximate location and extent of conservation areas are shown on the city of Aberdeen Critical Area Map 4, as most recently updated, and the following critical area maps hereby adopted:
    1. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Priority Habitat and Species maps;
    2. Washington State Department of Natural Resources, Official Water Type Reference maps, as amended;
    3. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Puget Sound Intertidal Habitat Inventory maps;
    4. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Shorezone Inventory;
    5. Washington State Department of Natural Resources Natural Heritage Program mapping data;
    6. Washington State Department of Health Annual Inventory of Shellfish Harvest Areas;
    7. Anadromous and resident salmonid distribution maps contained in the Habitat Limiting Factors reports published by the Washington Conservation Commission;
    8. Washington State Department of Natural Resources State Natural Area Preserves and Natural Resource Conservation Area maps; and
    9. Additional data and updates to the information resources listed in this Section as determined necessary by the city.
B. The city of Aberdeen critical areas map is to be used as a guide for the city, project applicants and/or property owners, and may be continuously updated as new critical areas are identified. In some instances, it is a reference and does not provide a final critical area designation.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.520 Critical Area Report - Additional Requirements for Conservation Habitat Areas.
In addition to the general critical area report requirements of Section 14.100.060, critical area reports for habitat conservation areas must meet the requirements of this Section. Critical area reports for two or more types of critical areas must meet the report requirements for each relevant type of critical area.
A. Preparation by a qualified professional. A critical areas report for a habitat conservation area shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a biologist with experience preparing reports for the relevant type of habitat.
B. Areas addressed in critical area report. The following areas shall be addressed in a critical area report for habitat conservation areas:
    1. The project area of the proposed activity;
    2. All habitat conservation areas and recommended buffers within three hundred feet of the project area; and
    3. All shoreline areas, floodplains, other critical areas, and related buffers within three hundred feet of the project area.
C. Habitat assessment. A habitat assessment is an investigation of the project area to evaluate the potential presence or absence of designated critical fish or wildlife species or habitat. A critical area report for a habitat conservation area shall contain an assessment of habitats including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:
    1. Detailed description of vegetation on and adjacent to the project area and its associated buffer;
    2. Identification of any species of local importance, priority species, or endangered, threatened, sensitive, or candidate species that have a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and assessment of potential project impacts to the use of the site by the species;
    3. A discussion of any federal, state, or local special management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the project area;
    4. A detailed discussion of the direct and indirect potential impacts on habitat by the project, including potential impacts to water quality;
    5. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing habitats and restore any habitat that was degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity and to be conducted in accordance with Mitigation Sequencing, Section 14.100.071; and
    6. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs.
D. Additional information may be required. When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project area conditions, the Director may also require the habitat management plan to include:
    1. An evaluation by an independent qualified professional regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate;
    2. A request for consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or the local Native American Indian Tribe or other appropriate agency; and
    3. Detailed surface and subsurface hydrologic features both on and adjacent to the site.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.530 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas-Water bodies-Additional Requirements for Specific Activities.
The following activities may be permitted by the Director in water bodies or their buffers provided that: the specified requirements for the activities have been included in the design and implementation of the proposal; the applicant has taken all reasonable measures to avoid adverse effects on water body and water body buffer functions and values; the applicant has provided compensatory mitigation for all adverse impacts to water bodies and their buffers that cannot be avoided; the applicant has demonstrated that the amount and degree of alteration is limited to the minimum needed to accomplish the project purpose; and the activities and uses are not prohibited by any other applicable law. Submittal of a critical area report will not be required for the activities listed in this Section, except as provided below.
A. Restoration of streams previously piped or channeled into a new or relocation streambed when part of a restoration plan that will result in equal or better habitat and water quality and quantity, and that will not diminish the flow capacity of the stream or other natural stream processes provided that the relocation has a state hydraulic project approval and all other applicable permits.
B. Road, trail, bridge, and right-of-way crossings provided they meet the following criteria:
    1. There is no other feasible alternative route with less impact on critical areas.
    2. The crossing minimizes interruption of natural processes such as the downstream movement of wood and gravel and the movement of all fish and wildlife. Bridges are preferred for all stream crossings and should be designed to maintain the existing stream gradient and substrate, provide adequate horizontal clearance on each side of the ordinary high water mark and adequate vertical clearance above ordinary high water mark for animal passage. If a bridge crossing is not feasible, culverts shall be designed according to applicable state and federal guidance criteria for fish passage as identified in Fish Passage Design at Road Culverts, WDFW March 1999, and/or the National Marine Fisheries Service Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings, 2000 (and subsequent revisions), and in accordance with a state hydraulic project approval. The applicant or property owner shall maintain fish passage through the bridge or culvert.
    3. The city may require that existing culverts be removed, repaired, or modified as a condition of approval if the culvert is detrimental to fish habitat or water quality, and a feasible alternative exists.
    4. Crossings shall be limited to the minimum width necessary. Common crossings are the preferred approach where multiple properties can be accessed by one crossing.
    5. Access to private development sites may be permitted to cross streams if there are no feasible alternative alignments. Alternative access shall be pursued to the maximum extent feasible, including through the provisions of Chapter 8.24 RCW. Exceptions or deviations from technical standards for width or other dimensions, and specific construction standards to minimize impacts may be specified, including placement on elevated structures as an alternative to fill, if feasible.
C. Passive outdoor recreational or educational activities which do not significantly affect the function of the water body or regulated buffer (including wildlife management or viewing structures, outdoor scientific or interpretive facilities, trails, hunting blinds, etc.) and meet the following criteria:
    1. Trails shall not exceed four feet in width and shall be surfaced with gravel or pervious material, including boardwalk;
    2. The trail or facility shall be located in the outer fifty percent of the buffer area unless a location closer to the water body edge is required for interpretive purposes;
    3. The trail or facility shall be constructed and maintained in manner that minimizes disturbance of the water body or buffer;
D. Utility lines and facilities providing local delivery service, not including facilities such as electrical substations, water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, petroleum products pipelines and transformers or other facilities containing hazardous substances, may cross water bodies or be located in buffers, if the following criteria are met:
    1. There is no reasonable location or route that does not cross the water body or outside the buffer based on analysis of system needs, available technology and alternative routes. Location within a buffer shall be preferred over a location within a water body. Crossings shall be contained within the footprint of an existing road or utility crossing where possible.
    2. Impacts to fish and wildlife habitat shall be avoided to the maximum extent possible and mitigated when avoidance is not feasible.
    3. Utilities that cross water bodies shall be as close to perpendicular to the channel as possible to minimize disturbance. Boring under the water body may be required.
    4. If not a crossing, the utility line shall be located as far from the water body as possible.
    5. The utility installation shall maintain the existing stream gradient and substrate.
    6. Clearing, grading, and excavation activities shall be limited to the minimum necessary to install the utility line, and the area is restored following utility installation.
E. Stormwater conveyance or discharge facilities such as infiltration systems dispersion trenches, level spreaders, and outfalls may be permitted in a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area buffer on a case-by-case basis when all of the following are met:
    1. Due to topographic or other physical constraints there are no feasible locations for these facilities outside the buffer.
    2. The discharge is located as far from the ordinary high water mark as possible and in a manner that minimizes disturbance of soils and vegetation.
    3. The discharge outlet is in an appropriate location and is designed to prevent erosion and promote infiltration.
    4. The discharge meets stormwater flow and water quality standard as provided in Chapter 13.68, Stormwater Management, of the Municipal Code.
F. Stream bank stabilization, shoreline protection, and public or private launching ramps may be permitted subject to all of the following standards:
    1. Natural shoreline processes will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. The activity will not result in increased erosion and will not alter the size or distribution of shoreline or stream substrate, or eliminate or reduce sediment supply from feeder bluffs;
    2. Adverse impact to fish or wildlife habitat conservation areas, specifically juvenile and adult fish migration corridors, or associated wetlands will be mitigated;
    3. Nonstructural measures, such as placing or relocating the development further from the shoreline, planting vegetation, or installing on-site drainage improvements, are not feasible or not sufficient;
    4. Stabilization is achieved through bioengineering or soft armoring techniques in accordance with an applicable hydraulic project approval is issued by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife;
    5. Hard bank armoring may occur only when the property contains an existing permanent structure(s) that is in danger from shoreline erosion caused by riverine processes and not erosion caused by upland conditions, such as the alteration of natural vegetation or drainage, and the armoring shall not increase erosion on adjacent properties and shall not eliminate or reduce sediment supply.
G. New public flood protection measures and expansion of existing measures may be permitted provided that bioengineering or soft armoring techniques shall be used where feasible. Hard bank armoring may occur only in situations where soft approaches do not provide adequate protection and shall be subject to requirements of the shoreline master program, where applicable, hydraulic project approval, and other permits.
H. New docks shall be permitted only for public access, as an accessory to water-dependent uses or associated with a single-family residence; provided, that it is designed and used only as a facility for access to watercraft.
    1. To limit the effects on ecological functions, the number of docks should be limited and new subdivisions should employ shared moorage whenever feasible. Docks on shorelines of the state must comply with policies and regulations of the city of Aberdeen shoreline master program.
    2. Docks shall be located and designed to minimize adverse effects on ecological processes through location where they will interfere with fluvial and limnal processes including gradient and substrate; recruitment of woody debris; and fish habitat, including that related to anadromous fish.
    3. Docks shall minimize reduction in ambient light level by limiting width to the minimum necessary and shall not exceed four feet in width, except where specific information on use patterns justifies a greater width. Materials that will allow light to pass through the deck may be required including grating on walkways or gangplanks in nearshore areas.
    4. Approaches shall utilize piers or other structures to span the entire upper foreshore to the point of intersection with stable upland soils and shall be designed to avoid interfering with stream processes.
    5. Pile spacing shall be the maximum feasible to minimize shading and avoid a wall effect that would block or baffle currents, sediment movement or movement of aquatic life forms, or result in structure damage from driftwood impact or entrapment.
    6. Docks should be constructed of materials that will not adversely affect water quality or aquatic plants and animals in the long term.
I. Launch ramps may be permitted for access to the water for the public or for residents of a development or for water-dependent use subject to the following criteria:
    1. Launch ramps shall be located and designed to minimize adverse effects on fluvial and limnal processes including stream gradient and substrate; recruitment of woody debris; and fish habitat, including that related to anadromous fish;
    2. Ramps shall be placed and maintained near flush with the bank slope. Preferred ramp designs, in order of priority, are:
        a. Open grid designs with minimum coverage of beach substrate;
        b. Seasonal ramps that can be removed and stored upland;
        c. Structures with segmented pads and flexible connections that leave space for natural shoreline substrate and can adapt to changes in shoreline profile.
J. In-stream structures, such as, but not limited to, high flow bypasses, dams, and weirs, other than those regulated exclusively by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) shall be permitted only when the multiple public benefits are provided and ecological impacts are fully mitigated. Dams on shorelines of the state shall be regulated in accordance with the shoreline master program. Dams on other streams shall require a variance as provided by Section 14.100.053.
    1. In-stream facilities locations shall avoid areas of high habitat value for aquatic organisms, specifically anadromous fish;
    2. In-stream facilities shall be designed to produce the least possible effect on fluvial processes and shall minimize change in gradient;
    3. In-stream facilities shall provide mitigation of all impacts on aquatic species and habitat;
    4. In-stream facilities shall provide fish passage, in accordance with Chapter 77.57 RCW;
    5. A construction bond for one hundred fifty percent of the cost of the structure and all mitigation measures shall be filed prior to construction and a maintenance agreement shall specify responsibility for maintenance, shall incorporate the maintenance schedule specified by the design engineer, shall require annual inspections by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Washington, and shall stipulate abandonment procedures which shall include, where appropriate, provisions for site restoration.
K. Facilities permitted as shoreline dependent or shoreline oriented uses in accordance with the city shoreline master program may be located in water bodies and buffers provided that only those facilities that are water dependent or water oriented and facilities for necessary access may be located in water bodies and buffers and provided that the facility is located, designed, constructed and operated to minimize and, where possible, avoid critical area disturbance to the maximum extent feasible. The Director may require the submittal of a critical area report for facilities that are not associated with residential uses.
L. Clearing and grading, when allowed as part of an authorized use or activity or as otherwise allowed in these standards, may be permitted provided that the following shall apply:
    1. Grading is allowed only during the designated dry season, which is typically regarded as May 1st to October 1st of each year provided that the city may extend or shorten the designated dry season on a case-by-case basis based on actual weather conditions.
    2. Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be used at all times. The soil duff layer shall remain undisturbed to the maximum extent possible. Where feasible, disturbed topsoil shall be redistributed to other areas of the site.
    3. The moisture-holding capacity of the topsoil layer shall be maintained by minimizing soil compaction or reestablishing natural soil structure and infiltrative capacity on all areas of the project area not covered by impervious surfaces.
M. Repairs to existing on-site sewage systems. Repairs to failing on-site sewage systems associated with an existing structure shall be accomplished by utilizing one of the following methods that result in the least impact:
    1. Connection to an available public sanitary sewer system;
    2. Replacement with a new on-site sewage system located in a portion of the site that has already been disturbed by development and is located landward as far as possible, provided the proposed sewage system is in compliance with Grays Harbor County Environmental Health Department; or
    3. Repair to the existing on-site septic system
N. Activities in water bodies or water body buffers not expressly allowed by Section 14.100.050, or permitted in Section 14.100.530.A through M shall require review by the Director and shall require submittal of a critical area report. The Director may modify the critical area report requirements according to Section 14.100.061.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.540 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas - General Requirements.
A. Alterations. A habitat conservation area may be altered only if the proposed alteration of the habitat or the mitigation proposed does not degrade the quantitative and qualitative functions and values of the habitat. All new structures and land alterations shall be prohibited from habitat conservation areas, except in accordance with this Chapter.
B. Non-indigenous species. No plant, wildlife, or fish species not indigenous to the region shall be introduced into a habitat conservation area unless authorized by a state or federal permit or approval.
C. Mitigation and contiguous corridors. Mitigation sites shall be located to preserve or achieve contiguous wildlife habitat corridors in accordance with a mitigation plan that is part of an approved critical area report to minimize the isolating effects of development on habitat areas, so long as mitigation of aquatic habitat is located within the same aquatic ecosystem as the area disturbed.
D. Approvals of activities. The Director shall condition approvals of activities allowed within or adjacent to a habitat conservation area or its buffers, as necessary to minimize or mitigate any potential adverse impacts. Conditions shall be based on the best available science and may include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Establishment of buffer zones;
    2. Preservation of critically important vegetation and/or habitat features such as snags and downed wood;
    3. Limitation of access to the habitat area, including fencing to deter unauthorized access;
    4. Seasonal restriction of construction activities;
    5. Establishment of a duration and timetable for periodic review of mitigation activities; and
    6. Requirement of a performance bond, when necessary, to ensure completion and success of proposed mitigation.
E. Mitigation and equivalent or greater biological functions. Mitigation of alterations to habitat conservation areas shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic and hydrologic functions and shall include mitigation for adverse impacts upstream or downstream of the development proposal site. Mitigation shall address each function affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement on a per function basis.
F. Approvals and the best available science. Any approval of alterations or impacts to a habitat conservation area shall be supported by the best available science.
G. Buffers. 
    1. Establishment of buffers. The Director shall require the establishment of buffer areas for activities adjacent to habitat conservation areas when needed to protect habitat conservation areas. Buffers shall consist of an undisturbed area of native vegetation or areas identified for restoration established to protect the integrity, functions, and values of the affected habitat. Required buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the habitat and the type and intensity of human activity proposed to be conducted nearby and shall be consistent with the management recommendations issued by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Habitat conservation areas and their buffers shall be preserved in perpetuity through the use of native growth protection areas and critical area tracts in accordance with Section 14.100.081.
    2. Seasonal restrictions. When a species is more susceptible to adverse impacts during specific periods of the year, seasonal restrictions may apply. Larger buffers may be required and activities may be further restricted during the specified season.
    3. In order to maintain effective buffer conditions and functions, a vegetation management plan shall be required for all buffer areas established to include:
        a. Maintaining adequate cover of native vegetation including trees and understory; if existing tree cover is less than a relative density of twenty, planting shall be required consisting of seedlings at a density of three hundred stems per acre or the equivalent.
        b. Provide a dense screen of native evergreen trees at the perimeter of the buffer. If existing vegetation is not sufficient to prevent viewing adjacent development from within the buffer, planting shall be required equivalent to two rows of three-foot high stock of native evergreens at a triangular spacing of fifteen feet or three rows of gallon containers at a triangular spacing of eight feet. Fencing may be required if needed to block headlights or other sources of light or to provide an immediate effective visual screen.
        c. Provide a plan for control of invasive weeds, and remove existing invasive species.
        d. Provide for a monitoring and maintenance plan for a period of at least five years, except this provision may be waived for single-family residential lots.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.541 Additional Requirements for Subdivisions.
The subdivision and short subdivision of land in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and associated buffers is subject to the following:
A. Land that is located wholly within a habitat conservation area or its buffer may not be subdivided.
B. Land that is located partially within a habitat conservation area or its buffer may be divided provided that the developable portion of each new lot and its access is located outside of the habitat conservation area or its buffer and meets the minimum lot size requirements of Zoning Code Title 17.
C. Access roads and utilities serving the proposed may be permitted within the habitat conservation area and associated buffers only if the city determines that no other feasible alternative exists and when consistent with this Chapter.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.542 Additional Requirements for Specific Habitats.
A. Endangered, threatened, and sensitive species. 
    1. No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or buffer with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except that which is provided for by a management plan established by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or applicable state or federal agency.
    2. Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with a critical area report prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the city. Approval for alteration of land adjacent to the habitat conservation area or its buffer shall not occur prior to consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for animal species, the Washington State Department of Natural Resources for plant species, and other appropriate federal or state agencies.
    3. Bald eagle habitat shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292). Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a verified nest territory or communal roost, a habitat management plan shall be developed by a qualified professional. Activities are adjacent to bald eagle sites when they are within eight hundred feet or within one half mile and in a shoreline foraging area. The city shall verify the location of eagle management areas for each proposed activity. Approval of the activity shall not occur prior to approval of the habitat management plan by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife.
B. Anadromous fish. 
    1. All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, adhering to the following standards:
        a. Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for the applicable species;
        b. An alternative alignment or location for the activity is not feasible;
        c. The activity is designed so that it will not degrade the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas;
        d. Shoreline erosion control measures shall be designed to use bioengineering methods or soft armoring techniques, according to an approved critical area report; and
        e. Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved critical area report.
    2. Structures that prevent the migration of salmonids shall not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by anadromous fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow the upstream migration of adult fish and shall prevent fry and juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped or harmed.
    3. Fills, when authorized by the city of Aberdeen shoreline management program, shall not adversely impact anadromous fish or their habitat or shall mitigate any unavoidable impacts and shall only be allowed for a water-dependent use.
C. Wetland habitats. All proposed activities within or adjacent to habitat conservation areas containing wetlands shall conform to the wetland development requirements set forth in Sections 14.100.200 through 14.100.263. If non-wetlands habitat and wetlands are present at the same location, the provisions of Sections 14.100.500 through 14.100.570 or Sections 14.100.200 through 14.100.263, whichever provides greater protection to the habitat, apply.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.550 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffers.
The Director shall have the authority to require buffers from the edges of all streams in accordance with the following:
A. Buffers shall be established for activities adjacent to as necessary to protect the integrity, functions and values of the resource. Buffer widths shall reflect the sensitivity of the species or habitat and the type and intensity of the adjacent human use or activity.
B. The buffer widths required by this Section are based on scientific studies of the conditions necessary to sustain ecological functions and values to support anadromous and resident fish and presume the existence of a dense native vegetation community in the buffer zone adequate to protect the stream functions and values at the time of the proposed activity. Buffers shall be measured as follows:
    1. Type S Water. All waters, as inventoried as “shorelines of the state” under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act, except associated wetlands, which shall be regulated in accordance with Sections 14.100.200 through 14.100.263—One hundred fifty feet.
    2. Type F-A Water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are greater than ten feet in width—One hundred fifty feet;
    3. Type F-B Water. Segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are less than ten feet in width—One hundred feet;
    4. Type Np Water. Segments of natural waters that are perennial nonfish habitat streams—Seventy-five feet;
    5. Type Ns Water. Segments of natural waters within defined channels that are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams—Fifty feet;
    6. Nonfish-bearing streams in existing subdivisions. 
        a. Where streams have been placed in separate tracts, buffers will be provided by the tract, provided a minimum dimension of twenty-five feet from the edge of the stream is provided;
        b. Where streams have not been placed in separate tracts, or if a minimum dimension of twenty-five feet from the edge of the stream is not provided, buffers will meet the dimensional requirements in Subsection B.4 of this Section, unless existing structures are located within the buffer. In that case, the following provisions shall apply:
            (i) An inner riparian buffer shall be provided with a dense community of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover. The dimension of this buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen feet, and may be expanded if sufficient clearance is available between the stream and existing primary structures.
            (ii) An outer riparian buffer may be provided to extend within ten feet of an existing primary structure. Within the outer buffer, a maximum of twenty-five percent of the zone may be used as grass turf, with the balance a dense community of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover.
C. Buffer measurement. The buffer shall be measured landward horizontally on both sides of the water body from the ordinary high water mark as identified in the field perpendicular to the alignment of the stream or lake/pond bank. The required buffer shall be extended to include any adjacent regulated wetland(s), landslide hazard areas and/or erosion hazard areas and required buffers, but shall not be extended across roads or other lawfully established structures or hardened surfaces that are functionally and effectively disconnected from the stream. Where lands adjacent to a stream display an average continuous slope of twenty percent to thirty-five percent and the required buffer is less than one hundred feet, the buffer shall extend to a thirty percent greater dimension. In all cases, where slopes within the required buffer exceed thirty-five percent, the buffer shall extend to a minimum dimension of twenty-five feet from the top of said slopes, or if a buffer associated with a geological hazard is present, to whichever extent is greater.
D. Buffers in conjunction with other critical areas. Where other critical areas defined in this Chapter fall within the water body buffer, the buffer area shall be the most expansive of the buffers applicable to any applicable critical area.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.551 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conversation Areas-Water Bodies-Buffer Averaging.
The Director shall have the authority to average standard stream buffer widths on a case-by-case basis when the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that all the following criteria are met.
A. Averaging to improve wetland protection may be permitted when all of the following conditions are met as demonstrated by critical area report pursuant to Sections 14.100.060 and 14.100.520:
    1. The water body or buffer area has significant differences in characteristics that affect its habitat functions;
    2. The buffer is increased adjacent to the higher-functioning area of habitat or more sensitive portion of the water body and decreased adjacent to the lower-functioning or less sensitive portion;
    3. The buffer averaging does not reduce the functions or values of the stream or riparian habitat, or the buffer averaging, in conjunction with vegetation enhancement, increases the habitat function;
    4. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging and all increases in buffer dimension for averaging are generally parallel to the wetland edge;
    5. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than seventy-five percent of the standard buffer width;
    6. The slopes adjacent to the stream within the buffer area are stable and the gradient does not exceed thirty percent.
B. Averaging to allow reasonable use of a parcel may be permitted when all of the following are met as demonstrated by a critical area report pursuant to Sections 14.100.060 and 14.100.520:
    1. There are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished without buffer averaging;
    2. The buffer averaging does not reduce the functions or values of the stream or riparian habitat, or the buffer averaging, in conjunction with vegetation enhancement, increases the habitat function;
    3. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging and all increases in buffer dimension for averaging are generally parallel to the wetland edge;
    4. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than seventy-five percent of the standard buffer width except where the Director finds that there is an existing feature such as a roadway that limits buffer dimension, or an essential element of a proposed development such as access that must be accommodated for reasonable use and requires a smaller buffer.
C. The applicant implements all reasonable measures to reduce the adverse effects of adjacent land uses and ensure no net loss of functions and values in conjunction with a critical area mitigation plan.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.552 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffer Increase.
The Director shall have the authority to increase the width of a stream buffer on a case-by-case basis when such increase is necessary to achieve any of the following:
A. Protect fish and wildlife habitat, maintain water quality, ensure adequate flow conveyance; provide adequate recruitment for large woody debris, maintain adequate stream temperatures, or maintain in-stream conditions.
B. Compensate for degraded vegetation communities or steep slopes adjacent to the stream.
C. Maintain areas for channel migration.
D. Protect adjacent or downstream areas from erosion, landslides, or other hazards.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.553 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Water Bodies - Buffer Decrease.
The Director shall have the authority to reduce buffer widths on a case-by-case basis, provided that the general standards for avoidance and minimization per 14.100.071.A and B shall apply, and when the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that all of the following criteria are met:
A. The buffer reduction shall not adversely affect the habitat functions and values of the adjacent habitat conservation area or other critical area.
B. The buffer shall not be reduced to less than seventy-five percent of the standard buffer as defined in Section 14.100.550.B.
C. The slopes adjacent to the habitat conservation area within the buffer area are stable and the gradient does not exceed thirty percent.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.554 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Other Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Buffers.
A. Definition and buffers. Protection standards for fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas other than streams and lakes are as provided in the table below:
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
|    Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation    |                Buffer Requirement                 |
|                     Area                     |                                                   |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Areas with which federally-listed threatened | Buffers shall be based on recommendations         |
| or endangered species have a primary         | provided by the Washington Department             |
| association.                                 | of Fish and Wildlife PHS Program; provided,       |
| State priority habitats and areas with       | that where no such recommendations                |
| which priority species have a primary        | are available, the buffer width shall             |
| association.                                 | be determined based on published literature       |
| A “primary association” means a critical     | concerning the species/habitat(s) in              |
| component(s) of the habitats of a species,   | question and/or the opinions and recommendations  |
| which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood | of qualified professional with appropriate        |
| that the species will maintain and           | expertise.                                        |
| reproduce over the long term.                |                                                   |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Natural area preserves and natural resource  | Buffers shall be based on recommendations         |
| conservation areas.                          | provided by site managers provided                |
|                                              | that the management strategies are                |
|                                              | considered effective and within the               |
|                                              | scope of this Chapter.                            |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Locally important habitat areas.             | The need for and dimensions of buffers            |
|                                              | for locally important species or habitats         |
|                                              | shall be determined on a case-by-case             |
|                                              | basis, according to the needs of specific         |
|                                              | species or habitat area of concern.               |
|                                              | The Director shall coordinate with                |
|                                              | the Washington Department of Fish and             |
|                                              | Wildlife and other state, federal or              |
|                                              | tribal experts in these instances,                |
|                                              | and shall use WDFW PHS management recommendations |
|                                              | when available.                                   |
+----------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+
B. Alterations that occur within a locally important habitat area or that may affect a locally important species as defined herein shall be subject to review on a case-by-case basis. The Director shall have the authority to require an assessment of the effects of the alteration on species or habitats and may require mitigation to ensure that adverse effects do not occur. This standard is intended to allow for flexibility and responsiveness with regard to locally important species and habitats.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.560 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Mitigation Standards.
A. Activities that adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and/or their buffers should generally be avoided through site design, including clustering. Unavoidable impacts to designated species or habitats shall be compensated for through habitat creation, restoration, and/or enhancement to achieve no net loss of habitat functions and values in accordance with the purpose and goals of this Chapter.
B. When compensatory mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit a compensatory mitigation plan with sufficient information to demonstrate that the proposed activities are logistically feasible, constructible, ecologically sustainable, and likely to succeed. In addition to the requirements of Section 14.100.072, specific information to be provided in the plan shall include, but not be limited to:
    1. General description and scaled drawings of the activities proposed including, but not limited to, clearing, grading/excavation, drainage alterations, planting, invasive plant management, installation of habitat structures, irrigation, and other site treatments associated with the development activities and proposed mitigation action(s);
    2. A description of the functions and values that the proposed mitigation area(s) shall provide, together with a description of required and an assessment of factors that may affect the success of the mitigation program; and
    3. A description of known management objectives for the species or habitat.
C. Required mitigation shall be completed as soon as possible following activities that will disturb fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and during the appropriate season. Mitigation shall be completed prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing wildlife and flora.
D. The Director shall have authority to require monitoring of mitigation activities and submittal of annual monitoring reports to ensure and document that the goals and objectives of the mitigation are met. The frequency and duration of the monitoring shall be based on the specific needs of the project as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

14.100.570 Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas - Piped Streams.
A. Building over a natural stream that is located in an underground pipe or culvert, except as allowed in Section 14.100.530.A through M for transportation or utility crossings, is prohibited. Relocation of the piped stream system around structures is allowed. The relocated system shall be sized to convey the one hundred-year future land use condition runoff from the total upstream tributary area as determined from a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standards determined by the city.
B. No riparian buffers are required along segments of piped or culverted streams unless designated by the city for removal. Any easements or setbacks from pipes or culverts shall be consistent with adopted city regulations or design standards as administered by the city Public Works Department. Setback requirements will include an easement over the piped stream system and a building setback from the edge of the easement. The city will determine the setback requirement during the permit review process. The setback size will be dependent upon the required amount of space that would be needed for maintenance, operation and future replacement of the piped stream system.
(Ord. 6474, Added, 02/25/2009)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:
15.04        Energy Code
15.08        Uniform Building Code
15.10        Property Maintenance and Rental Registration and Inspection
15.12        Mechanical and Fire Codes
15.32        Plumbing Code
15.36        Electrical Code
15.50        Unfit Dwellings, Buildings, and Structures
15.55        Flood Hazard Protection
15.60        Fire Prevention Code
15.70        Fire Code

Chapter 15.04 ENERGY CODE

Sections:
15.04.010    Adoption of code.
15.04.020    Permit fees.
15.04.030    Violations—Penalties.

15.04.010 Adoption of code.
The 2015 Washington State Energy Code, as written by the Washington State Building Code Council and filed as Chapter 51-11 WAC, is adopted, incorporated and made a part of this chapter by reference. One (1) copy of the Washington State Energy Code shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 6639 § 1, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6439, Amended, 06/27/2007; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004)

15.04.020 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the Washington State Energy Code and this chapter.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by these codes has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 6639 § 1, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.01.020)

15.04.030 Violations—Penalties.
Except as provided by Section 15.70.020, any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6639 § 1, Added, 12/12/2018)

Chapter 15.08 UNIFORM BUILDING CODE

Sections:
15.08.010    Adoption of code.
15.08.020    Permit fees.
15.08.030    Numbering of buildings.
15.08.040    Access to street or alley.
15.08.050    Violations—Penalties.

15.08.010 Adoption of code.
The codes and standards identified in this section, as published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as amended herein as the official building code of the city of Aberdeen. One (1) copy of each of the codes adopted by reference shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
A. ICC/ANSI Standards A117-2009.
B. The 2015 Edition of the International Existing Building Code as adopted by WAC  51-50-480000 through 51-50-481500.
C. The 2015 Edition of the International Building Code (IBC), as adopted by Chapter 51-50 WAC, but excluding Chapters 13, 27, 28, and 29 of the IBC, which are not adopted, and including IBC Appendices E and J.
D. The 2015 Edition of International Residential Code (IRC), as adopted by Chapter 51-51 WAC (IRC), and the IRC Appendices B, C, F, and G, but with the following amendments and exclusions:
    1. Section R105.2 of Chapter 1, exemption from permits item 1, is amended to read as follows: One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, providing the floor area does not exceed 128 square feet (11.89 square meters);
    2. Section R105.2 of Chapter 1, exemption from permits item 10 (decks under two hundred (200) square feet and thirty (30) inches above grade), is excluded and not adopted;
    3. Section R105.3.1.1 of Chapter 1 is excluded and not adopted;
    4. Chapter 11 and Chapters 25 through 42 are excluded and not adopted.
E. The 2015 Washington State Energy Code (Residential) as adopted by Chapter 51-11R WAC and the 2015 Washington State Energy Code (Commercial) as adopted by Chapter 51-11C WAC.
(Ord. 6639 § 2, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6595 § 1, Amended, 07/27/2016; Ord. 6544, Amended, 06/12/2013; Ord. 6501, Amended, 08/11/2010; Ord. 6439, Amended, 06/27/2007; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004; Ord. 6190, Amended, 07/01/1998)

15.08.020 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the International Code Council and this chapter. Construction valuation for determining permit fees shall be computed with the use of type and construction and square footage cost as prescribed in the latest edition of the Building Safety Journal as published by the International Code Council.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by these codes has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
C. A plan review fee shall be paid at the time of a plan submittal. The plan review fee shall be based on sixty-five (65) percent of the cost of the building permit fee.
D. The building official is authorized to make the following permit fee refunds:
    1. Any fee erroneously paid or collected;
    2. Eighty (80) percent of the permit fee paid when not work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
    3. Eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
The building official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after date of fee payment.
(Ord. 6639 § 2, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6595 § 2, Amended, 07/27/2016; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004; Ord. 6190, Amended, 07/01/1998. Formerly 15.08.040)

15.08.030 Numbering of buildings.
A. All doorways and entrances to all buildings, excepting outbuildings, fronting or abutting upon or adjacent to any public street, avenue, boulevard, way or drive within the city of Aberdeen, shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city of Aberdeen.
B. All doorways and entrances to all buildings, excepting outbuildings, hereafter erected fronting upon any public street, or abutting upon or adjacent to any public street, avenue, boulevard, way or drive within the city of Aberdeen, shall be numbered in accordance with the ordinances of the city of Aberdeen before the use or occupancy of such buildings.
C. For that part of the city of Aberdeen lying north of the Chehalis River, that Broadway be and is made the division line or primary use from which to begin numbering east and west; that Market Street be and is made the division line or primary base from which to begin numbering north and south, west of the Wishkah River; that Summit Street be and is made the division line or primary base from which to begin numbering north and south, east of the Wishkah River.
D. For that part of the city of Aberdeen lying south of the Chehalis River, that Tilden Street be and is made the division street from which to begin numbering east and west; that Marion Street be and is made the division line or primary base from which to begin numbering north and south.
E. The house numbering maps on file in the office of the city engineer of the city of Aberdeen are the approved and adopted system of numbering all lots and blocks in the city of Aberdeen.
F. The blocks and street numbers immediately adjoining the base line street, on the north, south, east or west, shall be numbered 100 and upwards and shall be known as 100 and upwards north, south, east or west (as location may be from base line), and that the tiers of blocks located north, south, east or west of the base line or street shall increase in numerical or consecutive order.
G. Except where otherwise provided by the house numbering maps, one hundred (100) numbers shall be allotted to a block, and one (1) whole number shall be allotted to each twenty-five (25) feet street frontage, and where there are more than one (1) doorway or entrance within said twenty-five (25) feet, unit or suite numbers shall be used.
H. Even numbers shall be used on the northerly side and odd numbers on the southerly side of all streets or ways extending in an easterly and westerly direction, and even numbers shall be used on the easterly side and odd numbers shall be used on the westerly side of all streets or ways extending in a northerly and southerly direction.
I. The first twenty-five (25) feet removed from the base street on the northerly or easterly side of all ways or streets, shall be numbered 100, the second twenty-five (25) feet shall be numbered 102, and each succeeding twenty-five (25) feet shall increase in consecutive numerical order to the end of the block; the first twenty-five (25) feet removed from the base street on the southerly or westerly side of all ways or streets shall be numbered 101, the second twenty-five (25) feet shall be numbered 103, and each succeeding twenty-five (25) feet shall increase in consecutive numerical order to the end of the block. The next block adjoining shall be numbered 200 and continued in like manner. This rule to apply in all cases except where otherwise shown by the house number map.
J. The first tier of blocks extending northerly from Eighth Street shall be numbered 1000, and increase northerly; the first tier of blocks extending northerly from First Avenue shall be numbered 1300, and increase northerly; and all curved streets, half blocks, and all other places shall conform to the house number map.
K. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to give the correct number to all new buildings being or to be constructed in the city of Aberdeen.
L. Applicants for building permits shall be required to give the building inspector their lot or lots and block number and location of the proposed building upon said lot or lots.
M. Any disputes as to correct numbering of any lot or block shall be decided and established by the building inspector.
N. The numbering of S.W. Front Street is as follows:
    1. From Marion to Cushing Streets, No. 1100;
    2. From Cushing to Perry Streets, No. 1200;
    3. From Perry to Schley Street, No. 1300.
(Ord. 6639 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.08.040 Access to street or alley.
No building shall be constructed upon any parcel or lot of land within the city of Aberdeen which land does not abut upon any street or alley, unless and until an easement or right-of-way is granted to and accepted by the city of Aberdeen sufficient for proper ingress and egress to said property and for the purpose of laying and constructing necessary water mains, sewer lines, power and telephone lines and other necessary public utilities for the purpose of serving said property.
(Ord. 6639 § 2, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.08.050 Violations—Penalties.
A. Building Code Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of the building code as herein adopted by reference is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6639 § 2, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code §§ 2.02.040, 2.02.060. Formerly 15.08.080)

Chapter 15.10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND RENTAL REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION

Sections:
Article 1.  General Provisions
    15.10.010    Purpose.
    15.10.020    Applicability.
    15.10.030    Definitions.
Article 2.  Administration and Enforcement
    15.10.040    Division of property maintenance inspection.
    15.10.050    Duties and powers of the code official.
    15.10.060    Approval.
    15.10.070    Violations.
    15.10.080    Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures and equipment.
    15.10.090    Conditions and standards for demolition, repair or vacation and closure.
    15.10.100    Investigations, complaints, notices and administrative hearings.
    15.10.110    Emergency order.
    15.10.120    Determination and order (after hearing).
    15.10.130    Appeal of building official order—Order stayed.
    15.10.140    Means of appeal.
    15.10.150    Compliance and enforcement.
    15.10.160    Notice to vacate—Penalties.
Article 3.  General Requirements
    15.10.170    Generally.
    15.10.180    Exterior property areas.
    15.10.190    Exterior structure.
    15.10.200    Interior structure.
    15.10.210    Component serviceability.
    15.10.220    Handrails and guardrails.
    15.10.230    Rubbish and garbage.
    15.10.240    Pest elimination.
Article 4.  Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
    15.10.250    Generally.
    15.10.260    Light.
    15.10.270    Ventilation.
    15.10.280    Occupancy limitations.
Article 5.  Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
    15.10.290    Generally.
    15.10.300    Required facilities.
    15.10.310    Toilet rooms.
    15.10.320    Plumbing systems and fixtures.
    15.10.330    Water system.
    15.10.340    Sanitary drainage system.
    15.10.350    Storm drainage.
Article 6.  Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
    15.10.360    Generally.
    15.10.370    Heating facilities.
    15.10.380    Mechanical equipment.
    15.10.390    Electrical facilities.
    15.10.400    Electrical equipment.
    15.10.410    Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
    15.10.420    Duct systems.
Article 7.  Fire Safety Requirements
    15.10.430    Generally.
    15.10.440    Means of egress.
    15.10.450    Fire-resistance ratings.
    15.10.460    Fire protection systems.
Article 8.  Boarding Standards
    15.10.470    Generally.
    15.10.480    Materials.
    15.10.490    Installation.
    15.10.500    Referenced standard.

Article 1. General Provisions

15.10.010 Purpose.
These regulations shall be known as the rental registration and inspection ordinance of the city of Aberdeen, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
A. Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, a reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and for a reasonable level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an owner’s authorized agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
B. Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
C. Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.020 Applicability.
A. General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
B. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, owner’s authorized agent, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility that is required under this section to be removed from, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
C. Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code). Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code.
D. Existing Remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
E. Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations that are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
F. Historic Buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings where such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
G. Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 of the International Property Maintenance Code and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in subsections (G)(1) and (G)(2) of this section.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.
    1. Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
    2. Provisions in Referenced Codes and Standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
H. Requirements Not Covered by Code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the code official.
I. Application of References. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.
J. Other Laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.030 Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this section:
A. Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
B. Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code, International Zoning Code or NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code), such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
C. Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
D. Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,” “building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
E. General Definitions. 
    “Anchored” means secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
    “Approved” means acceptable to the code official.
    “Basement” means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
    “Bathroom” means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
    “Bedroom” means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
    “Code official” means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
    “Condemn” means to adjudge unfit for occupancy.
    Cost of Such Demolition or Emergency Repairs. The costs shall include the actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less revenues obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair. Costs shall include, but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated related to demolition or emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and abatement if necessary; costs of inspectors, testing agencies or experts retained relative to the demolition or emergency repairs; costs of testing; surveys for other materials that are controlled or regulated from being dumped in a landfill; title searches; mailing(s); postings; recording; and attorney fees expended for recovery of the cost of emergency repairs or to obtain or enforce an order of demolition made by a code official, the governing body or board of appeals.
    “Detached” means when a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
    “Deterioration” means to weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.
    “Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
    “Easement” means that portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
    “Equipment support” means those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.
    “Exterior property” means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
    “Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
    “Guard” means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
    “Habitable space” means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
    “Historic building” means any building or structure that is one (1) or more of the following:
        1. Listed or certified as eligible for listing, by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places, in the National Register of Historic Places.
        2. Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law.
        3. Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register or state or locally designated historic district.
    “Housekeeping unit” means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
    “Imminent danger” means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.
    “Infestation” means the presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
    “Inoperable motor vehicle” means a vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
    “Labeled” means equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
    “Let for occupancy” or “let” means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
    “Neglect” means the lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
    “Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
    “Occupant” means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
    “Openable area” means that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
    “Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
    “Owner” means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
    “Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
    “Pest elimination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods.
    “Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.
    “Public way” means any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
    “Rooming house” means a building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling.
    “Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
    “Rubbish” means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
    “Sleeping unit” means a room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
    “Strict liability offense” means an offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
    “Structure” means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
    “Tenant” means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
    “Toilet room” means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
    “Ultimate deformation” means the deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to eighty (80) percent or less of the maximum strength.
    “Ventilation” means the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
    “Workmanlike” means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
    “Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a structure.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 2. Administration and Enforcement

15.10.040 Division of property maintenance inspection.
The division of property maintenance inspection is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official.
A. Appointment. The code official shall be appointed by the mayor of the city of Aberdeen.
B. Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy(s). Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the code official.
C. Liability. The code official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered civilly or criminally liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
    1. Legal Defense. Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
D. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code are approved by city council via resolution.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.050 Duties and powers of the code official.
A. General. The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The code official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
B. Inspections. The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
C. Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such structure or premises is occupied the code official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner; owner’s authorized agent or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
D. Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.
E. Notices and Orders. The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
F. Division Records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.060 Approval.
A. Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon application of the owner or owner’s authorized agent, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical, the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
B. Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code; provided, that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved, the code official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons the alternative was not approved.
C. Required Testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
    1. Test Methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
    2. Test Reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records.
D. Used Material and Equipment. The use of used materials that meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested where necessary, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the code official.
E. Approved Materials and Equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
F. Research Reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.070 Violations.
A. Purpose. It is found and declared that there exist within the city of Aberdeen dwellings, buildings, structures and equipment occupied or designed for human habitation and other uses which are unfit for human habitation or other uses, substandard and dangerous, and these conditions are the result of inadequate original construction, dilapidation, lack of proper maintenance, overcrowding or other defects. It is also found that these conditions cause danger or substandard conditions to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and contribute to the creation of slums or otherwise blighted areas.
B. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 15.50.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.080 Unsafe dwellings, buildings, structures and equipment.
A. Conditions for Declaring a Dwelling, Building, Structure, Equipment or Premises Unfit for Human Habitation or Other Use.  Any dwelling, building, structure, equipment, premises or portions thereof, in or on which any of the following conditions exist to the extent that the health or safety of the occupants, of the occupants of neighboring dwellings, buildings, structures or other premises, or the public is endangered, is declared to be unfit for human habitation or other use:
    1. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is less than the minimum requirements of the Uniform Building Code, for new buildings or structures of similar construction, purpose or location;
    2. Whenever any portion, member, appurtenance or ornamentation is likely to become detached, dislodged or collapse, or is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the Uniform Building Code, for new buildings or structures or similar construction;
    3. Whenever any portion of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports which lean, list or buckle or are wracked, warped, settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction or to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base;
    4. Whenever any portion of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
    5. Whenever any portion of foundations, foundation supports, fireplaces or chimneys list, bulge or settle, or fireplaces or chimneys are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, removal or movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or structure is likely to partially or completely collapse;
    6. Whenever any portion of floors, floor supports, ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split, buckle or settle are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
    7. Whenever any portion has deteriorated, crumbling, or loose plaster or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors including broken windows or doors, or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings;
    8. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is obstructed, insufficient in width, size or number, or is so arranged as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit as per the requirements of the Uniform Building Code;
    9. Whenever a building or structure is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
    10. Whenever ventilating equipment is not maintained in a safe manner as per the Uniform Mechanical Code;
    11. Whenever every habitable room does not have an aggregate window area of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten (10) square feet;
    12. Whenever one-half (1/2) of the required window area in all rooms is not openable; provided, that in any habitable room which has an openable doorway opening directly to the outdoors or indirectly through a porch, such doorway shall be included in computing the openable window area;
    13. Toilet compartments shall be provided with natural ventilation of not less than three (3) square feet or a mechanical exhaust ventilation system capable of four (4) air changes per hour;
    14. Whenever wiring has not been maintained and is not being used in a safe manner;
    15. Whenever public hallways, stairs and other exitways in buildings and multiple dwellings are not lighted at all times so as to provide at least one (1) foot-candle of illumination at all points;
    16. Whenever a habitable room does not contain at least two (2) supplied electric convenience outlets or one (1) such convenience outlet and one (1) supplied electric light fixture, or whenever any habitable room, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and hallway does not have one (1) supplied electric light fixture;
    17. Whenever a dwelling unit does not have a room or rooms which afford privacy to a person within said room or rooms, and has a water closet, lavatory and a bathtub or shower in good working condition;
    18. Whenever a hotel does not have water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers on each floor for each sex accessible from a public hallway or whenever additional water closets, lavatories, baths or showers are not provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one (1) for every additional eight (8) guests, or fractional number thereof, in excess of eight (8);
    19. Whenever walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, are not finished with smooth, nonabsorbent surfaces in accordance with the Uniform Building Code; whenever shower and tub enclosures within dwelling units are not finished with approved nonabsorbent materials;
    20. Whenever a dwelling unit is not provided with a kitchen which contains a sink, work counter of nonabsorbent material, adequate space for installing cooking appliance and refrigeration equipment and a storage area for cooking utensils;
    21. Whenever there is not an approved system of water supply, providing both hot and cold running water for the required sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling unit and whenever piping materials used for potable water are not approved by the plumbing code and whenever any such piping leaks or is insufficient in size as required by the plumbing code;
    22. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure;
    23. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the building official to be a fire hazard;
    24. Whenever a dwelling unit does not have at least one (1) room which has not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of superficial floor area, or whenever a room which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes does not have at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of superficial floor area;
    25. Whenever a room used for sleeping purposes does not have at least ninety (90) square feet of superficial floor area; provided, that when more than two (2) persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two (2);
    Exception: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit meeting the following requirements:
        a. The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two (2);
        b. The unit shall be provided with a separate closet;
        c. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front;
        d. Light and ventilation conforming to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code;
        e. The unit is provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower;
    26. Whenever a habitable room has less than seven (7) feet in any dimension;
    27. Whenever a water closet space is less than thirty (30) inches in width or a clear space in front of the water closet is less than twenty-four (24) inches;
    28. Whenever habitable rooms, storage rooms and laundry rooms have a ceiling height of less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches;
    29. Whenever hallways, corridors, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have a ceiling of less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches;
    30. Whenever a room which has a sloping ceiling is less than the prescribed ceiling height in more than one-half (1/2) the area thereof; provided, that no portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area;
    31. Whenever a building or structure, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, the accumulation of junk, debris or combustible materials, or otherwise, creates a health, fire or safety hazard;
    32. Whenever a nuisance exists that may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises, or a city owned right-of-way, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators, freezers, stoves, washers or dryers; or structurally unsound fences; or any lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
    33. Whenever untreated wood support posts, girders, beams, floor joists or other wood structural supports are in direct contact with earth;
    34. Whenever any dwelling unit is not provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit at a point five (5) feet above the floor in the center of all habitable rooms, except bedrooms which shall be sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit at a point five (5) feet above the floor in the center of the room;
    35. Whenever all plumbing fixtures are not trapped and vented and connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system and whenever all toilets are not flush type and in good working condition and whenever piping in both drain lines and vent lines is broken, cracked or in such a condition that it leaks or is made of materials which are not approved by the Uniform Plumbing Code;
    36. Whenever each hot water tank or hot water heating system is not provided with an approved adequately sized pressure relief valve with a full size drain plumbed to the exterior of the building or other approved location as determined by the building official;
    37. Whenever glazing in locations subject to human impact, such as glass doors, glazing immediately adjacent to such doors, glazing adjacent to any surface normally used as a walking surface, sliding glass door units, shower doors, tub enclosures and storm doors, is not safety glazing material as specified in Uniform Building Code, provided glazing does not need to be safety glass in locations as specified under “exceptions” listed in the Uniform Building Code;
    38. Whenever five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum board or other material which has equivalent or better fire resistive rating is not provided on walls and ceilings which separate individual dwelling units, dwelling units from common storage areas and dwelling units from public or private garage; provided, that existing partitions and ceilings with wood lath and plaster in which the plaster is a minimum of three-eighths (3/8) inch thick and is not cracked, broken or bulging will be acceptable in lieu of the above-mentioned requirement.
    39. Whenever one-half (1/2) inch gypsum board or other material which has equivalent or better fire resistive rating is not provided on walls and ceilings in individual dwelling units or dwellings; provided, that existing partitions and ceilings with wood lath and plaster in which the plaster is a minimum of three-eighths (3/8) inch think and is not cracked, broken or bulging will be acceptable in lieu of the above requirement.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.090 Conditions and standards for demolition, repair or vacation and closure.
A. Unfit Dwelling, Building, Structure, Equipment or Premises. Whenever the code official determines that all or any portion of a dwelling, building, structure, equipment or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use, the building official shall order that the unfit building or premises or portion thereof be:
    1. Repaired, or demolished and removed, if the estimated cost of repairing the conditions causing the building or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other use exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of a building or structure of similar size, design, type and quality; provided, that the building official may order a building or structure, for which the estimated cost of such repairs does not exceed fifty (50) percent of such replacement value, to be repaired, or demolished and removed, if the degree of structural deterioration is as described in Sections 15.10.080(A)(1) through (6), (8), (22) and (23), and the owner has failed three (3) or more times in the last five (5) years to correct the conditions by compliance dates as ordered by the building official;
    2. Repaired, and/or vacated and closed, if the estimated cost of repairing the conditions causing the building or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other use does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of a building or structure of similar size, design, type and quality; or
    3. Corrected or improved as specified in the order of the building official as to the conditions that caused the premises other than buildings and structures to be unfit.
    Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to condemn and resell property pursuant to Chapter 35.80A RCW (Condemnation of Blighted Property).
B. Replacement Estimating. In estimating the replacement value of an unfit building or structure, the building official shall use the square foot cost estimating method set forth in the “Residential Cost Handbook,” Marshall and Swift, latest available edition, or a cost estimating publication that the building official deems comparable.
C. Method of Estimation. In estimating the cost of repairs, the building official shall apply the following standards:
    1. Only the conditions causing the building, structure or portion thereof to be unfit for human habitation or other use shall be included in the cost estimate;
    2. All repair costs shall be based on estimates calculated from Marshall and Swift’s “Residential Cost Handbook,” latest available edition, or a cost estimating publication that the building official deems comparable;
    3. Repair estimates shall assume that all work will comply with the requirements of the current building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, energy, and fire codes in effect in the city of Aberdeen;
    4. If the extent of damage to a portion of a building or structure cannot be ascertained from visual inspection, the building official shall assume that the relative extent of damage or deterioration identified in the observable portion of the building exists in the unobserved portions; and
    5. Cost estimates for replacing or repairing the building, structure or portion thereof shall include the same type and quality of materials as originally used in the structure, unless different materials are required by current building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, energy, and fire codes. If the building or structure is so damaged that the original materials cannot be determined, repair costs shall be estimated using the materials identified under the applicable building quality classification in the square foot cost estimating method in the “Residential Cost Handbook” by Marshall and Swift.
D. Time Limits. If the building official finds that any of the following conditions exist, the building official shall order that such conditions be eliminated and that the building be closed within a time specified:
    1. The condition or conditions which cause the building or premises to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation create a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare that would exist even if the building were vacated and closed to entry; or
    2. Building appendages, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, are in a deteriorated condition or are otherwise unable to sustain the design loads specified; or
    3. Part of the building or premises or equipment intended to assist in extinguishing a fire, to prevent the origin or spread of fire, or to safeguard life or property from fire is in an unsafe or unusable condition.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.100 Investigations, complaints, notices and administrative hearings.
A. Investigations. The building official may investigate any building or premises which the building official believes to be unfit for human habitation or other use. If the investigation reveals conditions that make the building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use, the building official shall:
    1. Issue a complaint stating the conditions that make the building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use; and
    2. Serve the complaint by personal service, registered mail, or certified mail with return receipt requested, upon all persons who appear on a litigation guarantee from a licensed title insurance company as having any ownership interest in the building or premises; and
    3. Post the complaint in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
B. Complaints. No complaint shall be issued if a permit has been issued for all repairs, alterations, and improvements required to make the building or premises fit for human habitation or other use, and the repair work, in the building official’s opinion, is progressing at a satisfactory rate. For the purposes of this subsection, the building official may require as a condition of issuing a permit for that the applicant provide a written and signed, mutually agreed-upon schedule for the completion of the work.
C. Notices. If the address of the persons appearing on the litigation guarantee identified in subsection (A) of this section cannot be ascertained by the building official after a reasonable search, then the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the complaint shall be served either by personal service or by mailing a copy of the complaint by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address appearing on the last equalized tax assessment roll of the County Assessor and to any other address known to the County Assessor. Each person whose address cannot be ascertained shall be mailed a copy of the complaint at the address of the building or premises involved in the proceedings. In addition to serving and posting the complaint, the building official shall mail or cause to be delivered to all housing and commercial rental units in the building or on the premises a copy of the complaint.
D. Administrative Hearings. The complaint shall state that an administrative hearing will be held before the building official at a specified time and place, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after service of the complaint; and that all persons having any interest therein shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint, and to appear in person or by representative and to give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint. At the administrative hearing, the building official shall have the authority to administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. The rules of evidence shall not apply in administrative hearings before the building official.
E. Recording. A copy of the complaint shall be filed for public record with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.110 Emergency order.
A. Order. Whenever the building official finds that any building, structure or portion thereof is an imminent hazard to the extent that persons in or around the building, structure or portion thereof are in serious jeopardy, he may, without notice and order, take immediate action to vacate or demolish or restore the hazard to a condition of stability and safety and take whatever action necessary to barricade or prevent occupants or the general public from any dangerous conditions. The building official shall, within five (5) working days following completion of work to remove the imminent hazard, issue a complaint pursuant to Section 15.10.100. Any city funds spent in responding to the emergency shall be included in costs recovered under Section 15.10.150(D).
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.120 Determination and order (after hearing).
A. Hearing Determination. If, after the administrative hearing provided for in Section 15.10.100, the building official determines that a building or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use pursuant to Section 15.10.080, the building official shall further determine, using the standards set forth in Section 15.10.090, whether the building should be:
    1. Repaired, altered or improved;
    2. Vacated and closed; or
    3. Demolished and removed, and/or whether the premises and the conditions that cause it to be unfit should be corrected or improved.
B. Notice and Order. The building official shall issue a written order requiring that the building or premises be made fit for human habitation or other use. The building official shall post and serve the order upon all parties served with a copy of the complaint, in the manner provided in Section 15.10.100. The order shall contain:
    1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building, structure, or dwelling unit is located;
    2. A statement that the building official has found the building or structure or portion thereof to be dangerous and/or substandard with a brief and concise description of the condition found to render the determination;
    3. A statement that one (1) of the following actions shall be taken:
        a. If the building official determines that the building or structure or portion thereof must be repaired or replaced, the order shall require that permits be secured and the work physically commenced within such time and completed within such time as the building official determines is reasonable.
        b. If the building official determines that the building or structure or portion thereof shall be vacated and repaired, the order shall require that the premises be vacated within a time determined reasonable and that a permit be secured and work physically commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable.
        c. If the building official determines the building or structure or portion thereof must be vacated and demolished or is already vacated or demolished, the order shall require that the premises, if not vacated, be vacated within a time determined reasonable and that a permit be secured and work physically commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable;
    4. A statement advising that the building official will or has notified, as prescribed by Section 15.10.160, the water superintendent, public utility district and/or gas utility company to terminate utility service;
    5. A statement advising that failure to comply with the order may result in prosecution as a violator of the provisions of the city code;
    6. A statement advising that if required repairs or demolition or failure to obtain permits within specified time is not made, the city may proceed to cause the work to be done and that the amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the board or officer, shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid;
    7. A statement advising: (a) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order any action of the building official to the board of appeals; provided, the appeal is made in writing and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the written order issued pursuant to subsection (B) of this section; and (b) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing before the board of appeals and in such case the order issued by the building official shall be the final determination of the matter; and (c) that the person having a record title or legal interest in the building may request an informal conference to discuss modifications of the notice and order.
C. Asbestos Survey. If an owner fails to comply with an order and the building official elects to demolish and remove a building pursuant to Section 15.10.150(C) the owner shall either obtain an asbestos survey and make the same available to the building official or allow the building official access to the structure so that the building official may obtain an asbestos survey.
D. Timelines for Compliance. When calculating the time for compliance, the building official shall consider:
    1. The type of hazard, the nature and immediacy of the threat to the public health and safety, and the blight created by the conditions of the premises;
    2. A demonstrated intent by a responsible party to repair, demolish or vacate and close the building or to correct or improve the condition of the premises by:
        a. Entering into a contract with a licensed contractor to perform the required work within a specific time and for a reasonable compensation,
        b. Depositing cash in a segregated account in an amount sufficient to complete the required repairs,
        c. Securing a loan from an established lending institution that will provide sufficient funds to complete the required repairs, or
        d. Securing a permit to perform the required work and paying the required permit fees;
    3. The length of time required to obtain permits needed to complete the repairs;
    4. The complexity of the repairs, seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal rights of tenants; and
    5. Circumstances beyond the control of the responsible person.
E. Recording. If no appeal is filed, a copy of the order shall be filed with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.130 Appeal of building official order—Order stayed.
A. General. Any party affected by any order of the building official under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the order of the building official to the board of appeals. Notice of the right to appeal shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
B. Appeal Notice. The notice of appeal shall:
    1. Be filed with the building inspector, as secretary to the board of appeals, no more than thirty (30) days after service of the building official’s order;
    2. Be in writing and state clearly and concisely the specific objections to the building official’s order;
    3. State the ownership or other interest that each appellant has in the building, premises, or portion thereof involved in the order of the building official;
    4. State briefly the remedy sought; and
    5. Include the signatures of all appellants and their mailing addresses.
C. Hearing Schedule. Upon receipt of an appeal the secretary of the board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for hearing and such date shall not be more than forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal was filed.
D. Written Notice. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing to each appellant and members of the board of appeals by the secretary of the board. Such notice shall be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy to the address shown on the notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal and hearing shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
E. Order Stayed. Except for vacation, enforcement of any notice and order by the building official shall be stayed until final determination of the appeal is made by the board of appeals.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.140 Means of appeal.
A. General. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals; provided, that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served and the appeal fee has been paid. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
B. Building Code Commission. The building code commission shall be the board of appeals and shall hear all matters or issues raised on appeal of any notice and order of the building official in the manner provided in Section 15.50.100.
C. Membership of Board. The board of appeals shall consist of three members of the building code commission: the chairman, vice chairman and a member at large who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees or elected officials of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex officio member and serve as secretary but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the mayor, and shall serve staggered and overlapping terms.
    1. Alternate Members. The mayor shall appoint not less than two (2) alternate members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership.
    2. Chairman. The board shall annually select one (1) of its members to serve as chairman of the board of appeals.
    3. Disqualification of Member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest or who did not hear the evidence presented at the public hearing.
    4. Quorum of Appeals Board. A majority of the total membership of the board of appeals shall constitute a quorum and shall be necessary for conducting the hearing on appeal; provided, however, that members who have been disqualified or have disqualified themselves for any conflict of interest or in the interest of the appearance of fairness shall not be counted in determining the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum.
    5. Board Authority. The board shall have the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the order of the building official, or remand the case to the building official for further proceedings. The board shall summarily dismiss an appeal which is determined on its face to be without merit, frivolous, or brought merely for the purpose of delay.
    6. Written Decision of Appeals Board. Within fourteen (14) days after the hearing the board shall issue a written decision containing findings of fact and conclusions and shall mail copies of the decision to the parties of record. The decision of the board shall be the final decision of the city and shall have the same effect as a decision of the building official issued pursuant to Section 15.10.100.
    7. Recording. The decision and order of the board shall be filed by the building official with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
D. Notice of Meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within twenty (20) days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
E. Open Hearing. Hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of a minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the board membership.
    1. Procedures. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. The following procedures are required for all appeals of the code official:
        a. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the board.
        b. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor. Such fees may be established by the board, but shall in no event be greater than the cost involved.
        c. The board may grant continuances for good cause.
        d. The board of appeals or appellants may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the introduction of other evidence.
        e. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
        f. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the board or officer. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in and of itself to support a finding.
        g. The board of appeals may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal before the hearing or during the course of the hearing; provided, that: (1) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; and (2) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection.
        h. Parties to the appeal shall have the right to call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to introduce documentary and physical evidence; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify; to rebut the evidence against him; and to represent himself or to be represented by an attorney.
F. Postponed Hearing. When the full board is not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
G. Board Decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of appointed board members.
    1. Administration. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.
H. Petition to Superior Court. Any person who has standing to file a land use petition in the Superior Court of Grays Harbor County may file such a petition within twenty-one (21) days of issuance of the board’s decision pursuant to subsection (C)(6) of this section, as provided by Section 705 of Chapter 347 of the Laws of 1995.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.150 Compliance and enforcement.
A. Extension of Compliance Date. An extension of time for compliance with an order may be granted by the building official upon receipt of a written request filed with the building official by any party affected by the order not later than seven (7) days prior to the date set for compliance in the order. Any extension granted shall be in writing, and shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way. Extensions shall not be subject to appeal. The building official may, without a written request, grant an extension of time if in the building official’s opinion such an extension is warranted.
B. Certificate of Compliance. Compliance with an order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be the responsibility of each person named as a responsible party in the order. An owner or responsible party shall request a reinspection from the building official following correction of the conditions set forth in the order. If the building official finds that the repairs, alterations, corrections or other actions required by the order have been performed in compliance with the standards in this code, the building official shall issue a certificate of compliance certifying that, as of the date it is issued, the violations cited in the order have been corrected.
    1. Certificate Issuance. On issuance of a certificate of compliance, the building official certifies only that the violations listed in the complaint, order or decision have been corrected as required by this code. The building official makes no representation concerning other conditions in the building or any equipment therein, or of the premises, that is not listed in the complaint, order or decision. The building official shall not be responsible for any injury, damage, death or other loss of any kind sustained by any person, organization, or corporation arising out of any condition of the building, structure, equipment, or premises.
C. Enforcement of the Order. If the person served with an order fails to comply with the order, the building official, by such means and with such assistance as may be available, is hereby authorized and directed to cause the dwelling, building, structure, equipment or premises to be:
    1. Repaired, altered or improved; or
    2. Vacated and closed; or
    3. Demolished and removed; and
    4. To cause the premises and the conditions that cause it to be unfit to be corrected or improved and the costs thereof shall be recovered by the city in the manner provided in subsection (D) of this section.
        a. Failure to Comply with Enforcement Order. If an owner fails to comply with an order and the building official elects to demolish and remove a building pursuant to subsection A, the owner shall either obtain an asbestos survey and make the same available to the building official, or allow the building official access to the building so that the building official may obtain an asbestos survey.
D. Recovery of Costs. If the costs incurred by the building official pursuant to Section 15.10.110 or subsection (C) of this section for repairs, alterations or improvements, or of vacating and closing, or of demolition and removal are not paid after a written demand upon the owner and other persons named as responsible parties in the complaint, such costs shall be assessed against the property for which the costs were incurred in the manner provided below:
    1. If the building is removed or demolished by the building official, the building official shall, if possible, sell the salvageable materials from the building and shall apply the proceeds of the sale to the reimbursement of the costs of demolition and removal. Any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner.
    2. After notice to the owner and other persons with an ownership interest as shown on the litigation guarantee that all or a portion of the costs have not been paid, the building official shall notify the finance director of the amount due and owing, and upon receipt of the notification the finance director shall certify the amount to the Grays Harbor County Treasurer for assessment.
    3. Upon certification by the finance director of the amount due and owing, the Grays Harbor County Treasurer or designee shall enter the amount of the assessment upon the tax rolls against the real property for the current year to be collected at the same time as the general taxes and with interest at the rates and in the manner provided in RCW 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes. When collected, it shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.
    4. The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county and municipal taxes.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.160 Notice to vacate—Penalties.
A. Notice. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 15.10.100, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: “DO NOT ENTER—UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. IT IS A MISDEMEANOR TO OCCUPY THIS BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR DWELLING UNIT, OR TO REMOVE OR DEFACE THIS NOTICE. BUILDING OFFICIAL, CITY OF ABERDEEN.” It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or enter any building, structure or dwelling unit which has been posted; except, that entry may be made to repair or demolish such under a permit.
    1. Posting. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under Section 15.10.100, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit or as otherwise approved in advance by the building official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of compliance issued.
    2. Utilities. The building official may, by written notice directed to the owner and to the Superintendent of Water, public utility district and/or gas utility company, request that service of water, electricity or gas to the building or premises be terminated or disconnected on or before a specified date. Upon receipt of such notice the Superintendent of Water, public utility district, or gas utility company is authorized to terminate or disconnect the service and to restore the service upon the issuance by the building official of a certificate of compliance, or upon written notification by the building official that water, electricity or gas service should be restored.
    3. Utility Restoration. It is unlawful for anyone other than the Superintendent of Water, public utility district, or gas utility company, or their authorized representatives, to restore any water, electricity, or gas service that has been terminated or disconnected by notice from the building official.
B. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 3. General Requirements

15.10.170 Generally.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
A. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises that are not in a sanitary and safe condition and that do not comply with the requirements of this article. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.
B. Vacant Structures and Land. Vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land must comply with this code and shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety or quality of life.
    1. Appearance. All vacant structures and premises thereof must appear to be occupied or appear able to be occupied with little or no repairs.
    2. Security. All vacant structures and premises thereof must be secured against outside entry at all times. Security shall be by the normal building amenities such as windows and doors having adequate strength to resist intrusion. All doors and windows must remain locked. There shall be at least one (1) operable door into every structure and into each housing unit. Exterior walls and roofs must remain intact without holes.
        a. Architectural (Cosmetic) Structural Panels.  Architectural structural panels may be used to secure windows, doors and other openings provided they are cut to fit the opening and match the characteristics of the structure. Architectural panels may be of exterior grade finished plywood, medium density overlaid plywood (MDO) that is painted to match the structure’s exterior or covered with a reflective material such as plexiglass or other similar like material.
        Exception: Untreated plywood or similar structural panels may be used to secure windows, doors and other openings for a maximum period of thirty (30) days.
        b. Security Fences. Temporary construction fencing shall not be used as a method to secure a structure from entry.
        Exception: Temporary construction fencing may be used for a maximum period of thirty (30) days.
    3. Weather Protection. The exterior roofing and siding shall be maintained as required in Section 15.10.190.
    4. Fire Safety. 
        a. Fire Protection Systems. All fire suppression and alarm systems shall be maintained in a working condition and inspected as required by the fire department.
        b. Flammable Liquids. No vacant structure or premises or portion thereof shall be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials that constitute a safety or fire hazard.
        c. Combustible Materials. All debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage shall be removed from vacant structures, their accessory structures and adjoining yard areas. The structure and premises shall be maintained free from such items.
        d. Fire Inspections. Periodic fire department inspections may be required at intervals set forth by the chief or his designee.
    5. Plumbing Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures connected to an approved water system, an approved sewage system or an approved natural gas utility system shall be installed in accordance with applicable codes and be maintained in sound condition and good repair or removed and the service terminated in the manner prescribed by applicable codes.
        a. Freeze Protection. The structure’s water systems shall be protected from freezing.
    6. Electrical. Electrical service lines, wiring, outlets or fixtures not installed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes shall be repaired, removed or the electrical services terminated to the structure in accordance with applicable codes.
    7. Heating. Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant structures shall be removed, rendered inoperable or maintained in accordance with applicable codes.
    8. Interior Floors. If a hole in a floor presents a hazard, the hole shall be covered and secured with three-quarter (3/4) inch plywood, or a material of equivalent strength, cut to overlap the hole on all sides by a least six (6) inches.
    9. Termination of Utilities. The code official may, by written notice to the owner and to the appropriate water, electricity or gas utility, request that water, electricity or gas service to a vacant structure be terminated or disconnected.
        a. Restoration of Service. If water, electricity or gas service has been terminated or disconnected pursuant to Section 15.10.160(A)(2), no one except the utility may take any action to restore the service, including an owner or other private party requesting restoration of service, until written notification is given by the code official that service may be restored.
    10. Notice to Person Responsible. Whenever the code official has reason to believe that a structure is vacant, the code official may inspect the structure and premises. If the code official determines that a vacant structure violates any provision of this section, the code official shall notify in writing the owner of the structure or real property upon which the structure is located, or other person responsible, of the violations and required corrections and shall be given a time frame to comply.
        a. Alternate Requirements. The requirements and time frames of this section may be modified under an approved plan of action. Within thirty (30) days of notification that a structure or real property upon which the structure is located is in violation of this section, an owner may submit a written plan of action for the code official to review and approve if found acceptable. A plan of action may allow:
            (1) Extended use of nonarchitectural panels;
            (2) Extended use of temporary security fencing;
            (3) Extended time before the demolition of a structure is required; and
            (4) Substandard conditions to exist for a specific period of time, provided the structure is secured in an approved manner. When considering a plan of action, the code official shall take into consideration the magnitude of the violation and the impact to the neighborhood.
    11. Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be enforced according to the provisions and procedures of Chapter 1.12 and subject to the monetary penalties contained therein.
        a. Abatement. A structure or accessory structure thereto that remains vacant and open to entry after the required compliance date is found and declared to be a public nuisance. The code official is hereby authorized to summarily abate the violation by closing the structure to unauthorized entry. The costs of abatement shall be collected from the owner in the manner provided by law.
        b. Unsafe Structures and Equipment. Any vacant structure or equipment therein declared unsafe is subject to the provision of Section 108 of the International Property Maintenance Code and the demolition provisions of Section 110 of the International Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.180 Exterior property areas.
A. Sanitation. Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property that such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. Grading and Drainage. Premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
Exception: approved retention areas and reservoirs.
C. Sidewalks and Driveways. Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
D. Weeds. Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eighteen (18) inches. Noxious weeds (as outlined and classified under Chapter 17.10 RCW) shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
E. Rodent Harborage. Structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
F. Exhaust Vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.
G. Accessory Structures. Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
H. Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work; provided, that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
I. Defacement of Property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.190 Exterior structure.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
    1. Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code, the International Residential Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
        a. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
        b. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;
        c. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
        d. Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather resistant or watertight;
        e. Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;
        f. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        g. Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        h. Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        i. Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        j. Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        k. Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        l. Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or
        m. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
        Exceptions:
            (1) Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
            (2) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted where approved by the code official.
B. Protective Treatment. Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
C. Premises Identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be not less than four (4) inches (one hundred two (102) mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
D. Structural Members. Structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
E. Foundation Walls. Foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
F. Exterior Walls. Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
G. Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
H. Decorative Features. Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
I. Overhang Extensions. Overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. Where required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
J. Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
K. Chimneys and Towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. Exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
L. Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
M. Window, Skylight and Door Frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
    1. Glazing. Glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
    2. Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
N. Doors. Exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.
O. Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
P. Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
Q. Building Security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
    1. Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock throw of one (1) inch (twenty-five (25) mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
    2. Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six (6) feet (one thousand eight hundred twenty-eight (1,828) mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provides access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
    3. Basement Hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
R. Gates. Exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly secure the gates.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.200 Interior structure.
A. General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure that they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
    1. Unsafe Conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code, International Residential Building Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
        a. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
        b. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects;
        c. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state;
        d. Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects;
        e. Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
        f. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects.
        Exceptions:
            (1) Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
            (2) Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved by the code official.
B. Structural Members. Structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
C. Interior Surfaces. Interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected.
D. Stairs and Walking Surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
E. Handrails and Guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
F. Interior Doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.210 Component serviceability.
A. General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
    1. Unsafe Conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code, International Residential Building Code, or the International Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:
        a. Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Collapse of footing or foundation system;
            (2) Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil expansion;
            (3) Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil;
            (4) Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;
            (5) Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or
            (6) Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to the ground water table.
        b. Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Deterioration;
            (2) Ultimate deformation;
            (3) Fractures;
            (4) Fissures;
            (5) Spalling;
            (6) Exposed reinforcement; or
            (7) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
        c. Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Deterioration;
            (2) Corrosion;
            (3) Elastic deformation;
            (4) Ultimate deformation;
            (5) Stress or strain cracks;
            (6) Joint fatigue; or
            (7) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
        d. Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Deterioration;
            (2) Ultimate deformation;
            (3) Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
            (4) Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
            (5) Spalling;
            (6) Exposed reinforcement; or
            (7) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
        e. Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Deterioration;
            (2) Elastic deformation;
            (3) Ultimate deformation;
            (4) Metal fatigue; or
            (5) Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
        f. Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions:
            (1) Ultimate deformation;
            (2) Deterioration;
            (3) Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;
            (4) Fire damage beyond charring;
            (5) Significant splits and checks;
            (6) Horizontal shear cracks;
            (7) Vertical shear cracks;
            (8) Inadequate support;
            (9) Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
            (10) Excessive cutting and notching.
    2. Exceptions. 
        a. Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
        b. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted where approved by the code official.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.220 Handrails and guardrails.
A. General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one (1) side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface that is more than thirty (30) inches (seven hundred sixty-two (762) mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall be not less than thirty (30) inches (seven hundred sixty-two (762) mm) in height or more than forty-two (42) inches (one thousand sixty-seven (1,067) mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall be not less than thirty (30) inches (seven hundred sixty-two (762) mm) in height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.230 Rubbish and garbage.
A. Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. Exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
    1. Rubbish Storage Facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
    2. Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors or securing in a manner so as to not become an attractive nuisance.
C. Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
    1. Garbage Facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one (1) of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container.
    2. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.240 Pest elimination.
A. Infestation. Structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
B. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
C. Single Occupant. The occupant of a one (1) family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the premises.
D. Multiple Occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
E. Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations

15.10.250 Generally.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this article.
C. Alternative Devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International Building Code or International Residential Building Code shall be permitted.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.260 Light.
A. Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have not less than one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet (nine hundred fourteen (914) mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be not less than eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
B. Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with not less than a sixty (60) watt standard incandescent light bulb for each two hundred (200) square feet (nineteen (19) m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination; provided, that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty (30) feet (nine thousand one hundred forty-four (9,144) mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with not less than one (1) foot-candle (eleven (11) lux) at floors, landings and treads.
C. Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.270 Ventilation.
A. Habitable Spaces. Every habitable space shall have not less than one (1) openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to not less than 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 15.10.260(A).
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be not less than eight (8) percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty-five (25) square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
B. Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by subsection (A) of this section, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
C. Cooking Facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
Exceptions:
    1. Where specifically approved in writing by the code official.
    2. Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances.
D. Process Ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
E. Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.280 Occupancy limitations.
A. Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
B. Minimum Room Widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be not less than seven (7) feet (two thousand one hundred thirty-four (2,134) mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of three (3) feet (nine hundred fourteen (914) mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.
C. Minimum Ceiling Heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of seven (7) feet (two thousand one hundred thirty-four (2,134) mm).
Exceptions:
    1. In one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet (one thousand two hundred nineteen (1,219) mm) on center and projecting a maximum of six (6) inches (one hundred fifty-two (152) mm) below the required ceiling height.
    2. Basement rooms in one (1) and two (2) family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of six (6) feet eight (8) inches (two thousand thirty-three (2,033) mm) with a minimum clear height of six (6) feet four (4) inches (one thousand nine hundred thirty-two (1,932) mm) under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
    3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of seven (7) feet (two thousand one hundred thirty-four (2,134) mm) over not less than one-third (1/3) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a minimum clear ceiling height of five (5) feet (one thousand five hundred twenty-four (1,524) mm) shall be included.
D. Bedroom and Living Room Requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of subsections (D)(1) through (D)(5) of this section.
    1. Room Area. Every living room shall contain not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain not less than seventy (70) square feet (6.5 m2) and every bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person shall contain not less than fifty (50) square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
    2. Access from Bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
    Exception: Units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms.
    3. Water Closet Accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to not less than one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to not less than one (1) water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
    4. Prohibited Occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
    5. Other Requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this article; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Article 5 of this chapter; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Article 6 of this chapter; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Article 7 of this chapter.
E. Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table P1.
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
|     SPACE     |             MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE FEET              |
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
| "             | 1-2 occupants  | 3-5 occupants | 6 or more occupants |
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
| Living roomAB | 120            | 120           | 150                 |
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
| Dining roomAB | No requirement | 80            | 100                 |
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
| Bedrooms      | Shall comply with subsection (D)(1) of this section  |
+---------------+----------------+---------------+---------------------+
For SI: one (1) square foot = 0.0929 m2.
A See subsection (E)(2) of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces.
B See subsection (E)(1) of this section for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
    1. Sleeping Area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table P1 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. Sleeping areas shall comply with subsection (D) of this section.
    2. Combined Spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table P1 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
F. Efficiency Unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:
    1. A unit occupied by not more than one (1) occupant shall have a minimum clear floor area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet (11.2 m2). A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of two hundred twenty (220) square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a minimum clear floor area of three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m2). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (F)(2) and (F)(3) of this section.
    2. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working space of thirty (30) inches (seven hundred sixty-two (762) mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.
    3. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
    4. The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3).
G. Food Preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 5. Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements

15.10.290 Generally.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises that does not comply with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.300 Required facilities.
A. Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink that shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
B. Rooming Houses. Not less than one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units.
C. Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants.
D. Employees’ Facilities. Not less than one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees.
    1. Drinking Facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
E. Public Toilet Facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.310 Toilet rooms.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
B. Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units, or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
C. Location of Employee Toilet Facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one (1) story above or below the employees’ working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of five hundred (500) feet (one hundred fifty-two (152) m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of five hundred (500) feet (one hundred fifty-two (152) m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
D. Floor Surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.320 Plumbing systems and fixtures.
A. General. Plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. Plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.
B. Fixture Clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
C. Plumbing System Hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.330 Water system.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. Kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code or the International Plumbing Code.
B. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
C. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
D. Water Heating Facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum temperature of one hundred ten (110) degrees F (forty-three (43) degrees C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.340 Sanitary drainage system.
A. General. Plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
C. Grease Interceptors. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be maintained in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be regularly serviced and cleaned to prevent the discharge of oil, grease, and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system or the sewage treatment plant or processes. Records of maintenance, cleaning and repairs shall be available for inspection by the code official.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.350 Storm drainage.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 6. Mechanical and Electrical Requirements

15.10.360 Generally.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.370 Heating facilities.
A. Facilities Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
B. Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees F (twenty (20) degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above thirty (30) degrees F (minus one (-1) degree C), a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees F (eighteen (18) degrees C) shall be maintained.
C. Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one (1) or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a minimum temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees F (twenty (20) degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
    1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required; provided, that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
    2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above thirty (30) degrees F (minus one (-1) degree C), a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees F (eighteen (18) degrees C) shall be maintained.
D. Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees F (eighteen (18) degrees C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
    1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
    2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
E. Room Temperature Measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three (3) feet (nine hundred fourteen (914) mm) above the floor near the center of the room and two (2) feet (six hundred ten (610) mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.380 Mechanical equipment.
A. Mechanical Appliances. Mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.
B. Removal of Combustion Products. Fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances that are labeled for unvented operation.
C. Clearances. Required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
D. Safety Controls. Safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.
E. Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
F. Energy Conservation Devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.390 Electrical facilities.
A. Facilities Required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 15.10.400.
B. Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70. Dwelling units shall be served by a three (3) wire, one hundred twenty (120)/two hundred forty (240) volt, single-phase electrical service having a minimum rating of sixty (60) amperes.
C. Electrical System Hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
    1. Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Water Exposure. The provisions of this subsection shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.
        a. Electrical Equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code and/or NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code).
        Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement:
            (1) Enclosed switches, rated a maximum of six hundred (600) volts or less;
            (2) Busway rated a maximum of six hundred (600) volts;
            (3) Panelboards rated a maximum of six hundred (600) volts;
            (4) Switchboards rated a maximum of six hundred (600) volts;
            (5) Fire pump controllers rated a maximum of six hundred (600) volts;
            (6) Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
            (7) Motor control centers;
            (8) Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;
            (9) Low-voltage power circuit breakers;
            (10) Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
            (11) Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
            (12) Liquid-filled transformers;
            (13) Cast-resin transformers;
            (14) Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;
            (15) Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water;
            (16) Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
            (17) Motors;
            (18) Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
    2. Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Fire Exposure. The provisions of this subsection shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.
        a. Electrical Equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code and/or NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code).
        Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer’s representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.400 Electrical equipment.
A. Installation. Electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain not less than two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain not less than one (1) grounding-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain not less than one (1) receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the appropriate faceplate cover for the location.
C. Luminaires. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain not less than one (1) electric luminaire. Pool and spa luminaires over fifteen (15) V shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
D. Wiring. Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running through doors, windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or ceilings.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.410 Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumb waiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the code official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
B. Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, not less than one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.420 Duct systems.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 7. Fire Safety Requirements

15.10.430 Generally.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this article.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.440 Means of egress.
A. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Fire Code.
B. Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
C. Locked Doors. Means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the International Building Code and/or International Residential Code.
D. Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following: Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.450 Fire-resistance ratings.
A. Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
B. Opening Protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. Fire and smoke-stop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.460 Fire protection systems.
A. General. Systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire Code.
    1. Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25.
    2. Fire Department Connection. Where the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such signage shall have the letters “FDC” on the sign, not less than six (6) inches (one hundred fifty-two (152) mm) high, and words in letters not less than two (2) inches (fifty-one (51) mm) high, or an arrow to indicate the location of the connection. Such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code official.
B. Single- and Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing Group I-1 and R occupancies in accordance with subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section.
    1. Where Required. Existing Group I-1 and R occupancies shall be provided with single-station smoke alarms in accordance with subsections (B)(1)(c)(1) through (B)(1)(c)(4) of this section. Interconnection and power sources shall be in accordance with subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section.
    Exceptions:
        a. Where the code that was in effect at the time of construction required smoke alarms and smoke alarms complying with those requirements are already provided.
        b. Where smoke alarms have been installed in occupancies and dwellings that were not required to have them at the time of construction, additional smoke alarms shall not be required; provided, that the existing smoke alarms comply with requirements that were in effect at the time of installation.
        c. Where smoke detectors connected to a fire alarm system have been installed as a substitute for smoke alarms.
            (1) Group R-1. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all of the following locations in Group R-1:
                AIn sleeping areas.
                BIn every room in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area to the door leading from the sleeping unit.
                CIn each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. For sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level; provided, that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level.
            (2) Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:
                AOn the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
                BIn each room used for sleeping purposes.
                CIn each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level; provided, that the lower level is less than one (1) full story below the upper level.
            (3) Installation Near Cooking Appliances. Smoke alarms shall not be installed in the following locations unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm in a location required by subsection (B)(1)(c)(1) or (B)(1)(c)(2) of this section:
                AIonization smoke alarms shall not be installed less than twenty (20) feet (six thousand ninety-six (6,096) mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
                BIonization smoke alarms with an alarm-silencing switch shall not be installed less than ten (10) feet (three thousand forty-eight (3,048) mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
                CPhotoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than six (6) feet (one thousand eight hundred twenty-nine (1,829) mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.
            (4) Installation Near Bathrooms. Smoke alarms shall be installed not less than three (3) feet (nine hundred fourteen (914) mm) horizontally from the door or opening of a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm required by subsection (B)(1)(c)(1) or (B)(1)(c)(2) of this section.
    2. Interconnection. Where more than one (1) smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one (1) alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one (1) alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
    Exceptions:
        a. Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
        b. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
    3. Power Source. Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring; provided, that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
    Exceptions:
        a. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in existing buildings where no construction is taking place.
        b. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings that are not served from a commercial power source.
        c. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
    4. Smoke Detection System. Smoke detectors listed in accordance with UL 268 and provided as part of the building’s fire alarm system shall be an acceptable alternative to single- and multiple-station smoke alarms and shall comply with the following:
        a. The fire alarm system shall comply with all applicable requirements in Section 907 of the International Fire Code.
    5. Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall initiate alarm notification in the dwelling or sleeping unit in accordance with Section 907.5.2 of the International Fire Code.
    6. Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit shall not activate alarm notification appliances outside of the dwelling or sleeping unit; provided, that a supervisory signal is generated and monitored in accordance with Section 907.6.5 of the International Fire Code.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Article 8. Boarding Standards

15.10.470 Generally.
Windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.480 Materials.
A. Boarding Sheet Material. Boarding sheet material shall be minimum one-half (1/2) inch-thick (12.7 mm) wood structural panels complying with the International Building Code.
B. Boarding Framing Material. Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal two (2) inch by four (4) inch (fifty-one (51) mm by one hundred two (102) mm) solid sawn lumber complying with the International Building Code.
C. Boarding Fasteners. Boarding fasteners shall be minimum three-eighths (3/8) inch diameter (9.5 mm) carriage bolts of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply with the International Building Code.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.490 Installation.
A. Boarding Installation. The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1) and A103.1(2) and subsections (B) through (E) of this section.
[IMAGE: <15.10.490_001.jpg>]
B. Boarding Sheet Material. The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window.
C. Windows. The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the window sash shall be removed and stored. The two (2) inch by four (4) inch (fifty-one (51) mm by one hundred two (102) mm) strong back framing material shall be cut minimum two (2) inches (fifty-one (51) mm) wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the inside of the window opening six (6) inches (one hundred fifty-two (152) mm) minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window opening. The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured.
D. Door Walls. The door opening shall be framed with minimum two (2) inch by four (4) inch (fifty-one (51) mm by one hundred two (102) mm) framing material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches (six hundred ten (610) mm) on center. Blocking shall also be secured at a maximum of forty-eight (48) inches (one thousand two hundred nineteen (1,219) mm) on center vertically. Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating every six (6) inches (one hundred fifty-two (152) mm) on center.
E. Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One (1) door to the structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner.
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

15.10.500 Referenced standard.
International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Sections 15.10.480(A), (B) and (C).
(Ord. 6621 § 1, Added, 01/10/2018)

Chapter 15.12 MECHANICAL AND FIRE CODES

Sections:
15.12.010    Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
15.12.020    Permit fees.
15.12.030    Violations—Penalties.

15.12.010 Adoption of International Mechanical Code.
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC), as adopted by Chapter 51-52 WAC, is adopted by reference as the official mechanical code of the city of Aberdeen. One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the IMC shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
B. The following National Fire Prevention Association codes are adopted by reference:
    1. 2015 National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54, ANSI Z223).
    2. 2014 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (NFPA 58).
(Ord. 6639 § 3, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6595 § 2, Amended, 07/27/2016; Ord. 6544, Amended, 06/12/2013; Ord. 6501, Amended, 08/11/2010; Ord. 6439, Amended, 06/27/2007; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004; Ord. 6187, Amended, 06/24/1998)

15.12.020 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the International Mechanical Code and this chapter.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code.
(Ord. 6639 § 3, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004)

15.12.030 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6639 § 3, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6439, Amended, 06/27/2007. Formerly 15.12.060)

Chapter 15.32 PLUMBING CODE

Sections:
15.32.010    Adoption of code.
15.32.020    Permit fees.
15.32.030    Violations—Penalties.

15.32.010 Adoption of code.
The 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) as adopted by Chapter 51-56 WAC, with Appendices A, B, and I, but excluding Chapter 16 of the UPC, which is not adopted, and including the requirements relating to venting and combustion air of fuel fired appliances in Chapter 5 of the UPC and those portions of the UPC addressing building sewers, is hereby adopted by reference as the official plumbing code of the city of Aberdeen. One (1) copy of the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 6639 § 8, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6595 § 5, Amended, 07/27/2016; Ord. 6544, Amended, 06/12/2013; Ord. 6501, Amended, 08/11/2010; Ord. 6439, Amended, 06/27/2007; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004; Ord. 6190, Amended, 07/01/1998)

15.32.020 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the Uniform Plumbing Code and this chapter.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code.
(Ord. 6639 § 8, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6361, Amended, 06/09/2004; Ord. 6190, Amended, 07/01/1998. Formerly 15.32.030)

15.32.030 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by reference is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 6639 § 8, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.10.050. Formerly 15.32.050)

Chapter 15.36 ELECTRICAL CODE

Sections:
15.36.010    Adoption of code.
15.36.020    Conflict of provisions.
15.36.030    Electrical inspector—Duties.
15.36.040    Aluminum conductors.
15.36.050    Stop orders.
15.36.060    Licenses required.
15.36.070    Permit required.
15.36.080    Permit fees.
15.36.090    Unsafe wiring.
15.36.100    Notice and order.
15.36.110    Violations—Penalties.

15.36.010 Adoption of code.
Chapters 296-46A, B, and C, except subsections (10), (11), (12), (13), (14), and (15) of Section 256-46B-906, of the Washington Administrative Code, and the codes and standards adopted by reference therein, are adopted by reference as the electrical and telecommunications code of the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter. A copy of each code adopted by reference in WAC 296-46B-010 shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 6482, Amended, 04/22/2009; Ord. 6363, Amended, 07/28/2004; Ord. 6287, Amended, 05/02/2001; Ord. 6215, Amended, 05/12/1999; Ord. 6188, Amended, 07/01/1998; Ord. 6159, Amended, 08/06/1997)

15.36.020 Conflict of provisions.
In any instance where this chapter requires an equal, higher, or better standard of construction and an equal, higher, or better standard of materials, devices, appliances, and equipment than that required by codes adopted by reference in WAC 296-46B-010, the terms of this chapter shall govern. In all other cases where the provisions of this chapter conflict with a provision of chapter 296-46B WAC, as adopted by reference herein, the terms of chapter 296-46B WAC shall govern.
(Ord. 6363, Amended, 07/28/2004; Ord. 6287, Amended, 05/02/2001)

15.36.030 Electrical inspector—Duties.
An electrical inspector shall be appointed by the director of public works and, together with such inspectors or assistants as may be hired by the city, is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 2.11.030)

15.36.040 Aluminum conductors.
The use of aluminum conductors is prohibited unless otherwise approved for a specific use by the electrical inspector.
(Prior code § 2.11.050)

15.36.050 Stop orders.
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the electrical inspector may order such work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the electrical inspector to proceed with the work.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.11.080. Formerly 15.36.070)

15.36.060 Licenses required.
No person or persons except those duly licensed by the state of Washington and having a city business license or the owner shall do any wiring or work regulated by city ordinances upon any premises within the city or city-owned property or right-of-way.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.11.090. Formerly 15.36.080)

15.36.070 Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall do any electrical wiring in the city or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate electrical permit for each separate electrical project, building or structure. The person, firm or corporation shall provide the city all information necessary for issuance of said permit. If work authorized by a permit is not started within one hundred eighty (180) days or is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the permit is null and void and before work can be started or recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained and one-half (1/2) of the permit fee paid. No electrical permit shall be required for “like-in-kind” replacement as defined by WAC 296-46B-100 and as excepted by WAC 296-46B-901(8).
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6482, Amended, 04/22/2009. Formerly 15.36.090)

15.36.080 Permit fees.
A. All inspection and permit fees shall be paid prior to connection by the serving utility. Electrical power connections to a mobile home shall not be made by the serving utility until an inspection of the tie-down installation has been made and approval given by the city building department. All inspection requests shall be made twenty-four (24) hours in advance.
B. Inspection fees shall be as established by Chapter 296-46B WAC, provided that double fees will be charged for:
    1. Installations that are covered or concealed before inspection.
    2. Failure to obtain a permit prior to beginning the installation or alteration, or failure to obtain permits for emergency repairs to existing by the next business day after beginning the emergency repairs.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6363, Amended, 07/28/2004; Ord. 6287, Amended, 05/02/2001; Ord. 6159, Amended, 08/06/1997. Formerly 15.36.100)

15.36.090 Unsafe wiring.
If it is determined by the electrical inspector that unsafe wiring exists which constitutes a fire hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life, safety or welfare, the electrical inspector shall be authorized to order the public utility district to disconnect or cause to be disconnected electrical service to the site of the hazard until the hazard is repaired or removed to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall, upon finding electrical hazard, do one of the following to cause removal of hazard:
A. If in the opinion of the electrical inspector an extreme hazard exists, the inspector shall immediately have the service disconnected with or without prior notice to any party. Notice must be given within five (5) working days after the disconnect in writing specifying the reason for discontinuing service. The order by the electrical inspector to the public utility district may be verbal, but must be reduced to writing within five (5) working days after the verbal order and method of service on the owner shall be as specified in Section 15.50.160.
B. Discontinue electrical service when the building or structure becomes vacant. Written notice to have service discontinued upon vacancy shall be given to the public utility district and owner as specified in Section 15.50.160.
C. Discontinue electrical service when repairs and corrections have not been completed or made within a time limit as determined reasonable by the electrical inspector. Written notice shall be given to the public utility district and the owner as specified in Section 15.50.160.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.11.120. Formerly 15.36.110)

15.36.100 Notice and order.
The notice and order shall contain the following:
A. The notice shall be written except as otherwise provided in Section 15.36.110;
B. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building, structure, or hazard is located;
C. A statement that the electrical inspector has found a hazardous condition with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the determination;
D. A statement of action required to be taken as determined by the electrical inspector;
E. A statement of action that has been or will be taken if the hazardous condition is not removed; and
F. A statement advising that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building or structure may appeal from the notice and order any action of the electrical inspector to the board of appeals; provided, the appeal is made in writing and filed with the electrical inspector within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order; and that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.11.130. Formerly 15.36.120)

15.36.110 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation causing or permitting any electrical wiring, appliances, or equipment to be used or installed in violation of this chapter, or in violation of the National Electrical Code as adopted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The punishment provided in this section shall be deemed supplementary to any other recourse available to the city in such cases.
(Ord. 6639 § 9, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 2.11.140. Formerly 15.36.130)

Chapter 15.50 UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES

Sections:
15.50.010    Purpose.
15.50.020    Definitions.
15.50.030    Conditions for declaring a building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use.
15.50.040    Conditions and standards for demolition, repair or vacation and closure.
15.50.050    Investigation, complaint, notice and administrative hearing.
15.50.060    Emergency order.
15.50.070    Determination and order of building official after hearing.
15.50.080    Appeal from order of building official - Order stayed.
15.50.090    Board of appeals - Building Code Commission.
15.50.100    Conduct of hearing on appeal.
15.50.110    Petition to superior court.
15.50.120    Extension of compliance date.
15.50.130    Certificate of compliance.
15.50.140    Enforcement of the order of the building official.
15.50.150    Recovery of costs.
15.50.160    Notice to vacate - posting - compliance - termination of utilities.
15.50.170    Violations - penalties.

15.50.010 Purpose.
It is found and declared that there exist within the city of Aberdeen buildings and structures occupied or designed for human habitation and other uses which are unfit for human habitation or other uses, substandard and dangerous, and these conditions are the result of inadequate original construction, dilapidation, lack of proper maintenance, overcrowding or other defects. It is also found that these conditions cause danger or substandard conditions to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and contribute to the creation of slums or otherwise blighted areas.

15.50.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
"Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
"Building official" means the duly appointed Building Inspector or designated representative; however, for the purposes of this chapter, the term "building official" shall include the city engineer, fire marshal and the city electrician.
“Complaint” means the notice issued pursuant to AMC 15.50.050 that contains a concise written statement of the alleged conditions that make a building or premises unfit for human habitation and the notices required by AMC 15.50.050(D).
"Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
"Efficiency living unit" means any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining, and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of Section 15.50.030(Y).
"Habitable space or room" means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closet, halls, storage, or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
"Hazard" means an observable and/or measurable condition that exposes or places any person to the risk of illness, bodily harm, or loss or damage to property.
"Health official" means the designated head of Grays Harbor-Pacific Health District.
"Hotel" means any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
“Plumbing code” means chapter 15.32 AMC.
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
"Uniform building code" means chapter 15.08 AMC.
“Uniform mechanical code” means chapter 15.12 AMC.

15.50.030 Conditions for declaring a building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use.
Any building, structure, or the premises or portions thereof, in or on which any of the following conditions exist to the extent that the health or safety of the occupants, of the occupants of neighboring buildings or structures, or the public is endangered, is declared to be unfit for human habitation or other use:
A. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is less than the minimum requirements of the applicable ICC Codes, for new buildings or structures of similar construction, purpose or location;
B. Whenever any portion, member, appurtenance or ornamentation is likely to become detached, dislodged or collapse, or is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the applicable ICC Codes, for new buildings or structures or similar construction;
C. Whenever any portion of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports which lean, list or buckle or are wracked, warped, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction or to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base;
D. Whenever any portion of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
E. Whenever any portion of foundations, foundation supports, fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, or fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, removal or movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or structure is likely to partially or completely collapse;
F. Whenever any portion of floors, floor supports, ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split, buckle or settle are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety;
G. Whenever any portion has deteriorated, crumbling, or loose plaster or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors including broken windows or doors, or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings;
H. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is obstructed, insufficient in width, size or number, deteriorated, or is so arranged as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit as per the requirements of the applicable ICC Codes;
I. Whenever a building or structure is unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
J. Whenever ventilating equipment is not maintained in a safe manner as per the International Mechanical Code;
K. Whenever every habitable room does not have an aggregate window area of not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten (10) square feet;
L. Whenever one-half (1/2) of the required window area in all rooms is not openable; provided, that in any habitable room which has an openable doorway opening directly to the outdoors or indirectly through a porch, such doorway shall be included in computing the openable window area;
M. Toilet compartments shall be provided with natural ventilation of not less than three (3) square feet or a mechanical exhaust ventilation system capable of four (4) air changes per hour;
N. Whenever wiring has not been maintained and is not being used in a safe manner;
O. Whenever public hallways, stairs and other exitways in buildings and multiple dwellings are not lighted at all times so as to provide at least one (1) foot-candle of illumination at all points;
P. Whenever a habitable room does not contain at least two (2) supplied electric convenience outlets or one (1) such convenience outlet and one (1) supplied electric light fixture, or whenever any habitable room, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and hallway do not have one (1) supplied electric light fixture;
Q. Whenever a dwelling unit does not have a room or rooms which afford privacy to a person within said room or rooms, and has a water closet, lavatory and a bathtub or shower in good working condition;
R. Whenever a hotel does not have water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers on each floor for each sex accessible from a public hallway or whenever additional water closets, lavatories, baths or showers are not provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one (1) for every additional eight (8) guests, or fractional number thereof, in excess of eight (8);
S. Whenever walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, are not finished with smooth, nonabsorbent surfaces in accordance with the applicable ICC Codes; whenever shower and tub enclosures within dwelling units are not finished with approved nonabsorbent materials;
T. Whenever a dwelling unit is not provided with a kitchen which contains a sink, work counter of nonabsorbent material, adequate space for installing cooking appliance and refrigeration equipment and a storage area for cooking utensils;
U. Whenever there is not an approved system of water supply, providing both hot and cold running water for the required sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower for each dwelling unit and whenever piping materials used for potable water are not approved by the plumbing code and whenever any such piping leaks or is insufficient in size as required by the plumbing code;
V. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure;
W. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the building official to be a fire hazard;
X. Whenever a dwelling unit does not have at least one (1) room which has not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of superficial floor area, or whenever a room which is used for both cooking and living or both living and sleeping purposes does not have at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of superficial floor area;
Y. Whenever a room used for sleeping purposes does not have at least ninety (90) square feet of superficial floor area; provided, that when more than two (2) persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two (2).
Exception: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit meeting the following requirements:
    1. The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two (2),
    2. The unit shall be provided with a separate closet,
    3. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front,
    4. Light and ventilation conforming to the requirements of the applicable ICC Codes,
    5. The unit is provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower;
Z. Whenever a habitable room has less than seven (7) feet in any dimension;
AA. Whenever a water closet space is less than thirty (30) inches in width or a clear space in front of the water closet is less than twenty-four (24) inches;
BB. Whenever habitable rooms, storage rooms and laundry rooms have a ceiling height of less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches;
CC. Whenever hallways, corridors, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have a ceiling of less than seven (7) feet six (6) inches;
DD. Whenever a room which has a sloping ceiling is less than the prescribed ceiling height in more than one-half (1/2) the area thereof; provided, that no portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area;
EE. Whenever a building or structure, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, the accumulation of junk, debris or combustible materials, or otherwise, creates a health, fire or safety hazard;
FF. Whenever a nuisance exists that may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises, or a city owned right-of-way, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators, freezers, stoves, washers or dryers; or structurally unsound fences; or any lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;
GG. Whenever untreated wood support posts, girders, beams, floor joists or other wood structural supports are in direct contact with earth;
HH. Whenever any dwelling unit is not provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit at a point five (5) feet above the floor in the center of all habitable rooms, except bedrooms which shall be sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit at a point five (5) feet above the floor in the center of the room;
II. Whenever all plumbing fixtures are not trapped and vented and connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system and whenever all toilets are not flush type and in good working condition and whenever piping both drain lines and vent lines are broken, cracked or in such a condition that they leak or of materials which are not approved by the Uniform Plumbing Code;
JJ. Whenever each hot water tank or hot water heating system is not provided with an approved, adequately sized pressure relief valve with a full size drain plumbed to the exterior of the building or other approved location as determined by the building official;
KK. Whenever glazing in locations subject to human impact such as glass doors, glazing immediately adjacent to such doors, glazing adjacent to any surface normally used as a walking surface, sliding glass door units, shower doors, tub enclosures and storm doors are not safety glazing materials as specified in applicable ICC Codes, provided glazing does not need to be safety glass in locations as specified under “exceptions” listed in the applicable ICC Codes;
LL. Whenever five-eighths (5/8) inch gypsum board or other material which has equivalent or better fire resistive rating is not provided on walls and ceilings which separate individual dwelling units, dwelling units from common storage areas and dwelling units from public or private garage; provided, that existing partitions and ceilings with wood lath and plaster in which the plaster is a minimum of three-eighths (3/8) inch thick and is not cracked, broken or bulging will be acceptable in lieu of the above mentioned requirement;
MM. Whenever one-half (1/2) inch gypsum board or other material which has equivalent or better fire resistive rating is not provided on walls and ceilings in individual dwelling units or dwellings; provided, that existing partitions and ceilings with wood lath and plaster in which the plaster is a minimum of three-eighths (3/8) inch think and is not cracked, broken or bulging will be acceptable in lieu of the above requirement;
NN. Whenever the water, solid waste, electric, or natural gas utility service to an occupied building has been disconnected for more than thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 6639 § 12, Amended, 12/12/2018; Ord. 6606 § 1, Added, 05/10/2017)

15.50.040 Conditions and standards for demolition, repair or vacation and closure.
A. Whenever the building official determines, pursuant to Section 15.50.030 of this Code, that all or any portion of a building or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use, the building official shall order that the unfit building or premises or portion thereof be:
    1. Repaired, or demolished and removed, if the estimated cost of repairing the conditions causing the building or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other use exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of a building or structure of similar size, design, type and quality, provided that the building official may order a building or structure, for which the estimated cost of such repairs do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of such replacement value, to be repaired, or demolished and removed, if the degree of structural deterioration is as described in 15.50.030(1) – (6), (8), (22), (23), and the owner has failed three (3) or more times in the last five (5) years to correct the conditions by compliance dates as ordered by the building official;
    2. Repaired, and/or vacated and closed, if the estimated cost of repairing the conditions causing the building or structure to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation or other use does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of a building or structure of similar size, design, type and quality; or
    3. Corrected or improved as specified in the Order of the building official as to the conditions that caused the premises other than buildings and structures to be unfit.
    Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City to condemn and resell property pursuant to RCW 35.80A (Condemnation of Blighted Property).
B. In estimating the replacement value of an unfit building or structure, the building official shall use the Square Foot Cost Estimating Method set forth in the "Residential Cost Handbook," Marshall and Swift, latest available edition, or a cost estimating publication that the building official deems comparable.
C. In estimating the cost of repairs, the building official shall apply the following standards:
    1. Only the conditions causing the building, structure or portion thereof to be unfit for human habitation or other use shall be included in the cost estimate;
    2. All repair costs shall be based on estimates calculated from the Marshall and Swift’s “Residential Cost Handbook” latest available edition, or a cost estimating publication that the building official deems comparable;
    3. Repair estimates shall assume that all work will comply with the requirements of the current Building, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Energy, and Fire Codes in effect in the City of Aberdeen;
    4. If the extent of damage to a portion of a building or structure cannot be ascertained from visual inspection, the building official shall assume that the relative extent of damage or deterioration identified in the observable portion of the building exists in the unobserved portions; and
    5. Cost estimates for replacing or repairing the building, structure or portion thereof shall include the same type and quality of materials as originally used in the structure, unless different materials are required by current Building, Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Energy, and Fire Codes. If the building or structure is so damaged that the original materials cannot be determined, repair costs shall be estimated using the materials identified under the applicable building quality classification in the Square Foot Cost Estimating Method in the "Residential Cost Handbook" by Marshall and Swift.
D. If the building official finds that any of the following conditions exist, the building official shall order that such conditions be eliminated and that the building be closed within a time specified:
    1. The condition or conditions which cause the building or premises to be unsafe or unfit for human habitation create a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare that would exist even if the building were vacated and closed to entry; or
    2. Building appendages, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, are in a deteriorated condition or are otherwise unable to sustain the design loads specified; or
    3. Part of the building or premises or equipment intended to assist in extinguishing a fire, to prevent the origin or spread of fire, or to safeguard life or property from fire is in an unsafe or unusable condition.

15.50.050 Investigation, complaint, notice and administrative hearing.
A. The building official may investigate any building or premises which the building official believes to be unfit for human habitation or other use. If the investigation reveals conditions that make the building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use, the building official shall:
    1. Issue a complaint stating the conditions that make the building or premises unfit for human habitation or other use; and
    2. Serve the complaint by personal service, registered mail, or certified mail with return receipt requested, upon all persons who appear on a litigation guarantee from a licensed title insurance company as having any ownership interest in the building or premises; and
    3. Post the complaint in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of- way.
B. No complaint shall be issued if a permit has been issued for all repairs, alterations, and improvements required to make the building or premises fit for human habitation or other use, and the repair work, in the building official's opinion, is progressing at a satisfactory rate. For the purposes of this sub-section, the building official may require as a condition of issuing a permit for that the applicant provide a written and signed, mutually agreed-upon schedule for the completion of the work.
C. If the address of the persons appearing on the litigation guarantee identified in subparagraph A cannot be ascertained by the building official after a reasonable search, then the building official shall make affidavit to that effect, and the complaint shall be served either by personal service or by mailing a copy of the complaint by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the address appearing on the last equalized tax assessment roll of the County Assessor and to any other address known to the County Assessor. Each person whose address cannot be ascertained shall be mailed a copy of the complaint at the address of the building or premises involved in the proceedings. In addition to serving and posting the complaint, the building official shall mail or cause to be delivered to all housing and commercial rental units in the building or on the premises a copy of the complaint.
D. The complaint shall state that an administrative hearing will be held before the building official at a specified time and place, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after service of the complaint; and that all persons having any legal interest in the property shall have the right to provide a written response prior to the hearing and to appear in person or by representative at the time and place fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence shall not apply in administrative hearings before the building official. At the hearing the building official shall receive and consider all information provided, including proposals for the occupation, vacation, repair or demolition of the property. The building official shall consider issuance of a consent order for the necessary repairs and may continue the date of the administrative hearing to provide interested persons additional time to propose detailed repair schedules or other information to be used in making the building official’s determination under Section 15.50.070. 
E. A copy of the complaint shall be filed for public record with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6606 § 2, Amended, 05/10/2017)

15.50.060 Emergency order.
Whenever the building official finds that any building, structure or portion thereof is an imminent hazard to the extent that persons in or around the building, structure or portion thereof are in serious jeopardy, he may, without notice and order, take immediate action to vacate or demolish or restore the hazard to a condition of stability and safety and take whatever action necessary to barricade or prevent occupants or the general public from any dangerous conditions. The building official shall, within five working days following completion of work to remove the imminent hazard, issue a complaint pursuant to Section 15.50.050. Any city funds spent in responding to the emergency shall be included in costs recovered under Section 15.50.150.

15.50.070 Determination and order of building official after hearing.
A. If, after the administrative hearing provided for in Section 15.50.050, the building official determines that a building or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use pursuant to Section 15.50.030, the building official shall further determine, using the standards set forth in Section 15.50.040 , whether the building should be:
    1. Repaired, altered or improved;
    2. Vacated and closed; or
    3. Demolished and removed, and/or whether the premises and the conditions that cause it to be unfit should be corrected or improved.
B. The building official shall issue a written order requiring that the building or premises be made fit for human habitation or other use. The building official shall post and serve the order upon all parties served with a copy of the complaint, in the manner provided in Section 15.50.050. The order shall contain:
    1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building, structure, or dwelling unit is located;
    2. A statement that the building official has found the building or structure or portion thereof to be dangerous and/or substandard with a brief and concise description of the condition found to render the determination;
    3. A statement that one of the following actions shall be taken:
        a. If the building official determines that the building or structure or portion thereof must be repaired or replaced, the order shall require that permits be secured and the work physically commenced within such time and completed within such time as the building official determines is reasonable.
        b. If the building official determines that the building or structure or portion thereof shall be vacated and repaired, the order shall require that the premises be vacated within a time determined reasonable and that a permit be secured and work physically commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable.
        c. If the building official determines the building or structure or portion thereof must be vacated and demolished or is already vacated or demolished, the order shall require that the premises, if not vacated, be vacated within a time determined reasonable and that a permit be secured and work physically commenced and completed within such time as the building official determines reasonable;
    4. A statement advising that the building official will or has notified, as prescribed by Section 15.50.160, the water superintendent, public utility district and/or gas utility company to terminate utility service;
    5. A statement advising that failure to comply with the order may result in prosecution as a violator of the provisions of the city code;
    6. A statement advising that if required repairs or demolition or failure to obtain permits within specified time is not made, the city may proceed to cause the work to be done and that the amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the board or officer, shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid;
    7. A statement advising: (1) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order any action of the building official to the board of appeals; provided, the appeal is made in writing and filed with the building official within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the written order issued pursuant to AMC 15.50.070(B); and (2) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing before the board of appeals and in such case the order issued by the building official shall be the final determination of the matter; and (3) that the person having a record title or legal interest in the building may request an informal conference to discuss modifications of the notice and order.
C. If an owner fails to comply with an order and the building official elects to demolish and remove a building pursuant to Section 15.50.140 the owner shall either obtain an asbestos survey and make the same available to the building official or allow the building official access to the structure so that the building official may obtain an asbestos survey.
D. When calculating the time for compliance under subsection A, the building official shall consider:
    1. The type of hazard, the nature and immediacy of the threat to the public health and safety, and the blight created by the conditions of the premises;
    2. A demonstrated intent by a responsible party to repair, demolish or vacate and close the building or to correct or improve the condition of the premises by:
        a. Entering into a contract with a licensed contractor to perform the required work within a specific time and for a reasonable compensation,
        b. Depositing cash in a segregated account in an amount sufficient to complete the required repairs,
        c. Securing a loan from an established lending institution that will provide sufficient funds to complete the required repairs, or
        d. Securing a permit to perform the required work and paying the required permit fees;
    3. The length of time required to obtain permits needed to complete the repairs;
    4. The complexity of the repairs, seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal rights of tenants; and
    5. Circumstances beyond the control of the responsible person.
E. If no appeal is filed, a copy of the order shall be filed with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.

15.50.080 Appeal from order of building official - Order stayed.
A. Any party affected by any order of the building official under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the order of the building official to the Board of Appeals. Notice of the right to appeal shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
B. The notice of appeal shall:
    1. Be filed with the Building Inspector, as secretary to the Board of Appeals, no more than thirty (30) days after service of the building official's order;
    2. Be in writing and state clearly and concisely the specific objections to the building official's order;
    3. State the ownership or other interest that each appellant has in the building, premises, or portion thereof involved in the order of the building official;
    4. State briefly the remedy sought; and
    5. Include the signatures of all appellants and their mailing addresses.
C. Upon receipt of an appeal the secretary of the Board of Appeals shall fix a date, time and place for hearing and such date shall not be more than forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal was filed.
B. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing to each appellant and members of the board of appeals by the secretary of the board. Such notice shall be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy to the address shown on the notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal and hearing shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
C. Except for vacation, enforcement of any notice and order by the building official shall be stayed until final determination of the appeal is made by the board of appeals.

15.50.090 Board of appeals - Building Code Commission.
The Building Code Commission shall be the board of appeals and shall hear all matters or issues raised on appeal of any notice and order of the building official in the manner provided in Section 15.60.100.
A. The secretary for the board of appeals shall be the Building Inspector.
B. No member who did not hear the evidence presented at the hearing shall vote or take part in the Board’s decision on an appeal.
C. A majority of the total membership of the board of appeals shall constitute a quorum and shall be necessary for conducting the hearing on appeal, provided, however, that members who have been disqualified or have disqualified themselves for any conflict of interest or in the interest of the appearance of fairness shall not be counted in determining the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum.
D. The board shall conduct an open-record hearing (“de novo” hearing) on the building official’s complaint and order. The board shall have the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the order of the building official, or remand the case to the building official for further proceedings. 
E. Within fourteen (14) days after the hearing the Board shall issue a written decision containing findings of fact and conclusions and shall mail copies of the decision to the parties of record. The decision of the Board shall be the final decision of the City and shall have the same effect as a decision of the building official issued pursuant to Section 15.50.050. The decision and order of the Board shall be filed by the building official with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6606 § 3, Amended, 05/10/2017)

15.50.100 Conduct of hearing on appeal.
The board shall follow the rules of procedure for administrative and quasi-judicial hearings adopted in Chapter 2.18. The board may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal before the hearing or during the course of the hearing; provided, that: (A) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; and (B) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection.
(Ord. 6606 § 4, Amended, 05/10/2017)

15.50.110 Petition to superior court.
Any person who has standing to file a land use petition in the Superior Court of Grays Harbor County may file such a petition within twenty-one (21) days of issuance of the Board's decision pursuant to Section 15.50.090, as provided by Section 705 of Chapter 347 of the Laws of 1995.

15.50.120 Extension of compliance date.
An extension of time for compliance with an order may be granted by the building official upon receipt of a written request filed with the building official by any party affected by the order not later than seven (7) days prior to the date set for compliance in the order. Any extension granted shall be in writing, and shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way. Extensions shall not be subject to appeal. The building official may, without a written request, grant an extension of time if in the building official's opinion such an extension is warranted.

15.50.130 Certificate of compliance.
A. Compliance with an order issued pursuant to this chapter 15.50 shall be the responsibility of each person named as a responsible party in the order. An owner or responsible party shall request a reinspection from the building official following correction of the conditions set forth in the order. If the building official finds that the repairs, alterations, corrections or other actions required by the order have been performed in compliance with the standards in this Code, the building official shall issue a certificate of compliance certifying that, as of the date it is issued, the violations cited in the order have been corrected.
B. On issuance of a certificate of compliance, the building official certifies only that the violations listed in the complaint, order or decision have been corrected as required by this Code. The building official makes no representation concerning other conditions in the building or any equipment therein, or of the premises, that is not listed in the complaint, order or decision. The building official shall not be responsible for any injury, damage, death or other loss of any kind sustained by any person, organization, or corporation arising out of any condition of the building, structure, equipment, or premises.

15.50.140 Enforcement of the order of the building official.
A. If the person served with an order fails to comply with the order, the building official, by such means and with such assistance as may be available, is hereby authorized and directed to cause the building to be:
    1. Repaired, altered or improved; or
    2. Vacated and closed; or
    3. Demolished and removed; and
    4. To cause the premises and the conditions that cause it to be unfit to be corrected or improved, and the costs thereof shall be recovered by the City in the manner provided in Section 15.50.150.
B. If an owner fails to comply with an order and the building official elects to demolish and remove a building pursuant to subsection A, the owner shall either obtain an asbestos survey and make the same available to the building official, or allow the building official access to the building so that the building official may obtain an asbestos survey.

15.50.150 Recovery of costs.
A. If the costs incurred by the building official pursuant to Sections 15.50.060 or 15.50.140 for repairs, alterations or improvements, or of vacating and closing, or of demolition and removal are not paid after a written demand upon the owner and other persons named as responsible parties in the complaint, such costs shall be assessed against the property for which the costs were incurred in the manner provided below.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the building official, the building official shall, if possible, sell the salvageable materials from the building and shall apply the proceeds of the sale to the reimbursement of the costs of demolition and removal. Any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner.
C. After notice to the owner and other persons with an ownership interest as shown on the litigation guarantee that all or a portion of the costs have not been paid, the building official shall notify the Finance Director of the amount due and owing, and upon receipt of the notification the Finance Director shall certify the amount to the Grays Harbor County Treasurer for assessment.
D. Upon certification by the Finance Director of the amount due and owing, the Grays Harbor County Treasurer or designee shall enter the amount of the assessment upon the tax rolls against the real property for the current year to be collected at the same time as the general taxes and with interest at the rates and in the manner provided in RCW 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes. When collected, it shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City.
E. The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property which shall be of equal rank with state, county and municipal taxes.

15.50.160 Notice to vacate - posting - compliance - termination of utilities.
A. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 15.50.050, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form: “DO NOT ENTER - UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. IT IS A MISDEMEANOR TO OCCUPY THIS BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR DWELLING UNIT, OR TO REMOVE OR DEFACE THIS NOTICE. BUILDING OFFICIAL, CITY OF ABERDEEN.” It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or enter any building, structure or dwelling unit which has been posted; except, that entry may be made to repair or demolish such under a permit.
B. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under Section 15.50.050, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit or as otherwise approved in advance by the building official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of compliance issued.
C. The building official may, by written notice directed to the owner and to the Superintendent of Water, public utility district and/or gas utility company, request that service of water, electricity or gas to the building or premises be terminated or disconnected on or before a specified date. Upon receipt of such notice the Superintendent of Water, public utility district, or gas utility company is authorized to terminate or disconnect the service, and to restore the service upon the issuance by the building official of a certificate of compliance, or upon written notification by the building official that water, electricity or gas service should be restored.
D. It is unlawful for anyone other than the Superintendent of Water, public utility district, or gas utility company, or their authorized representatives, to restore any water, electricity, or gas service that has been terminated or disconnected by notice from the building official.

15.50.170 Violations - penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6311, Added, 11/28/2001)

Chapter 15.55 FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION

Sections:
Article 1.  General
    15.55.010    Purpose.
    15.55.020    Penalties for noncompliance.
    15.55.030    Interpretation.
    15.55.040    Abrogation and greater restrictions.
    15.55.050    Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Article 2.  Definitions
    15.55.060    Definitions.
Article 3.  Regulatory Data
    15.55.070    Special flood hazard area.
    15.55.080    Base flood elevation.
Article 4.  Administration
    15.55.090    The floodplain administrator.
    15.55.100    Floodplain development permit.
    15.55.110    Floodplain development permit application.
    15.55.120    Records.
    15.55.130    Certificate of occupancy.
Article 5.  Variances and Appeals
    15.55.140    Board of appeals.
    15.55.150    Application for variances.
    15.55.160    Variance criteria.
    15.55.170    Decisions on variance applications.
    15.55.180    Appeals from decisions of the floodplain administrator.
Article 6.  General Development Standards
    15.55.190    Floodplain obstructions.
    15.55.200    Alteration of watercourses.
    15.55.210    Site design.
    15.55.220    Critical facilities.
    15.55.230    Hazardous materials.
    15.55.240    Utilities.
    15.55.250    Subdivisions.
Article 7.  Standards for Protection of Structures
    15.55.260    Applicability.
    15.55.270    Residential structures.
    15.55.280    Nonresidential structures.
    15.55.290    Manufactured homes.
    15.55.300    Recreational vehicles.
    15.55.310    Appurtenant structures.

Article 1. General

15.55.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by managing development in order to:
A. Protect human life, health and property from the dangers of flooding;
B. Minimize the need for publicly funded and hazardous rescue efforts to save those who are isolated by flood waters;
C. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood damage repair and flood control projects;
D. Minimize disruption of commerce and governmental services;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in the floodplain;
F. Maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use of flood-prone areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
G. Encourage those who occupy areas subject to flooding to assume responsibility for their actions; and
H. Qualify the city of Aberdeen for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, thereby giving citizens and businesses the opportunity to purchase flood insurance.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.020 Penalties for noncompliance.
A. No development shall be undertaken or placed in the areas regulated by this chapter without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
B. The city of Aberdeen, through its authorized agents, may initiate injunction, abatement proceedings or any other appropriate civil action in the courts against any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter. In addition, each violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be a civil violation which shall be imposed and collected in the same manner as provided for in Chapter 1.12.
C. In addition to incurring civil liability under subsection (B) of this section, violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with the provisions), shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each violation or each day of continued unlawful activity shall constitute a separate violation. Any person who violates this chapter, or fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.030 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the city;
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.040 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Where a provision of this chapter and another code, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.050 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of property protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on occasion. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the regulated areas, or development permitted within such areas, will be free from flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Aberdeen or any officer or employee of the city for any damage to property or habitat that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 2. Definitions

15.55.060 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, terms or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also referred to as the “one hundred (100) year flood”). The area subject to the base flood is the special flood hazard area designated on flood insurance rate maps as Zones “A” or “AE.”
“Base flood elevation” means the elevation of the base flood in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
“Basement” means any area of the structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Critical facility” means a facility necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare during a flood. “Critical facilities” include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency operations installations, water and wastewater treatment plants, electric power stations, and installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste (other than consumer products containing hazardous substances intended for household use).
“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
“Elevated building” means a nonbasement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. A building on a slab on grade foundation is not considered an elevated building.
“Elevation Certificate” means the official form (FEMA Form 81-31) used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with provisions of this chapter and determine the proper flood insurance premium rate.
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either or both:
    1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
    2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
“Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes the flood insurance rate map, floodway data, and base flood elevations.
“Floodplain administrator” means the community development director or the director’s designee.
“Floodway” means the channel of a stream or other nontidal watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point.
“Historic structure” means a structure that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Washington Heritage Register, or the Washington Heritage Barn Register, or has been certified to contribute to the historical significance of a registered historic district.
“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawlspace). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is compliant with Sections 15.55.270(F) and (H).
“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
“NAVD88” means the North American Vertical Datum of 1988. Unless otherwise noted, all elevations referred to in this chapter are in relation to NAVD88.
“New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which meets all four (4) of the following criteria:
    1. Built on a single chassis;
    2. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
    3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by an automobile or light duty truck;
    4. Designed primarily for use as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use, not as a permanent dwelling.
“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means the land subject to inundation by the base flood. Special flood hazard areas are designated on the flood insurance rate map with the letters “A,” “AE,” or “AH” and may include additional flood-prone areas designated in this chapter.
“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit’s expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. “Substantial damage” also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, replacement, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five (5) year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 3. Regulatory Data

15.55.070 Special flood hazard area.
A. This chapter applies to the special flood hazard area (SFHA) and areas mapped Zone X within the jurisdiction of the city of Aberdeen. The SFHA is defined as the following areas:
    1. The special flood hazard area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study for Grays Harbor County, Washington, and Incorporated Areas” dated February 3, 2017, and any revisions thereto, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map dated February 3, 2017, and any revisions thereto. The flood insurance study and the FIRM are on file at the office of the floodplain administrator.
    2. Lands adjacent to lands in subsection (A)(1) of this section that are flooded after February 3, 2017.
B. The floodplain administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation and make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the SFHA and mapped Zone X.
C. A development project is not subject to the requirements of this chapter if the floodplain administrator determines that the site is located on land that is outside the SFHA and mapped Zone X, and is higher than the base flood elevation. The floodplain administrator shall inform the applicant that a building on the site may still be subject to the flood insurance purchase requirements unless the owner obtains a letter of map amendment from FEMA.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.080 Base flood elevation.
A. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer this chapter.
B. The base flood elevations for the SFHAs of the city of Aberdeen shall be as follows:
    1. In Zone AE and Zone AH on the flood insurance rate map, the base flood elevation shall be as shown in parentheses after the zone designation on the map.
    2. In Zone AE where there is no elevation shown after the zone designation, the base flood elevation shall be the one (1) percent annual chance flood elevation as shown in the flood profile for the stream in the flood insurance study.
    3. In Zone A where the flood insurance rate map and the flood insurance study do not provide a base flood elevation, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the city engineer using an approach approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for site-specific flood elevation determinations.
    4. Where a flood rises higher than the base flood elevation as determined above, the base flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest recorded flood level for that site.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 4. Administration

15.55.090 The floodplain administrator.
The floodplain administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. In particular, the floodplain administrator shall:
A. Review all floodplain development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. Review all floodplain development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Review all floodplain development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the SFHA or mapped Zone X.
D. Ensure that all development activities within the SFHA and mapped Zone X meet the requirements of this chapter.
E. Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of all structures.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.100 Floodplain development permit.
A. A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within the SFHA. The permit shall be obtained for all development as defined in Section 15.55.060. The permit is not required within areas mapped Zone X.
B. Activities that do not meet the definition of “development” are allowed in the SFHA without the need for a floodplain development permit under this chapter, provided all other federal, state, and local requirements are met. The following are examples of activities not considered “development” or “manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate”:
    1. Routine maintenance of landscaping that does not involve grading, excavation, or filling;
    2. Removal of noxious weeds and hazard trees and replacement of nonnative vegetation with native vegetation;
    3. Normal maintenance of structures, such as reroofing and replacing siding, provided such work does not qualify as a substantial improvement;
    4. Normal maintenance of above ground utilities and facilities, such as replacing downed power lines and utility poles;
    5. Normal street and road maintenance, including filling potholes, repaving, and installing signs and traffic signals, but not including expansion of paved areas;
    6. Plowing and other normal farm practices (other than structures or filling) on farms.
C. If there has been no start of construction, a floodplain development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance. Where the applicant documents a need for an extension beyond this period due to conditions beyond the applicant’s control, the floodplain administrator may authorize one or more extensions.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.110 Floodplain development permit application.
Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator. The applicant shall furnish all information required to determine compliance with the permitting requirements of this chapter. At a minimum, the application form shall require the applicant to furnish:
A. One (1) or more site plans, drawn to scale, showing:
    1. The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations in relation to NAVD88 of the property in question;
    2. Names and location of all lakes, water bodies, waterways and drainage facilities within three hundred (300) feet of the site;
    3. The elevations of the ten (10), fifty (50), one hundred (100), and five hundred (500) year floods in relation to NAVD88, where such data is available;
    4. The boundaries of the SFHA, floodway, wetlands, shoreline buffer, critical areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, as defined in this chapter and other ordinances of the city;
    5. The proposed drainage system including, but not limited to, storm sewers, overland flow paths, detention facilities and roads; and
    6. Existing and proposed structures, fill, pavement and other impervious surfaces, and sites for storage of materials.
B. If the proposed project involves grading, excavation, or filling, the site plan shall include proposed post-development terrain at one (1) foot contour intervals.
C. If the proposed project includes a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs to a substantially damaged structure, the application shall include the base flood elevation for the building site and the proposed elevations of the following, in relation to NAVD88:
    1. The top of bottom floor (including basement, crawlspace, or enclosure floor);
    2. The top of the next higher floor;
    3. The top of the slab of an attached garage;
    4. The lowest elevation of machinery or equipment servicing the structure;
    5. The lowest adjacent (finished) grade next to structure;
    6. The highest adjacent (finished) grade next to structure; and
    7. The lowest adjacent grade at the lowest elevation of a deck or stairs, including structural support.
D. If the proposed project includes a new structure, substantial improvement, or repairs to a substantially damaged nonresidential structure that will be dry floodproofed, the application shall include the base flood elevation for the building site, the elevation to which the structure will be dry floodproofed, and a certification by a registered professional engineer or licensed architect that the dry floodproofing methods meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.55.280(B).
E. The applicant for a project to develop in the SFHA shall provide a certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed development and all other past or future similar developments would not cumulatively result in an increase of flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood by more than one (1) foot.
F. The application shall include a description of the extent to which a stream, lake, or other water body, including its shoreline, will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
G. The application shall include documentation that the applicant will apply for all necessary permits required by federal, state, or local law. The application shall include written acknowledgment that the applicant understands that the final certification of use or certificate of occupancy will be issued only if the applicant provides copies of the required federal, state, and local permits or letters stating that a permit is not required. A floodplain development permit is not valid if those other permits and approvals are not obtained prior to any ground disturbing work or structural improvements.
H. The application shall include acknowledgment by the applicant that representatives of any federal, state or local unit of government with regulatory authority over the project are authorized to enter upon the property to inspect the development.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.120 Records.
A. The floodplain administrator shall maintain copies of all development permit applications, variances, permits, inspection records, and correspondence with applicants for a floodplain development permit. All records shall be made available for public inspection.
B. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, record, and maintain the certification required by Section 15.55.110(D).
C. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, record, and maintain the actual “finished construction” elevations for all new construction and substantial improvements in the SFHA in relation to NAVD88. This information shall be recorded on a current FEMA Elevation Certificate (FEMA form 81-31), signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor, currently licensed in the state of Washington. This is not required for Zone X.
D. For all new or substantially improved dry floodproofed nonresidential structures, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, record and maintain the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed in relation to NAVD88. This information shall be recorded on a current FEMA Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA form 81-65) by a professional engineer currently licensed in the state of Washington. This is not required for Zone X.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.130 Certificate of occupancy.
A. A certification of use for the property or a certificate of occupancy for a new or substantially improved structure or an addition shall not be issued until:
    1. The permit applicant provides a properly completed, signed and sealed Elevation and/or Floodproofing Certificate showing finished construction data.
    2. The permit applicant provides the documentation required by Section 15.55.110(G).
    3. All other provisions of this chapter have been met.
B. The floodplain administrator may accept a performance bond or other security that will ensure that unfinished portions of the project will be completed after the certification of use or certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 5. Variances and Appeals

15.55.140 Board of appeals.
In order to hear requests for variances from the provisions of this chapter and to hear appeals from decisions of the floodplain administrator there is created a board of appeals which shall be the members of the building code commission as established by Section 2.32.020.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.150 Application for variances.
A. An application for a variance shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator. As a minimum, the application form shall require the applicant to identify the requirement for which the variance is requested and the applicable variance criteria in Section 15.55.160.
B. Upon filing of a complete application for a variance by a property owner, contractor or authorized representative of the owner or contractor, the floodplain administrator shall forward the application to the secretary of the board. The secretary of the board shall schedule a public hearing and give notice as prescribed in Section 2.18.050.
C. In considering applications for variances the board shall follow the procedures established for quasi-judicial hearings in Chapter 2.18.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.160 Variance criteria.
A. In reviewing applications for a variance, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
    1. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
    2. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
    3. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
    4. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
    5. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood or erosion damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
    6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding;
    7. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan, growth management regulations, critical area regulations, the shoreline management program, and floodplain management program for that area;
    8. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges;
    9. The potential of the proposed development project to adversely affect federal, state or locally protected species or habitats; and
    10. Is the minimum necessary to grant relief.
B. No variance shall be granted to the requirements of this chapter unless the applicant demonstrates that:
    1. The development project cannot be located outside the SFHA;
    2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
    3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
    4. The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not represent a problem faced by other area properties;
    5. If the project is within a designated floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood would result;
    6. The project will not adversely affect features or quality of habitat supporting local, state or federally protected fish or wildlife;
    7. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, beneficial stream or water uses and functions, or creation of a nuisance;
    8. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to streambeds, shorelines, banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities; and
    9. All requirements of other permitting agencies will still be met.
C. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site, building, or structure may be granted using criteria more permissive than the above requirements, provided:
    1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the site, building, or structure; and
    2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the site, building, or structure losing its historic designation.
D. Variances to the provisions of Article 7 of this chapter (Standards for Protection of Structures) may be issued for a structure on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, providing the other variance criteria are met. The applicant for such a variance shall be notified, in writing, that the structure (1) will be subject to increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage and (2) such construction increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
E. Variances pertain to a physical piece of property. They are not personal in nature and are not based on the inhabitants or their health, economic, or financial circumstances.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.170 Decisions on variance applications.
A. The board shall apply the criteria in Section 15.55.160 in determining whether a request for variance should be granted.
B. Any decision granting a variance shall be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days from date of decision by the secretary for the board. The decision shall include the following conditions:
    1. If the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, an acknowledgment by the applicant that there is an increased risk of damages from future flooding during the life of the structure and the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see Section 15.55.160(D));
    2. Failure to obtain a permit for construction within one (1) year, unless otherwise specified by the board, will result in loss of all rights obtained by the variance;
    3. The decision is final unless a petition for review is filed with superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from date of decision;
    4. Construction pursuant to the variance is not authorized until all appeals have terminated and notice of the variance has been recorded by the city;
    5. The secretary of the board shall record a notice of variance, acknowledged by the applicant, with the County Auditor upon receipt of recording fees from the applicant and after expiration of the twenty-one (21) day period for filing appeals. The notice of variance shall include conditions in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section and state that a complete copy of the variance is available upon request.
C. Any decision denying a variance shall be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days from the date of decision by the secretary of the board and shall include a notice that the decision shall be final unless a petition for review is filed with the superior court within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of decision. Upon final action denying an application for a variance, the board shall not accept further filing of an application for substantially the same variance involving substantially the same property within one (1) year from the date of denial.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.180 Appeals from decisions of the floodplain administrator.
A. An appeal to the appeals board from a decision of the floodplain administrator must be in writing and contain the information required by Section 2.18.040.
B. All appeals shall be served upon the floodplain administrator or the secretary of the board and must be filed within twenty-one (21) days of the decision which is being appealed.
C. In considering appeals from decisions of the floodplain administrator the board shall follow the procedures established for quasi-judicial hearings in Chapter 2.18.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 6. General Development Standards

15.55.190 Floodplain obstructions.
A. Within the floodway as delineated in Zone AE on the flood insurance rate map:
    1. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited unless documentation and certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood and the proposed improvement is in compliance with the provisions of the shoreline master program. The certification must incorporate the equal degree of encroachment approach that accounts for similar development that could be anticipated in the future.
    2. Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited, except for the following. The following exceptions must still meet all other requirements in this chapter, including subsection (A)(1) of this section:
        a. Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a residential structure that do not increase the ground floor area, providing the cost of which does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the repair or reconstruction is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by a local code enforcement official, and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or to an historic structure, may be excluded from the fifty (50) percent calculations.
        b. Repairs, replacement, reconstruction, or improvements to existing farmhouses located in designated floodways and located on designated agricultural lands that do not increase the building’s total square footage of encroachment and are consistent with all requirements of WAC 173-158-075;
        c. Repairs, replacement, reconstruction, or improvements to substantially damaged residential dwellings other than farmhouses that do not increase the building’s total square footage of encroachment and are consistent with all requirements of WAC 173-158-076; or
        d. Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to residential structures identified as historic structures that do not increase the building’s dimensions.
B. In the A and AE Zones where no floodway has been delineated:
    1. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited unless the permit applicant provides:
        a. A certification by a registered professional engineer that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The certification shall be done in accordance with standard engineering practices, using hydraulic and hydrologic analyses. It must incorporate the equal degree of encroachment approach that accounts for similar development that could be anticipated in the future.
        b. A map that shows the area impacted by any increase in the level of the base flood caused by the development.
        c. Notarized statements from the owners of the impacted properties (other than the permit applicant) that they have no objections to the increase in flood heights on their properties.
    2. The provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section do not apply to the following:
        a. Projects that do not require a development permit as listed in Section 15.55.100(B);
        b. Improvements or repairs to an existing structure that do not change the structure’s external dimensions;
        c. Special flood hazard areas designated as Zone AH; and
        d. Special flood hazard areas designated as Zone AE that are inundated by coastal flooding, which are defined as:
            (1) Areas mapped Zone AE that are downstream of the city limits on the Chehalis River;
            (2) Areas mapped Zone AE that are downstream of the city limits on the Wishkah River;
            (3) Areas mapped Zone AE that are downstream of Cherry Street on Fry Creek;
            (4) Areas mapped Zone AE that are downstream of Tyler Street on Wilson Creek; and
            (5) Areas mapped Zone AE that are downstream of the Wishkah Road on Stewart Creek.
C. Except in areas defined in subsections (B)(2)(c) and (2)(d) of this section, no filling or grading shall reduce the effective flood storage volume of the SFHA. A development proposal shall provide compensatory storage if filling or grading eliminates any effective flood storage volume. Compensatory storage shall meet the following three (3) criteria:
    1. Provide equivalent volume at equivalent elevations to that being displaced. For this purpose, “equivalent elevation” means having similar relationship to ordinary high water and to the best available ten (10) year, fifty (50) year and one hundred (100) year water surface profiles;
    2. Be hydraulically connected to the source of flooding;
    3. Provide compensatory storage in the same construction season as when the displacement of flood storage volume occurs and before the flood season begins.
D. All newly created compensatory storage areas shall be graded and vegetated to allow fish access during flood events without creating fish stranding sites.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.200 Alteration of watercourses.
A. In addition to the other requirements in this section, an applicant for a project that will alter or relocate a watercourse shall also submit a request for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), where required by FEMA. The project will not be approved unless FEMA issues the CLOMR and the provisions of the letter are made part of the permit requirements.
B. The floodplain administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the Washington Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA.
C. Maintenance shall be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. If the maintenance program does not call for cutting of vegetation, the system shall be oversized at the time of construction to compensate for said vegetation growth or any other natural factor that may need future maintenance.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.210 Site design.
A. If a lot has a buildable site out of the SFHA, all new structures shall be located in that area, when possible.
B. If a lot does not have a buildable site out of the SFHA, all new structures, pavement, and other development must be sited as far from the water body as possible or on the highest land on the lot.
C. All new development shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on flood flows, flood storage, water quality, and habitat.
D. The site plan required in Section 15.55.110(A) shall account for surface drainage to ensure that existing and new buildings on the site will be protected from stormwater runoff and the project will not divert or increase surface water runoff onto neighboring properties.
E. Whether or not within the special flood hazard area, positive drainage, including but not limited to gutters, downspouts, piping, sloping of ground, etc., shall be conveyed to the nearest storm drain system in the adjacent right-of-way per the requirements of the city engineer, if in his or her opinion such is needed to reduce impacts upon adjacent properties.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.220 Critical facilities.
A. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA.
B. Construction of new critical facilities in the SFHA shall be permissible if no feasible alternative site is available, provided:
    1. Critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus three (3) feet or to the height of the five hundred (500) year flood, whichever is higher.
    2. If there is no available data on the five hundred (500) year flood, the permit applicant shall develop the needed data in accordance with FEMA mapping guidelines.
    3. Access to and from the critical facility shall be protected to the elevation of the five hundred (500) year flood.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.230 Hazardous materials.
No new development shall create a threat to public health, public safety, or water quality. Chemicals, explosives, gasoline, propane, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants, or other materials that are hazardous, toxic, or a threat to water quality are prohibited from the SFHA. This prohibition does not apply to small quantities of these materials kept for normal household use. This prohibition does not apply to the continued operations of existing facilities and structures or reuse of existing facilities and structures.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.240 Utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
B. Water wells shall be located outside the floodway and shall be protected to the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet;
C. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.250 Subdivisions.
A. This section applies to all subdivision proposals, short subdivisions, short plats, planned developments, and new and expansions to manufactured housing parks that are wholly or in part located in the SFHA.
B. All proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
C. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals base flood elevation data.
D. All subdivisions of land that is both in and outside the area of special flood hazard shall have all parcels platted with buildable sites on higher ground outside the area of special flood hazard. This does not apply to parcels set aside for open space or to the coastal flood areas as defined in Section 15.55.190(B)(2)(d).
E. All proposals shall have utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
F. All proposals shall ensure that all subdivisions have at least one access road connected to land outside the SFHA with the surface of the road at or above the base flood elevation wherever possible. This does not apply to the coastal flood areas as defined in Section 15.55.190(B)(2)(d).
G. All proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to avoid exposure to water damage.
H. The final recorded subdivision plat shall include a notice that part of the property is in the SFHA.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Article 7. Standards for Protection of Structures

15.55.260 Applicability.
A. The protection requirements of this article apply to all new structures and substantial improvements in the SFHA, which include:
    1. Construction or placement of a new structure;
    2. Reconstruction, rehabilitation, or other improvement that will result in a substantially improved building;
    3. Repairs to an existing building that has been substantially damaged;
    4. Placing a manufactured home on a site;
    5. Placing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.270 Residential structures.
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure within a SFHA shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the higher of either:
    1. The base flood elevation plus two (2) feet, or
    2. An elevation one and one-half (1.5) feet above the average centerline of the adjacent street, or as determined by the city engineer if special topography conditions warrant.
B. New construction of any residential structure within a Zone X shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above an elevation one and one-half (1.5) feet above the average centerline of the adjacent street, or as determined by the city engineer if special topography conditions warrant. A FEMA Elevation Certificate is not required for new construction within a Zone X.
C. The structure shall be aligned parallel with the direction of flood flows where practicable.
D. The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
E. All materials below the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet shall be resistant to flood damage and firmly anchored to prevent flotation. Materials harmful to aquatic wildlife, such as creosote, are prohibited below the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet.
F. Electrical, heating, ventilation, duct work, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be elevated above the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet. Water, sewage, electrical, and other utility lines below the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet shall be constructed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within them during conditions of flooding.
G. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be used only for parking, storage, or building access and shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
    1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
    2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
    3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
    4. The bottom of the crawlspace or enclosed area shall be either:
        a. At or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade; or
        b. Less than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height of the enclosed area, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, does not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
H. Upon completion of the construction and before issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the permit applicant shall provide a current “finished construction” FEMA Elevation Certificate (FEMA form 81-31), signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor, currently licensed in the state of Washington.
I. Upon completion of the construction of an elevated building and before issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall provide a signed nonconversion agreement that acknowledges that the conversion of the area below the lowest floor to a use or dimension contrary to the building’s originally approved design is prohibited.
    1. The nonconversion agreement shall authorize the floodplain administrator to conduct inspections of the enclosed area of the building upon reasonable notice.
    2. The applicant shall record the nonconversion agreement with the County Auditor.
    3. A copy of the recorded nonconversion agreement shall be presented as a condition of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy.
    4. The floodplain administrator may waive this requirement where the enclosed area is less than four (4) feet in height, measured from the floor of the enclosure to the underside of the floor system above.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.280 Nonresidential structures.
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure within a SFHA shall be elevated in accordance with Section 15.55.270 to or above the higher of either:
    1. The base flood elevation plus two (2) feet, or
    2. An elevation one and one-half (1.5) feet above the average centerline of the adjacent street, or as determined by the city engineer if special topography conditions warrant.
B. New construction of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure within a Zone X shall be elevated in accordance with Section 15.55.270 to or above an elevation one and one-half (1.5) feet above the average centerline of the adjacent street, or as determined by the city engineer if special topography conditions warrant. A FEMA Elevation Certificate is not required for new construction within a Zone X.
C. As an alternative to elevation, a new or substantial improvement to a nonresidential structure and its attendant utility and sanitary facilities may be dry floodproofed to the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet. A dry floodproofed building must meet the following:
    1. Below the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
    2. The structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
    3. The plans are certified by a registered professional engineer or licensed architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans.
    4. Upon completion of the construction and before issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the permit applicant shall provide an “as-built” FEMA Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA form 81-65) signed by a professional engineer currently licensed in the state of Washington.
D. Slab-on-grade structures in the SFHA may be elevated to the base flood elevation plus one (1) foot.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.290 Manufactured homes.
All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on any site in the SFHA shall be:
A. Elevated on a permanent foundation in accordance with Section 15.55.270; and
B. Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to other applicable anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.300 Recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall:
A. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or
C. Meet the requirements of Section 15.55.290.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

15.55.310 Appurtenant structures.
A. This section applies to accessory structures of five hundred (500) square feet or less that are used only for parking or storage in relation to the principle structure on the property.
B. An appurtenant structure may be exempt from the elevation requirement of Section 15.55.270(A), provided:
    1. It meets the requirements of Sections 15.55.270(B), (C), (D), and (E);
    2. The walls of the structure meet the requirements of Section 15.55.270(F); and
    3. The project meets all the other requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 6605 § 2, Added, 01/25/2017)

Chapter 15.60 FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sections:
15.60.010    Adoption of code.
15.60.020    Enforcement.
15.60.030    Definitions.
15.60.040    Modification.
15.60.050    Permit issuance generally.
15.60.060    Appeal from order of the fire chief.
15.60.070    Appeals board.
15.60.080    Abandoned underground tanks—Applicability of Appendix B.
15.60.090    Permit fees.
15.60.100    Impersonation or unlawful acts.
15.60.110    Interfering with fire department/driving over fire hose unlawful.
15.60.120    Fireworks classification and registration.
15.60.130    Labeling of fireworks.
15.60.140    Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.
15.60.150    Authorized sales of toy pistols, canes, guns, etc.
15.60.160    Approved storage facilities.
15.60.170    Signal purposes, forest protection, exempt.
15.60.180    Alarm systems.
15.60.190    Violations—Penalties.

15.60.010 Adoption of code.
A. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 35.21.180 authorizing the adoption by cities and towns of fire codes, by reference, there is adopted by reference that certain code known as Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American Insurance Association, successor to the National Board of Firewriters, 1970 Edition, including Appendix “A” and Appendix “B” except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended, of which code and revision three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city comptroller of the city of Aberdeen and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and from the date on which the ordinance codified herein takes effect, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits of the city of Aberdeen.
B. The State Fireworks Law, Chapter 70.77 RCW, as presently existing or subsequently amended, is hereby adopted, incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. A copy of Chapter 70.77 RCW, including all future amendments, shall be maintained for use and examination by the public in the office of community development.
C. The rules of the State Director of Fire Protection relating to fireworks, Chapter 212-17 WAC, as presently existing or subsequently amended, are hereby adopted, incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference. A copy of Chapter 212-17 WAC, including all future amendments adopted pursuant to the Washington Administrative Procedure Act, Chapter 34.04 RCW, shall be maintained for use and examination by the public in the office of community development.
D. In any instance where the express terms of this chapter conflict with the provisions of the state codes adopted by reference, the terms of this chapter shall govern, it being the intent of this section that local fireworks regulation by the city shall follow the provisions and procedures for state licenses as closely as practical while recognizing the exercise of local options regarding the sale and discharge of fireworks.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.010)

15.60.020 Enforcement.
The fire code shall be enforced by the fire department as established by Section 2.44.010.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.020)

15.60.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
“Alarm system monitoring company” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other form of association, that engages in the business of monitoring property, burglary, robbery, fire, smoke, sprinkler system flow or panic alarms, and reporting any activation of such alarm systems to the 911 Center.
“Alarm system user” means the person having or maintaining a property, burglary, robbery, fire, smoke, sprinkler system flow or panic alarm. It means only a subscriber when the system is connected to an alarm system monitoring company.
“Burglary alarm” has the same meaning as “property alarm” below.
“False alarm” means the activation of an alarm when (1) there is no evidence of a crime or other activity on the premises that would warrant a call for immediate police or fire assistance or investigation, and (2) no individual who was on or near the premises or who viewed a video communication from the premises called for the dispatch or confirmed a need for immediate police or fire response.
“Fire alarm” means a signal initiated by a device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch, smoke detector, or other device whose activation is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature.
“Fire chief” means the chief of fire or his designee.
“Fire department” means office of the fire chief.
Municipality. Wherever “municipality” is used in the fire prevention code, it means the city of Aberdeen.
“Person” whenever used in this chapter shall when necessary mean and include any person of either sex, associations, copartnerships and corporations whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. The singular number shall, when necessary, include the plural and the masculine pronoun shall include the feminine.
“Police chief” means the chief of police or his designee.
“Police department” means office of the police chief.
“Property alarm” or “burglary alarm” means any system, device, or mechanism for detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon real property protected by the system which may be activated by sensors or other techniques, and, when activated, automatically transmits a telephone message, emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the protected premises.
“System subscriber” means any person, corporation, or other business entity that purchased or contracted with an alarm system monitoring company for any alarm system.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code §§ 3.01.030, 3.02.060)

15.60.040 Modification.
The fire chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire chief thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.050. Formerly 15.60.050)

15.60.050 Permit issuance generally.
A. All permits issued will be issued by the building division and a record kept thereof. The permit shall not be issued until the fire chief has approved the application.
B. Any adult person or other group desiring to do any act mentioned in the preceding section shall first make written application for a permit to the chief of the fire department of the city. The form of the application and the criteria for issuance, denial, or issuance with conditions shall be the same as used by the state of Washington in processing applications for the corresponding state license. Applications for permits for public display of fireworks shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days in advance of the proposed display.
C. Permit applications for fireworks stands and/or displays shall be reviewed and issued by the fire chief or his designee.
D. The fire chief or his designee shall grant an application for a permit under RCW 70.77.260 if the application meets the standards under Chapter 70.77 RCW and this chapter.
E. No permit shall be granted or issued under this chapter unless the person applying for the permit has first obtained a valid license from the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, as provided by the laws of this state, to do the particular act or acts described in the permit.
F. No retail sales of fireworks shall be permitted from any location other than a temporary stand complying with the requirements of Chapter 70.77 RCW, Chapter 212-17 WAC, and this chapter.
G. Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for the period of time stated thereon only; provided, that no permit shall be valid beyond the calendar year in which the same is issued. Permits shall be renewed in the same manner as for the application for an original permit.
H. The chief of the fire department, upon reasonable opportunity to be heard and subject to review of such action by the city council, shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the chief finds that:
    1. The permittee has violated any provisions of this chapter or of state law for any rule or regulation made by the chief of the fire department or by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection;
    2. The permittee has created or caused a fire nuisance;
    3. Any permittee has had his state license revoked or canceled for any reason; or
    4. Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed at the time of the original application for such permit, reasonably would have warranted the fire chief in refusing originally to issue such permit.
I. It is unlawful for any person to store fireworks of any class without first having made a written application for and received a permit for such storage to the chief of the fire department at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the proposed storage. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make an investigation as to whether such storage, as proposed, will be of such a nature and character and will be so located as to constitute a hazard to property or to be dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as he may prescribe.
J. Following the revocation of any permit issued by the city, if the permittee remains in possession of a lawfully acquired stock of fireworks, such fireworks may be sold only under the supervision of the chief of the fire department and of the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, and only to such persons who are authorized to buy, possess, sell or otherwise use such fireworks.
K. No person shall operate or use an alarm system to evoke a police or fire response on any premises under that person’s control without first having obtained a permit from the police department. The police department need not respond to any alarm system for which a permit has not first been obtained. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be an operator or user of an alarm system if:
    1. The person controls both the alarm system and the premises upon which it is installed;
    2. The person controls the premises and is the subscriber, client or tenant of the system subscriber; or
    3. The person is the system subscriber.
Each permit will include a control number which shall not be transferable. A permit may be denied if the subscriber has an outstanding alarm service charge pending within the city.
Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, owns, operates or possesses an alarm system within the city which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall disconnect the alarm and render it inoperable or alter it in accordance with this chapter.
L. The police chief may revoke a permit of any permittee:
    1. Whose alarm system has resulted in more than six (6) false alarm responses by the police department within a continuous ninety (90) day period; or
    2. Who has failed to pay a penalty charge, as set forth in this chapter, within sixty (60) days of billing.
The police chief shall notify such permittee in writing by certified mail of the revocation of the alarm permit and the grounds thereof.
The notice shall specify the specific date of revocation which shall be no sooner than ten (10) days after the notice is deposited in the mail and that the department will discontinue responding to alarms that occur at the premise described in the revoked permit after the date of revocation.
The permittee may, within ten (10) days of receiving notice of permit revocation, appeal the decision to the city council. A decision by the city council on the appeal shall be final.
M. Reinstatement of an alarm permit may be made upon receipt of a letter from an alarm company licensed by the city pursuant to city code that the alarm system is operating properly and/or the permittee(s)’ agents are properly trained in the alarm system operation. There will be a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the permit reinstatement. Permits will not be reinstated if there are any outstanding fees or service charges due.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.060 Appeal from order of the fire chief.
A. Any party affected by any order of the fire chief under this chapter shall have the right to appeal the order of the chief to the board of appeals. Notice of the right to appeal shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure or site and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
B. The notice of appeal shall:
    1. Be filed with the fire chief and the building official, who serves as secretary to the board of appeals, no more than thirty (30) days after service of the chief’s order;
    2. Be in writing and state clearly and concisely the specific objections to the fire chief’s order;
    3. State the ownership or other interest that each appellant has in the building, premises, or portion thereof involved in the order of the fire chief;
    4. State briefly the remedy sought; and
    5. Include the signatures of all appellants and their mailing addresses.
C. Upon receipt of an appeal the secretary of the board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for hearing and such date shall not be more than forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal was filed.
D. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing to each appellant and members of the board of appeals by the secretary of the board. Such notice shall be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy to the address shown on the notice of appeal. Notice of the appeal and hearing shall be posted in a place on the property conspicuous to persons entering the structure and if practical conspicuous from an abutting public right-of-way.
E. Except for vacation, enforcement of any notice and order by the fire chief shall be stayed until final determination of the appeal is made by the board of appeals.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.060)

15.60.070 Appeals board.
The building code commission shall be the board of appeals and shall hear all matters or issues raised on appeal of any notice and order of the building official in the manner provided in this section.
A. The secretary for the board of appeals shall be the building inspector.
B. No member who did not hear the evidence presented at the hearing shall vote or take part in the board’s decision on an appeal.
C. A majority of the total membership of the board of appeals shall constitute a quorum and shall be necessary for conducting the hearing on appeal; provided, however, that members who have been disqualified or have disqualified themselves for any conflict of interest or in the interest of the appearance of fairness shall not be counted in determining the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum.
D. The board shall conduct an open-record hearing (“de novo” hearing) on the fire chief’s complaint and order. The board shall have the authority to affirm, modify, or reverse the order of the fire chief, or remand the case to the fire chief for further proceedings.
E. Within fourteen (14) days after the hearing the board shall issue a written decision containing findings of fact and conclusions and shall mail copies of the decision to the parties of record. The decision of the board shall be the final decision of the city and shall have the same effect as a decision of the fire chief issued pursuant to Section 15.60.060. The decision and order of the board shall be filed by the building official with the Grays Harbor County Auditor.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.070)

15.60.080 Abandoned underground tanks—Applicability of Appendix B.
All abandoned underground tanks shall be removed in compliance with the IFC and the Department of Ecology guidelines.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Amended, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.090)

15.60.090 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the fire code and this chapter.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.01.110. Formerly 15.60.100)

15.60.100 Impersonation or unlawful acts.
It is unlawful to commit any of the following acts within the city:
A. For any person with intent to deceive to falsely represent himself to be an employee or member of, or connected with, the Aberdeen fire department.
B. For any person to go or remain within any building in which there is a fire involving either structure or contents, or within any building endangered by fire, or within the guard lines established by the fire department at and near any fire unless the person is a regular member of the Aberdeen fire department, or wears or carries an official badge, card, permission or insignia provided and used by the fire chief.
C. Sell, transport, possess, or discharge any fireworks which have not been classified or registered as required by state law.
D. Transfer ownership or possession of dangerous fireworks, whether by wholesale or retail sales, by gift or other means of conveyance of title, or other delivery, to any person who does not possess and present to the transferor for inspection at the time of transfer a valid license and permit.
E. Sell or discharge any fireworks in any public garage or public oil station or on any premises where gasoline or other Class I flammable liquids are stored or dispensed or where more than four (4) motor vehicles are stored.
F. Sell any consumer fireworks to a consumer or user thereof other than at a fixed place of business of a retailer for which a license and permit have been issued.
G. Allow any rubbish to accumulate in any premises where any fireworks are stored or sold, or permit a fire nuisance to exist.
H. Set off or ignite any form of fireworks as defined in this chapter in any forest, fallows, grass or brush-covered land on private property between April 15th and December 1st of any year, unless it is done under a written permit from the Supervisor of Forestry of the State of Washington and from the fire chief, and in strict accordance with the terms of the permits and other applicable law.
I. Set off, ignite, or aid in setting off or igniting any form of fireworks as defined in this chapter in a public place. “Public place” shall include but is not limited to parks, sidewalks, streets and other pedestrian and automobile byways, garages or gasoline stations, and any other form of property open to the public within the city.
J. Possess, discharge, transport, import, manufacture, or use any class or kind of fireworks in violation of the provisions of Chapter 70.77 RCW, Chapter 212-17 WAC, or this chapter.
K. It is unlawful for any person to store fireworks of any class without first having made a written application for and received a permit for such storage to the chief of the fire department at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the proposed storage. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make an investigation as to whether such storage, as proposed, will be of such a nature and character and will be so located as to constitute a hazard to property or to be dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as he may prescribe.
L. Following the revocation of any permit issued by the city, if the permittee remains in possession of a lawfully acquired stock of fireworks, such fireworks may be sold only under the supervision of the chief of the fire department and of the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection, and only to such persons who are authorized to buy, possess, sell or otherwise use such fireworks.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.02.020. Formerly 15.60.110)

15.60.110 Interfering with fire department/driving over fire hose unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, lead or haul any trailer, truck, automobile, locomotive, railroad car or any vehicle whatsoever on, over or across any hose belonging to the fire department of the city of Aberdeen or other public thoroughfare in such a manner as to interfere with, impede or obstruct the passage of any apparatus of the fire department when an alarm has been struck or sounded.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code § 3.02.040. Formerly 15.60.130)

15.60.120 Fireworks classification and registration.
No fireworks shall be sold, offered for sale, discharged, transported or stored within the city without first having been classified and registered by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.130 Labeling of fireworks.
No fireworks shall be sold, offered for sale, discharged, transported or stored within the city unless the same shall have been labeled and stamped as required by state law and shall bear the classification label and license number of the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.140 Dates and times consumer fireworks may be sold or discharged.
A. No consumer fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale at retail within the city except from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on each day from the first of July through the fourth of July of each year.
B. No consumer fireworks shall be discharged without a permit within the city except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on the fourth of July.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.150 Authorized sales of toy pistols, canes, guns, etc.
Toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other similar devices in which paper caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths (0.25) grain of explosive compound for each cap are used may be sold at all times.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.160 Approved storage facilities.
It is unlawful for any person to store unsold stocks of consumer fireworks remaining unsold after the lawful period of sale, as provided in his permit, except in such cases of storage as the chief of the fire department shall approve. Unsold stocks of consumer fireworks remaining after the authorized retail sales period shall be returned on or before July 31st of the same year to the approved storage facilities of a licensed fireworks wholesaler, to a magazine or storage place approved by the chief of the fire department, or to a place approved by the Chief of the Washington State Patrol, through the Director of Fire Protection.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.170 Signal purposes, forest protection, exempt.
This chapter does not prohibit the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by motor vehicles, railroads, or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination or for use in forest protection activities.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.180 Alarm systems.
A. It is required that alarm system users and alarm system monitoring companies properly maintain and use alarm systems in order to reduce unnecessary police and fire responses to false alarms, and to require in-person or other independent verification before the city will respond to alarms at premises where an automatic property and/or automatic burglary alarm system has a record of unreliability.
B. The express purpose of alarm systems is to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to protect individuals or create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially affected by the terms of this chapter. This chapter imposes or creates no duties on the part of the city or any of its departments, and the obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter, and any liability for failing to do so, is placed solely upon the parties responsible for owning, operating, monitoring or maintaining automatic alarm systems.
C. This chapter shall apply only to alarm systems or equipment designed to be monitored so as to convey to a monitoring service center, either electronically or by voice, a message for the purpose of evoking a municipal emergency response. None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the installation or maintenance of alarms which are not so monitored.
D. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to originate an alarm system to evoke a municipal emergency response within the city shall first sign an indemnity agreement holding the city harmless from any liability involving the failure of any agency alarm, circuit or equipment or the discontinuance of emergency response actions ordered because of such failure.
E. Alarm testing shall be the responsibility of the subscriber and/or the alarm company. No alarm verifications will be conducted by either the police or the fire departments.
    1. Alarm subscribers shall provide to their alarm monitoring service a notice of telephone numbers where persons authorized to enter the premises of the subscriber can be reached at all times so that one (1) of said persons is able to respond to the premises within thirty (30) minutes after being notified by the police to do so. If the subscriber fails to so respond to a location upon request by shift supervisor, further police responses may be terminated.
    2. Alarms shall not be activated to summon a municipal emergency response for any purpose other than burglar alarms for burglaries, robbery alarms for robberies, or fire-related emergencies.
F. Proprietary alarm equipment designed to alert any municipal emergency service by providing unattended automatic dialing of any public telephone number of any municipal emergency service for the purpose of transmitting a prerecorded message is prohibited.
G. Combination alarms designed to alert any municipal emergency service will not be allowed within the city unless there is a distinct separation in the transmittal of any specific alarm activation. For purposes of this section, combination alarms shall include but not be limited to devices combining burglary and fire alarms, devices combining burglary and holdup alarms, and devices combining burglary and trouble alarms.
H. All monitored alarm systems to summon a municipal emergency response shall be installed in accordance with the ordinances and building codes of the city. Alarms will not be reset by either the police department or the fire department.
I. All alarm companies who sell, install, service or maintain municipal emergency response alarm systems within the city must have a valid city business license.
J. Service charges for false alarms from any one (1) location shall be assessed as follows:
    1. For the first two (2) false alarms within any continuous ninety (90) day period, no charge will be assessed and warning letter issued;
    2. For the third false alarm within a continuous ninety (90) day period, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be assessed;
    3. For the fourth false alarm within a continuous ninety (90) day period, a charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be assessed;
    4. For the fifth false alarm and every false alarm thereafter within a continuous ninety (90) day period, a charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per such false alarm will be assessed.
    5. If the fire chief determines that a new system has been installed or adequate repairs have been made to an existing alarm system, a new continuous ninety (90) day period, for purposes of Section 15.60.050 and this section, shall commence. The subscriber shall be responsible to provide documentation of corrective action.
    6. Any false alarm involving a municipal emergency response will be considered a billable alarm. If a question arises as to the validity of an alarm, the final determination will be made by the police chief or his designee, or by the fire chief or his designee.
    7. False alarm penalties referred to in this section will be billed directly by the city to the alarm customer involved in the false alarm.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.60.190 Violations—Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6639 § 13, Renumbered, 12/12/2018. Prior code §§ 3.01.120, 3.02.070. Formerly 15.60.150)

Chapter 15.70 FIRE CODE

Sections:
15.70.010    Adoption of code.
15.70.020    Amendments to the 2015 International Fire Code.
15.70.030    Permit fees.
15.70.040    Violations—Penalties.

15.70.010 Adoption of code.
A. The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code (IFC), as adopted by Chapter 51-54A WAC, as amended by this chapter and including all of IFC Chapter 5, Section 503 and IFC Appendices B, C, D, H, I, J and K, is adopted as the official fire code of the city of Aberdeen. One (1) copy of the IFC, 2015 Edition, shall be maintained at City Hall for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 6639 § 14, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.70.020 Amendments to the 2015 International Fire Code.
The following amendments to the 2015 International Fire Code are adopted:
A. Section 108.1 is amended to read as follows:Board of appeals is established. The Building Code Commission shall have jurisdiction of all appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The rules of procedure established by the commission and Chapter 2.32 AMC shall govern appeals under this code.
B. Section 108.3 is amended to read as follows:Special qualifications. The commission may select and appoint ex officio members who are qualified by experience and training to advise the commission on matters pertaining to hazards of fire, explosions, hazardous conditions, or fire protection systems, that require specialized knowledge or expertise. An ex officio member appointed by the commission shall have no vote on any matter before the commission and shall not be an employee of the city.
C. Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation exists after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Section 110.1 is amended to read as follows:General. If during the inspection of a premises, a building or structure or any building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a clear and inimical threat to human life, safety or health, the fire code official shall issue such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary in accordance with this section and Aberdeen Municipal Code Chapter 15.50. The fire code official shall refer the building to the building department for any repairs, alterations, remodeling, removing or demolition required.
E. Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a civil infraction with maximum penalty and default amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) not including statutory assessments required by state law. The authority of the fire code official to issue infractions for violating stop work orders shall be in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty for violations of this code.
(Ord. 6639 § 14, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.70.030 Permit fees.
A. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for such permits as may be required by the International Fire Code and this chapter.
B. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by these codes has been commenced first without obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to a permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the applicable code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
(Ord. 6639 § 14, Added, 12/12/2018)

15.70.040 Violations—Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of the fire code as herein adopted by reference is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 6639 § 14, Added, 12/12/2018)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS

Chapters:
16.04        Comprehensive Plan
16.08        Short Plats
16.16        Mobile Home Parks

Chapter 16.04 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:
16.04.010    Purpose and applicability.

16.04.010 Purpose and applicability.
A. The comprehensive plan of the city is the document, prepared by the planning commission and adopted by resolution of the city council, containing text and maps establishing general goals and policies to guide decisions about the future orderly development of the city and to promote the fiscal, physical, social, cultural and economic well-being of its population. "Comprehensive" means that the plan encompasses all geographic parts of the city and all functional elements such as land use, circulation and community facilities, and their relationship to one another, the environment, and the metropolitan community.
B. The adopted comprehensive plan is intended to guide and give direction to city-wide development over a relatively long period of time. The zoning ordinance, short subdivision ordinance, subdivision ordinance, shorelines master program, and other development regulations shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. Public improvements through the investment of public capital funds, regardless of the source, should be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan.
C. Location of features shown on comprehensive plan maps are considered general unless specific plans have provided more precise delineation. Map boundaries or locations are subject to interpretation by the planning director, hearing examiner, planning commission, or city council as the case may be.
D. For the comprehensive plan to have integrity and effect, it must be stable over several decades. to retain stability and integrity, the plan should not be subject to frequent changes. Nevertheless it must be continuously reviewed and kept up-to-date to ensure community needs are met, community goals and aspirations are promoted, and appropriate developments are encouraged. Therefore, the comprehensive plan should be publicly reviewed by the planning commission every five years to ensure that iti meets the needs of the community and the plan is effective and efficient.
(Ord. 6284, Amended, 04/25/2001. Prior code § 11.03.010)

Chapter 16.08 SHORT PLATS

Sections:
16.08.010    Applicability.
16.08.020    Exemptions.
16.08.030    Summary procedure.
16.08.040    Redivisions.
16.08.050    Defining of land.
16.08.060    Short plat application and fees.
16.08.070    Time of official action.
16.08.080    Identification marker posting.
16.08.090    Consent of access.
16.08.100    City engineer.
16.08.110    Environmental considerations.
16.08.120    City engineer action.
16.08.130    Notice required.
16.08.140    Appeal.
16.08.150    Conditional approvals.
16.08.160    Final approval and recording.
16.08.170    Map.
16.08.180    Supporting documents.
16.08.190    Certification.
16.08.200    Minimum standards.
16.08.210    Application for modification.
16.08.220    Fees.

16.08.010 Applicability.
Every division of land into four or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites or subdivisions for the purpose of sale or lease, or owner's permitted uses, shall proceed in compliance with this chapter. It is established that the city engineer is authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.04.010)

16.08.020 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose;
B. Divisions made by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent;
C. Any division of land pursuant to RCW 58.17 governing divisions containing dedications and divisions into five or more lots, parcels or tracts;
D. Boundary line adjustment of parcels not in a recorded plat or short plat, where access is not affected and where no new lot is created thereby, or where no lot is reduced in size below the minimum square footage required by the applicable zoning control;
E. Divisions of land due to condemnation or sale under threat thereof, by an agency or division of government vested with the power of condemnation;
F. Any division of land lots, tracts, or parcels where the smallest lot is one one-hundred-twenty-eighth of a section of land or larger, or is five acres or larger if the land is not capable of description as a fraction of a section of land. For purposes of computing the size of any lot under this item which borders on a street, the lot size shall be expanded to include that area which would be bounded by the centerline of the street and the side lot running perpendicular to such centerline.
(Prior code § 11.04.020)

16.08.030 Summary procedure.
A. Two-lot Subdivisions. Where the division of land is into two lots or parcels only, then the provisions of Sections 16.08.080 and 16.08.090, relating to identification markers, shall not apply and the city engineer may request immediate review and comment from the Grays Harbor Health District, the engineering department, and any other agency listed in Section 16.08.100. Subsequently, the city engineer may summarily approve or reject the proposed short division.
B. Boundary Line Adjustments. Applications for boundary line adjustments within approved subdivisions or short subdivisions shall be presented to the city engineer for approval together with the appropriate fee. The city engineer shall issue a certificate of approval if the proposed adjustment complies with minimum zoning, health, building, and similar regulations and will not adversely affect access, easements or drainfields. The certificate shall be affixed to a supplemental declaration of short subdivision which shall contain the adjusted legal description and shall be effective upon being filed for record.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005)

16.08.040 Redivisions.
A. Land within a short subdivision may not be further divided in any manner within a period of five years without the filing of a final plat as per RCW 53.17 or, when the original short subdivision contains fewer than four lots, the above prohibition shall not apply to the creation of additional lots not exceeding a total of four. After five years, further divisions may be permitted when otherwise consistent with the then current regulations of the city of Aberdeen; provided, that when the subdivider owns more than one lot within a short subdivision, he may not divide the aggregate total into more than four lots unless subdivision is done as per requirements of RCW 58.17.
B. Where there have been no sales of any lots in a short subdivision, nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a subdivider from completely withdrawing his entire short plat and thereafter presenting a new application.
(Prior code § 11.04.040)

16.08.050 Defining of land.
Where a subdivider owns not less than one-eighth of a section or, if the land is not capable of subdivisional description, eighty (80) acres, he may define the boundaries of his short subdivision to include not less than one-sixteenth of a section or, if the land is not capable of subdivisional description, forty (40) acres, remain; and provided further, that his definition of boundary leaves proper provision for access to the remaining parcel and is approved by the approving authority.
(Prior code § 11.04.050)

16.08.060 Short plat application and fees.
Proposed short plat or short plat modifications shall be submitted to the city engineer on forms furnished by the city engineer who shall affix a file number and date of receipt. The city engineer shall not accept any application until the appropriate fee for each proposed plat is paid to the city. Any subsequent refiling by an applicant shall not be accepted by the city engineer until the appropriate additional fee is paid. The application shall contain the following:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider;
B. A certification by the subdivider showing the entire contiguous land in which there is an interest by reason of ownership, contract for purchase, earnest money agreement, or option by any person, firm or corporation in any manner connected with the development, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all such persons, firms or corporations;
C. The existing zoning classifications;
D. The square footage c omputation of each lot or parcel sufficiently accurate to show that each such lot or parcel contains at least sufficient footage to meet minimum zoning and health requirements. The square footage of land contained in access panhandles shall not be included in the lot size computation;
E. The source of water supply, if any, and if a public system is used, the name of the supplier;
F. The method of sewage disposal;
G. Environmental documents needed to comply with the state's Environmental Policy Act, if any;
H. Any other documents judged necessary by the city engineer.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005)

16.08.070 Time of official action.
Short plats shall be approved, disapproved, or returned to the applicant for modification or correction within thirty (30) days from the date of submission thereof, unless the applicant gives a written consent to the extension of such time period.
(Prior code § 11.04.070)

16.08.080 Identification marker posting.
The subdivider shall, for identification purposes only, cause markers of a type approved by the city engineer to be placed upon each of the approximate road frontage corners of the subject property, and maintain them thereon during the period extending from the time of application to the time of final action, for purpose of permitting field checks by the applicable agencies.
(Prior code § 11.04.080)

16.08.090 Consent of access.
The subdivider shall permit free access to the land being divided to all agencies considering the short subdivision for the period of time extending from the time of application to the time of final action.
(Prior code § 11.04.090)

16.08.100 City engineer.
A. The city engineer shall distribute one copy of the short plat to each of the following:
    1. Grays Harbor Pacific Health District;
    2. Secretary of the planning commission;
    3. Grays Harbor County Assessor;
    4. Any other federal, state or local agencies as may be relevant;
    5. Fire department.
B. The city engineer shall set a date for the return of findings and recommendations from each relevant agency, the date to be ten working days from the date of the application. If the findings and recommendations are not so returned, then the city engineer may make such findings as he deems proper.
(Prior code § 11.04.100)

16.08.110 Environmental considerations.
Environmental considerations meeting with the state Environmental Policy Act of 1971, amendments thereto, and the Washington Administrative Code shall be completed prior to filing with the city engineer.
(Prior code § 11.04.110)

16.08.120 City engineer action.
A. The city engineer shall consider and review the proposed short subdivision with regard to:
    1. Its conformance to the general purposes of the city of Aberdeen's comprehensive plan, shoreline master program, and to any other applicable laws and policies;
    2. Whether appropriate provisions are made for: drainage ways, streets, alleys, other public ways, water supplies, and sanitary wastes;
    3. The physical characteristics of the short subdivision site. Disposal may be made because of flood, inundation or swamp conditions. Construction of protective improvements may be required as a condition of approval;
    4. All other relevant facts, to determine whether the public use and interest will be served by the short subdivision.
B. The city engineer may:
    1. Approve the short subdivision, with or without condition; or
    2. Return the short plat to the applicant for correction or for the applicant's construction of improvements in a manner consistent with official findings; or
    3. Disapprove the short subdivision and the short plat thereof.
(Prior code § 11.04.120)

16.08.130 Notice required.
A. Upon approval or denial, the city engineer shall insure that a notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation within the area in which the development is proposed, and said notice shall describe the proposed short subdivision, action taken by the city engineer, and that any person aggrieved by the decision of the city engineer may request a review of that decision by the hearing examiner; provided, that the appeal is made in writing and filed with the finance director’s office within ten (10) days from the date of publication.
B. In addition, the city engineer shall insure that an additional notice of the decision, which clearly indicates the appeal procedure, is given by at least one of the following:
    1. Mailing to the latest property owners, as shown on the county assessor's records, within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the proposed short subdivision;
    2. Posting in a conspicuous manner on the proposed short subdivision property of adjacent properties;
    3. Any other manner deemed appropriate by the city engineer to accomplish the objectives of reasonable notice to adjacent landowners and the public.
(Ord. 6592 § 5, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.04.130)

16.08.140 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city engineer may request a review of that decision by the hearing examiner. The appeal shall be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal with the finance director within ten (10) days from the date notice requirements are met according to Section 16.08.130. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 2.30.
(Ord. 6592 § 6, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.04.140)

16.08.150 Conditional approvals.
When approval by the city engineer or hearing examiner requires the meeting of conditions, the construction of improvements or corrections, or time is necessary for improvements or corrections, or time is necessary for the obtaining of required certifications, then the approval action shall be a conditional approval which shall, at the option of the approving body, be conditioned upon fulfillment prior to the final approval of a building permit or upon fulfillment within six (6) months. Upon application within the time period, and upon good cause shown, the approving body may grant an additional six (6) month time period.
(Ord. 6592 § 7, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.04.150)

16.08.160 Final approval and recording.
When the short subdivision and the short plat thereof meet all the requirements thereof and will serve the public use and interest, and the subdivider has provided all of the required documentation and certification, then written approval shall be inscribed upon the face of the short plat. The action approving a short plat shall become effective if, within five working days, the applicant files for record with the auditor of Grays Harbor County a declaration of short subdivision and no appeal has been made as described in Section 16.08.140.
(Prior code § 11.04.160)

16.08.170 Map.
A map shall be prepared on a sheet of paper or on reproducible material, either of them having dimensions of eight and one-half inches by fourteen (14) inches and containing the following information:
A. A legal description of the short subdivision and of the lots, tracts or parcels therein, together with the legal description of private streets and easements therein, all prepared or approved and sealed by a land surveyor registered with the state of Washington. In addition, where it differs from the description of the short subdivision, a legal description of the contiguous land owned by the subdivider;
B. The date, scale and north arrow;
C. The boundary lines to scale of the tract to be subdivided and each lot contained therein, and block, if any;
D. The number assigned to each lot, and block, if any;
E. The location and widths of any easements and rights-of-way for public services or utilities within the area contained within the short subdivision;
F. The boundaries of all lands reserved in the deeds for the common use of the property owners of the short subdivision;
G. The location, outside lands to be subdivided, of permanent features which will have an impact upon the short subdivision, such as all existing or platted streets adjacent to the short subdivision, water courses, railroad rights-of-way, all utility rights-of-way, township lines and section lines.
(Prior code § 11.04.170)

16.08.180 Supporting documents.
The following documentation shall accompany each application for approval of a short plat:
A. A vicinity sketch clearly identifying the location of the property being short subdivided, the sketch having a scale of not less than three inches to the mile;
B. Copies of restrictions or covenants, if any, proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land. Such restrictions shall be recorded simultaneously with the short plat before it becomes effective;
C. In any short subdivision where lots are served or to be served by a private street, the subdivider shall furnish copies of such further covenants or documents that will result in:
    1. A declaration of short subdivision;
    2. Certification of approval by the city engineer given when he finds that the short plat serves a public use and interest and complies with all adopted recommendations for approval.
(Prior code § 11.04.180)

16.08.190 Certification.
The written approval of the city engineer shall be inscribed on the face of the short plat.
(Ord. 6592 § 8, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.04.190)

16.08.200 Minimum standards.
Upon the following subjects, the public use and interest shall be deemed to require as a minimum the standards set out below:
A. Each lot shall contain sufficient square footage to meet minimum zoning requirements and Uniform Plumbing Code requirements or regulations established by the city engineer.
B. Adequate bridges and storm drainage facilities shall be provided.
C. Where any abutting city or county street has insufficient width to conform to minimum street width standards for the city of Aberdeen, sufficient additional right-of-way as determined by the city engineer shall be deeded to the city of Aberdeen.
D. If the lots are to be served by septic tanks, soil data and percolation rates may be required by the city engineer. Notations regarding the conditions for approval may be required to be inscribed upon the short plat. The city engineer may request recommendations from the Grays Harbor Health District for determining suitability for septic tanks and drain fields.
E. Lots within a short subdivision shall be designed so that lots adjacent to primary and secondary arterials do not require direct access; except that, if the subdivider presents proof that direct access to such lots is necessary to the development of his property and the city engineer so finds, the city engineer may permit direct access. This shall not apply to any parcels of one one-hundred-twenty-eighth of a section, or five acres or more.
F. Access to the boundary of all short subdivisions shall be provided by an opened, constructed and maintained city or county street; except, that access to the boundary of a short subdivision by private street may be permitted where such private streets are otherwise permitted by this chapter.
G. The maximum number of lots that may be served by a private street shall be four, unless modification is granted by the Aberdeen city council. In all other cases, access to any lot shall be by an opened, constructed and maintained city or county street. In no case shall this mean that the city council may grant an exception to RCW 58.17.
H. If the subdivider uses a private street, each lot having access thereto shall have a responsibility for maintenance of such private street. Any private street shall also contain a drainage and utilities easement.
(Prior code § 11.04.200)

16.08.210 Application for modification.
A. Any subdivider may make application for a variation or modification where it appears there exist extraordinary conditions, such as topography, access, location, shape, size, drainage, or other physical features of the site or other adjacent development. Such application shall accompany the proposed short plat and shall include any and all details the developer deems necessary to support his application properly, and shall outline the provisions from which the modification is sought.
B. All modifications shall be heard by the hearing examiner.
C. Such application shall be filed with the city engineer together with the appropriate fee.
D. If the hearing examiner finds unusual hardship or extraordinary difficulties, the minimum requirements of this chapter may be modified to mitigate the hardship; provided, that the public use and interest is protected and the development is in keeping with the general spirit and intent of these regulations, and the modification is not in violation of Chapter 58.17 RCW. No such modification may be granted if it would have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, or this chapter.
(Ord. 6592 § 9, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005)

16.08.220 Fees.
The city council shall establish by resolution any fees or charges for applications, notices, plan reviews, permits, administrative actions, or appeals authorized under this chapter. Applicants shall pay the appropriate fees or charges in effect at the time a completed application is submitted to the reviewing department. No application shall be reviewed or approved unless the appropriate fees and charges have been paid.
(Ord. 6382, Added, 09/28/2005)

Chapter 16.16 MOBILE HOME PARKS

Sections:
16.16.010    Declaration of purpose.
16.16.020    Definitions.
16.16.030    Location of mobile home parks.
16.16.040    General use regulations.
16.16.050    Mobile home park site requirements.
16.16.060    Street system.
16.16.070    Off-street parking facilities.
16.16.080    Walkways.
16.16.090    Utilities.
16.16.100    Mobile home pad.
16.16.110    Commercial facilities.
16.16.120    Buffer, ground cover and recreation area.
16.16.130    Storage.
16.16.140    Mobile home accessories.
16.16.150    Signs.
16.16.160    Requirements for approval of mobile home park permit.
16.16.170    Administration.
16.16.180    Enforcement.
16.16.190    Violations—Penalties.

16.16.010 Declaration of purpose.
A. Purpose of Chapter. Regulations to insure a suitable living environment for owners of mobile homes are adopted and established as necessary for the general health, safety, welfare and convenience of the inhabitants of the city of Aberdeen.
B. Name of Chapter. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Mobile Home Park Ordinance."
(Prior code § 11.07.010)

16.16.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are described in this section:
"Mobile home" means a manufactured relocatable living unit of not less than thirty-two (32) feet in length.
"Mobile home lot" means a plot of ground within a mobile home park which is plainly marked and designed to accommodate one mobile home.
"Mobile home pad" means that part of the individual lot which is improved to provide an accepted foundation for the placement of the mobile home and any attached accessory structure.
"Mobile home park" means any tract of land of five acres that is divided into lots, under the ownership or management of one person, firm or corporation for the purpose of locating two or more mobile homes for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
"Service building" means a building for the purpose of housing community facilities.
(Prior code § 11.07.020)

16.16.030 Location of mobile home parks.
Access. A mobile home park shall have direct access to a public street.
(Prior code § 11.07.030)

16.16.040 General use regulations.
Occupancy Restrictions. A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a mobile home pad, connected to water, sewage and electrical utilities, and meets all the requirements of the Department of Labor and Industry.
(Prior code § 11.07.040)

16.16.050 Mobile home park site requirements.
A. Size of Mobile Home Park. No mobile home park shall be developed on any tract of land less than five acres in size.
B. Size of Mobile Home Lots. The minimum size of a mobile home lot shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet for parks of more than ten acres, and five thousand (5,000) square feet for parks of five to ten acres; the minimum width of a mobile home lot shall be forty (40) feet; the lot boundaries shall be plainly marked by corner stakes, fencing, shrubbery, or other means. A mobile home shall not occupy more than one-third of its lot.
C. Spacing of Mobile Homes and Accessory Structures. 
    1. There shall be a distance of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes and between the park boundary and a mobile home;
    2. There shall be a distance of five feet between mobile homes and accessory structures.
D. Setback of Mobile Homes. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet and an average distance of ten feet between an individual mobile home and an adjoining park street.
(Prior code § 11.07.050)

16.16.060 Street system.
A. Internal access roads shall meet the following requirements:
    1. Internal access roads shall be privately owned and constructed, and shall be maintained free of cracks, holes and other hazards;
    2. All roads and parking lots shall be adequately lighted at night.
B. Paving Required. All park streets and access roads shall be graded and paved with a crushed rock base and asphaltic concrete blacktop, or concrete surfacing to the requirements of the city engineer's office.
C. All mobile home park proposals shall be approved by the fire department.
(Prior code § 11.07.060)

16.16.070 Off-street parking facilities.
A. Number. There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces on each mobile home lot. Additional common parking facilities shall be provided at the rate of one additional space for every ten mobile home lots. Additional guest parking facilities shall be provided at the rate of one additional space for each five mobile home lots.
B. Size. Each parking space shall be nine feet by twenty (20) feet.
C. Parking Prohibited. Parking spaces shall not be located within the buffer zone required around the perimeter of the mobile home park. Parking shall be only in designated parking areas within the mobile home park. No common parking space shall be located closer than ten feet to any mobile home lot line.
D. Office Parking Facilities. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the mobile home park office.
E. Paving Required. All common parking areas shall be paved with a crushed rock base and asphaltic concrete, blacktop, or concrete surfacing. Off-street parking areas on individual mobile home lots shall be provided with an adequate all-weather surface.
F. Width. The minimum paved width of an access road or roads shall be thirty-eight (38) feet for roads with parking on both sides and twenty-four (24) feet for roads with no parking.
(Prior code § 11.07.070)

16.16.080 Walkways.
Common Walkways. An adequate safe, convenient, all-season common walkway system shall be provided and maintained. Such walkways shall have a minimum width of four feet.
(Prior code § 11.07.080)

16.16.090 Utilities.
A. Potable water supply, sanitary sewerage and storm drainage systems shall all be provided in accordance with the city's requirements.
B. Electrical power, telephone and television cables shall be installed underground. Terminals may be installed above ground.
(Prior code § 11.07.090)

16.16.100 Mobile home pad.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a pad of sufficient size to accommodate the mobile home and any attached accessory structures. Each mobile home pad shall be surfaced with a minimum of three inches of washed gravel of uniform size. The mobile home pad shall be graded to obtain adequate surface drainage.
(Prior code § 11.07.100)

16.16.110 Commercial facilities.
Commercial facilities designed to serve residents of the park may be allowed in parks greater than ten acres.
(Prior code § 11.07.110)

16.16.120 Buffer, ground cover and recreation area.
A. Buffer Required. An adequate landscaped buffer or screen shall be required around the perimeter of the park as specified by the board of adjustment.
B. Ground Cover Required. Lawn or other suitable ground cover shall be required on all areas except those covered by structures, by paved or surfaced areas, and by planting beds. Also excepted are undisturbed areas such as ravines and streams which are preserved in their natural state.
C. Recreation Area Required. Not less than five hundred (500) square feet per mobile home site shall be provided for recreational space; provided, however, that no outdoor recreation area shall contain less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
(Prior code § 11.07.120)

16.16.130 Storage.
A. Storage Shall Be Provided. Individual storage space for each mobile home shall be provided by the park management, either at each mobile home lot or in a centralized storage facility located within a reasonable distance from the mobile home lot (generally not more than one hundred (100) feet).
B. Size of Storage Space. The amount of storage space provided for each mobile home unit shall be not less than one hundred forty-four (144) cubic feet of usable space, with a minimum height of six feet.
(Prior code § 11.07.130)

16.16.140 Mobile home accessories.
A. Accessories Allowed. Normal accessories for mobile homes shall be allowed and may include an awning, carport, ramada, cabana, deck and storage facility.
B. Permanent Structural Additions. No permanent structural additions other than allowed accessories shall be built onto or become part of any mobile home.
C. Skirting Required. All mobile homes shall be fitted with an approved skirting.
D. Steps Required. All mobile homes shall be equipped with steps or ramps meeting the Uniform Building Code requirements.
(Prior code § 11.07.140)

16.16.150 Signs.
A. Signs and advertising devices shall be prohibited in a mobile home park except:
    1. One identifying sign at the entrance of the mobile home park which may be indirectly lighted, but shall be nonflashing, and which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area;
    2. Directional or informational signs for the convenience of tenants and the public relative to parking, office, traffic movement, etc., provided such signs are not larger than two square feet in area.
B. Maximum Height of Identifying Sign. The maximum height of the identifying sign shall be four feet.
(Prior code § 11.07.150)

16.16.160 Requirements for approval of mobile home park permit.
A. Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park within the boundaries of the city of Aberdeen unless he holds a valid conditional use permit which is authorized to be issued by the city council.
B. Application for Permit and Filing of Plans. Application to construct, alter or enlarge any mobile home park shall be filed with the building department of the city of Aberdeen.
C. Refusal to Examine Incomplete Plans. The building inspector shall reserve the right to refuse to examine any incomplete, unintelligible or indefinite plans.
D. Information Required on Plans. An accurate map drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch showing the boundaries of the site, all streets bounding the site; the proposed location and vertical height of any buildings; proposed public dedications, if any; location and design of parking facilities including points of ingress and egress; topographic map with contours at intervals of not more than five feet together with proposed grading, drainage and landscaping; location of private and common open space; furnish plan layout and elevation for all utility systems as covered under Section 16.16.090 of this chapter and any other information required by the building inspector.
E. Application Fee Required. All applications for a conditional use permit for mobile home parks shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005. Prior code § 11.07.160)

16.16.170 Administration.
A. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Conflict of Ordinances. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance, code or regulations, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and general welfare shall prevail.
C. Effect of Partial Invalidity. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
D. The city council shall establish by resolution any fees or charges for applications, notices, plan review s , permits, administrative actions, or appeals authorized under this chapter. Applicants shall pay the appropriate fees or charges in effect at the time a completed application is submitted to the reviewing department. No application shall be reviewed or approved unless the appropriate fees and charges have been paid.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005. Prior code § 11.07.170)

16.16.180 Enforcement.
Enforcement by Designated Officer. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.07.180)

16.16.190 Violations—Penalties.
A. Violation Deemed a Misdemeanor. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto is made a misdemeanor.
B. Each Day Constitutes a Separate Offense. Each day such violation continues may be considered a separate offense.
(Prior code § 11.07.190)

Title 17 ZONING

Chapters:
17.04        General Provisions
17.08        Use Classifications and Zoning Map
17.12        R-S Single-Family Residential District
17.16        R-M Multiple Family Residential District
17.20        R-P Residential Professional District
17.24        M-I Major Institutional District
17.28        C-R Commercial Residential District
17.32        C-D Downtown Commercial District
17.36        C-G General Commercial District
17.40        W-D Waterfront Development District
17.44        L-I Light Industrial District
17.48        I Industrial District
17.50        Historic Preservation
17.52        Planned Developments, Manufactured Home Subdivisions, Cluster Subdivisions and Other Combining Districts
17.56        Special Conditions
17.60        Parking
17.62        Marijuana-Related Uses
17.64        Amendments and Rezones
17.68        Conditional Use Permits and Variances
17.72        Special Use Permits and Unclassified Use Permits
17.76        Appeals of Administrative Decisions
17.78        Public Notification
17.80        Administrative Site Plan Review
17.84        Signs
17.88        Landscaping
17.92        Nonconformities
17.96        Administration and Enforcement

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
Article 1.  Title and Purpose
    17.04.010    Title.
    17.04.020    Effect.
    17.04.030    Purpose.
Article 2.  Definitions
    17.04.040    Purpose.
    17.04.050    General meaning.
    17.04.060    Definitions in other chapters.
    17.04.070    Definitions.

Article 1. Title and Purpose

17.04.010 Title.
Chapters 17.04 through 17.96 shall be known as the "Aberdeen Zoning Code."
(Prior code § 11.001.010)

17.04.020 Effect.
Chapters 17.04 through 17.96, and the zoning map thereby adopted, shall regulate the use and development of land and water within the city of Aberdeen.
(Prior code § 11.001.020)

17.04.030 Purpose.
Chapters 17.04 through 17.96 constitute an official land use control for the city of Aberdeen, state of Washington, adopted and established to serve the public health, safety and general welfare; to encourage the appropriate use of land throughout the city; to encourage the development of an attractive community; to lessen traffic congestion and accidents; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to promote coordinated development of unbuilt areas; to encourage the formation of neighborhood and community units; to secure an appropriate allotment of land area in new developments for all the requirements of community life; to conserve and restore natural beauty and other natural resources; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage and other public uses and requirements; and to provide a means for carrying out the goals and policies of the city of Aberdeen comprehensive development plan.
(Prior code § 11.001.030)

Article 2. Definitions

17.04.040 Purpose.
This article contains the definitions of words to clarify the meaning of the goals, policies and regulations within this title.
(Prior code § 11.002.010)

17.04.050 General meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense shall include the future, and the future the present. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular.
(Prior code § 11.002.020)

17.04.060 Definitions in other chapters.
Certain chapters include specific definitions within them. Please see those chapters for the definitions. If there is a discrepancy between the definitions in this chapter and the specific definitions in a chapter, the definitions in that chapter shall control within that chapter and the definitions in this chapter staff control in balance of the title.
(Prior code § 11.002.030)

17.04.070 Definitions.
Certain terms, words, and phrases in this chapter shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
“Access” means way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property.
“Accessory building” means a minor building that is located on the same lot as a principal building and is used incidentally to a building that houses a principal use, including gazebos, garages, carports, sheds, greenhouses, patio covers, solariums, and similar roofed structures.
“Accessory dwelling unit” means a habitable living unit that provides the basic requirements of shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation and meets the standards provided in Section 17.56.125.
“Accessory use” means a use incidental and subordinate to a permitted use and located on the same lot or contiguous lots of single ownership, or in the same building as permitted use.
“Administrator” means the planning and development department.
“Adult entertainment establishment” shall include any adult cabaret or adult entertainment facility as defined under Chapter 5.34.
“Alley” means a public right-of-way at least ten (10) feet wide but not more than twenty (20) feet wide which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and not intended for general traffic circulation.
“Annexation” means the incorporation of a land area into the city of Aberdeen with a resulting change in boundaries.
“Bed and breakfast inn” means any building or group of buildings on the same lot in which the operator lives in one (1) of the buildings and offers one (1) or more guest room for rent where the guests do not stay for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
“Board of adjustment” means the hearing examiner system established by Chapter 2.30.
“Boarding house” means any building or group of buildings located on the same lot containing a total of more than five (5) guest rooms and where meals are provided by the management as a part of the consideration for the guest rooms.
“Bond” means a surety bond, cash deposit, escrow account, assignment of savings, irrevocable letter of credit or other means acceptable to, or required by, the city to guarantee work is in compliance with all applicable city requirements.
“Buildable area” means the space remaining on a building lot after the minimum zoning requirements, including but not limited to lot coverage, building setbacks, landscaping, and parking, have been met.
“Building” means a structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
“Building height” means the vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade measured where the walls will intersect the ground to the highest point of the roof.
“Building setback line” means a line which establishes a definite point beyond which the foundation of a building shall not extend.
“Caretaker’s residence” means a dwelling unit located on the premises of a commercial, industrial or public enterprise, and which is occupied by a person who is the owner, proprietor, manager, watch guard, or is otherwise at times in charge of such enterprise.
“Cargo containers” means standardized reusable vessels that were (1) originally, specifically or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities, and/or (2) designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device. This definition includes the terms “transport containers” and “portable site storage containers” having a similar appearance to and characteristics of cargo containers.
“Change of use” means any use which substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
“Child care facility” means a building or structure where an agency, person or persons regularly provide care for a group of children for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, as home day care, mini day care, and commercial day care.
“Child day care” means provision of supplemental parental care and supervision for a nonrelated child or children, on a regular basis for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day and under license by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services. The term is not intended to include babysitting services of a casual, nonrecurring nature or in the child’s home. Likewise, the term is not intended to include cooperative, reciprocative child care by a group of parents in their respective homes. “Child day care” types include “home day care,” “mini day care” and “commercial day care.”
“Church” means a building intended primarily for religious worship and accessory uses including Sunday school, religious education classrooms, assembly rooms, a kitchen, a library or reading room, a recreation hall, or a one (1) family dwelling for religious staff, but excluding child care services, parochial schools, and facilities for the training of religious orders.
“Club” means a nonprofit, social organization whose premises are generally restricted to members and their guests.
“Cluster” means a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and the preservation of sensitive features.
“Cluster subdivision” means a form of development for residential subdivisions that permits a reduction in requirements and allows common wall construction techniques; provided, there is no increase in the number of lots or the number of dwellings permitted under a conventional subdivision and the resultant land is devoted to open space.
“Commercial day care” means a child care facility for the care of thirteen (13) or more children.
“Conditional use” means a category of uses listed within a zoning district that requires review before the board of adjustment to determine their compatibility with the surrounding area and comprehensive plan.
“Condominium” means a building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. Condominiums, cooperatives and like property and buildings shall be treated in this title in a like manner regardless of whether the properties and buildings are condominiums, cooperatives, or are in a single ownership. This provision applies to residential, commercial and industrial condominiums and cooperatives.
“Day” means a calendar day beginning at midnight and ending on the following midnight.
“Density” means the total number of square feet in a lot divided by the number of dwelling units located on the lot.
“Department” means the Aberdeen planning and economic development department.
“Duplex” means a structure on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by a common wall.
“Dwelling” means a building designed exclusively for residential purposes, including “single-family dwellings,” “duplexes,” “condominiums,” “townhomes,” and “multiple family dwellings,” but not including hotels or motel units without a kitchen.
“Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for use of a single family maintaining a household.
“Eating and drinking places” means retail establishments selling food and/or drink.
“Excavation, surface” means removal or recovery of soil, rock, minerals or organic substances other than vegetation, from land or land on or beneath the surface of water; provided, however, that dredging for navigational purposes or excavation for utilities shall not be included within this definition.
“Family” means an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or legal custody, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who are not all related by blood, marriage or legal custody living together in a dwelling unit.
“Fence” means a structure serving as a barrier that wholly or partially encloses a field, yard, or other real property, excluding retaining walls not more than one (1) foot above finished grade; for the purposes of this title, plant material is not considered a fence.
“Gross floor area” means the total usable horizontal area of a building, excluding attics.
“Group care living facilities, homes” means a place of residence for the handicapped, physically or mentally disabled, developmentally disabled, homeless or otherwise dependent persons. Group homes are intended to provide residential facilities in a home-like environment. Such homes range from licensed establishments operated with twenty-four (24) hour supervision to nonlicensed facilities offering only shelter. They shall not include correctional facilities (except as authorized by Chapters 137-56 and 137-57 WAC for work/training release programs), nursing homes, foster family homes or adult family homes as defined by the Washington State Department of Social and Health Services or its successor agency. Group homes include, but are not limited to, the following:
    1. Confidential Shelters. Shelter for victims of domestic violence as defined and regulated in Chapter 70.123 RCW and Chapter 388-61A WAC. Such facilities are characterized by a need for confidentiality.
    2. Home for the Disabled. A home or other facility which provides board and domiciliary care to individuals who, by reason of infirmity, require such care. An infirmity may be based on conditions including, but not limited to, physical handicap, mental illness and other developmental disabilities. These group homes are a type of boarding home, as defined in Chapter 18.20 RCW. However, boarding homes serving the aged infirm are not included in this definition.
    3. Homeless Shelter. A facility offering lodging and/or emergency shelter to homeless individuals for an indefinite period of time and meeting the standards of Chapter 248-144 WAC.
    4. Group Home for Youth. Any home maintained and operated for the care of children on a twenty-four (24) hour basis as defined and regulated in Chapter 388-73 WAC and Chapter 74.15 RCW.
    5. Group Home for Offenders. A home or other facility operated for housing and supervision of work/training release residents during their stay in a work/training release program as defined and regulated in Chapters 137-56 and 137-57 WAC.
    6. Group Living. Living facilities for groups of unrelated individuals that include at least one (1) person residing on site who is responsible for supervising, managing, monitoring and/or providing care, training or treatment of residents.
“Home day care” means a child care facility for the care of ten (10) or fewer children located in the family dwelling of the provider. All services must be provided by members of the resident family.
“Home occupation” means a commercial activity that is conducted within a dwelling unit or an accessory building by the person(s) residing on the property and which is secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling unit.
“Hotel” means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities. See “motel,” “boarding house,” and “bed and breakfast inn.”
“Junk” means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal, or other use or disposition.
“Kennel” means a premises where four (4) or more dogs, cats or combination thereof, of at least six (6) months of age, are kept by the owners of the animals or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not compensation is involved. May include indoor and outdoor runs.
“Landscaping” means a strip of land with plants, hedges, fences, walls or similar screening used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block noise, glare, or other nuisances.
“Lot” means a tract of land lawfully established and officially recorded in the County Auditor’s office, whether described by metes and bounds and/or by lot or by lot and block designation in a recorded plat, which constitutes a unit of land under single ownership with a minimum of twenty (20) feet of frontage on an improved street.
“Lot area” or “lot size” means the total horizontal area included within the legally defined boundaries of the lot, excluding public rights-of-way.
“Lot, corner” or “corner lot” means a lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more streets where the angle of intersection is one hundred thirty (130) degrees or less.
“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
“Lot, interior” or “interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot
“Lot line, front” or “front lot line” means, for corner lots, the shortest boundary of the lot abutting a street. For interior lots, the boundary abutting the street except for “panhandle” lots where the front lot line shall be the boundary line (extended the width of the lot) which represents the intersection of the driveway portion of the lot with the buildable area of the lot.
“Lot line, rear” or “rear lot line” means the boundary of the lot opposite and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
“Lot line, side” or “side lot line” means any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
“Lot width” means the mean horizontal dimension of a lot measured between the side lot lines, approximately parallel to the street frontage.
“Low impact development (LID)” means a stormwater and land management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.
“Low impact development best management practices (BMPs)” means low impact development best management practices or stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited to, bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse.
“Low impact development principles” means low impact development principles and land management strategies that emphasize conservation, use of on-site natural features, and site planning to minimize impervious surfaces, native vegetation loss, and stormwater runoff.
“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling built to 42 U.S.C.  5401 through 5403 standards (as amended in 2000). A mobile home, modular home, commercial coach, or recreational vehicle is not a manufactured home.
“Manufactured home, new” or “new manufactured home” means any manufactured home required to be titled under RCW Title 46, which has not been previously titled to a retail purchaser, and is not a “used mobile home” as defined in RCW 82.45.032(2).
“Manufactured home park” or “mobile home park” means a tract of land under single ownership or control upon which two (2) or more manufactured homes occupied as dwellings may be located.
“Metes and bounds” means a means of legally describing land where a high degree of accuracy is required. “Metes” refers to distances, where “bounds” refers to boundaries revealed by monuments and landmarks. The description starts at an easily identifiable point of beginning, following boundaries for precise distances and ultimately returning to the point of beginning.
“Mini day care” means a child care facility for the care of twelve (12) or fewer children; when located in a residence, the portion where the children have access must be separate from the family living quarters, or that portion where the children have access must be used exclusively for their care during the hours that the child care center is operating.
“Mobile home” means a factory-built dwelling built prior to June 15, 1976, to standards other than the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Code, and acceptable under applicable state codes in effect at the time of construction or introduction of the home into the state. Mobile homes have not been built since the introduction of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act.
“Motel” means a facility offering accommodations containing five (5) or more rooms with at least twenty-five (25) percent having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building. See “hotel,” “boarding house,” and “bed and breakfast inn.”
“Multiple family dwelling” means a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
“Nonconforming” shall have the definition set forth in Chapter 17.92.
“Open space” means an area that is legally and practically accessible to the residents of the development, that is not encumbered with any substantial structure, devoted to use as a roadway, parking area or sidewalk and is left in its natural or undisturbed state as of the date development began. Minor improvements may be made to open space areas to accommodate the cutting of trails, or, if unwooded, to landscape for ball fields, picnic areas and similar facilities or to create a wooded or natural area. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of an open area may lie within a floodplain or floodway.
“Ownership” means possession of real estate or a legal contract to purchase or lease real estate, assigning sole or preemptive right to use or occupy real estate for a specified period of time.
“Permitted use” means a use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district.
“Personal and professional services” means beauty and barber shops; offices for doctors, dentists and others engaged in human healing arts, provided no overnight care is given; mortuary; offices for engineers, attorneys, architects, real estate, insurance, travel agencies, ambulance services and bail bonds; and other services similar to the above to which the sale or repair of merchandise or equipment is incidental.
“Planning commission” means the city of Aberdeen planning commission.
“Primary use” means the main use of land or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
“Public and semi-public uses” means a structure or activity housing such uses as public and private schools, public assembly areas, public and private recreational facilities, places of worship, mortuaries and cemeteries, libraries, police and fire stations, public parking areas, fish hatcheries and pens, and watersheds; excluding those listed as unclassified uses.
“Recreational open space” means a portion of a lot or a building available for the recreational use of the residents of the lot.
“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicular type unit designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel uses, with or without motive power. This definition includes vehicles such as travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers and motor homes. A recreational vehicle is not a mobile home.
“Recreational vehicle park” means a private or public recreational facility on which two (2) or more recreational trailers or vehicles are parked or located.
“Recycling drop box” means a structure or box with a top, enclosed on four (4) sides, and with an opening or door in which recyclable materials are placed or deposited. A recycling drop box under this definition shall have no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. Included within this definition are metal recycling collection drop boxes and recycling reverse vending machines. Recycling drop boxes may be within or outside of a building.
Sales – “garage sales” or “yard sales” means the sale of used household personal items by the owner thereof, usually on residential premises.
“Sales, incidental wholesale/retail” or “incidental wholesale/retail sales” means occasional wholesale and/or retail sales where less than fifty (50) percent of the total sales volume conducted on or from a business premises.
“Sales, retail” or “retail sales” means sales for direct consumption and not for resale.
“Sales, secondhand” or “secondhand sales” means sales of items previously used by other persons, excluding garage sales and yard sales.
“Sales, wholesale” or “wholesale sales” means sales for resale, not for direct consumption.
“Sign” means any device that is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such device is located and is designed to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate information to them.
“Sign, billboard” or “billboard sign” means any message, word, symbol, design, picture or visual medium which is intended to draw attention to a product, service, business, person, institution, or location and is placed or painted on the ground, or on any tree, wall, fence, rock, structure or thing whatsoever, whether indoor or outdoor, so as to be visible from off premises, exclusive of legal notices, and safety and directional signs posted by public agencies.
“Sign, freestanding” or “freestanding sign” means a sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a sign. If the message is removed from a structure that was originally designed and used as a freestanding sign, this structure shall still be considered a sign.
“Sign, off-premises” or “off-premises sign” means a sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, or activity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
“Sign, portable” or “portable sign” means a sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground except for temporary signs.
“Sign, temporary” or “temporary sign” means a sign that: (1) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or event that is designed, intended, or expected to take place or to be completed within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (2) is intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary.
“Single-family dwelling” means a building containing one (1) dwelling unit on a lot intended for occupancy by one (1) family.
“Special use” means a category of uses listed within a zoning district that requires review before the planning commission and city council to determine their compatibility with the surrounding area and comprehensive plan.
“Street” means land designated by the city of Aberdeen or the state of Washington as a thoroughfare and which affords the primary means of access to abutting property or private land.
“Surface, impervious” or “impervious surface” means ground or covered ground through which water cannot percolate.
“Townhome” means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family and containing one (1) dwelling unit, occupying space from the ground to the roof and not lying vertically under or over adjacent units, and attached to one (1) or more other dwelling units by common walls which may be located on lot side lines.
“Unclassified use” means a use possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical its being made automatically and consistently permissible in any defined classification or zone as set forth in this title, such as airports, landing fields, heliports, correctional institutions, public transit facilities, power-generating plants, utility booster stations and conversion plants, sewage treatment plants, quarrying and mining, and commercial excavation.
“Urban services area” means that area, both within the city and outside it, which is either presently served or is slated to be served by the water and sewer systems of the city of Aberdeen.
“Use” means the activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot.
“Variance” means a device granted by the board of adjustment which provides relief to a property owner from certain provisions of this title when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in the denial of the rights and privileges allowed to other properties in the vicinity.
“Vision clearance triangle” means formed by the intersection of two (2) street rights-of-way.
“Yard” means an open space abutting a lot line unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward except for certain exceptions allowed herein. A yard shall be measured at right angles to the lot line and shall extend into the lot to the depth required by this title.
“Yard, front” or “front yard” means a yard extending the full width of the lot abutting the front lot line to the depth required by this title.
“Yard, rear” or “rear yard” means a yard extending the full width of the lot abutting the rear lot line to the depth required by this title.
“Yard, side” or “side yard” means a yard which extends from the front yard, or front lot line where no front yard exists, to the rear yard or rear lot line where no rear yard exists and abutting a side yard lot to the depth required by this title.
(Ord. 6644 § 4, Amended, 03/27/2019; Ord. 6593 § 1, Amended, 06/08/2016; Ord. 6592 § 11, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011; Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005; Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998)

Chapter 17.08 USE CLASSIFICATIONS AND ZONING MAP

Sections:
17.08.010    Classifications.
17.08.020    Zoning map.
17.08.030    Conflicts between the text and the zoning map.
17.08.040    Interpretation of zoning boundaries.
17.08.050    Interpretation of code.
17.08.060    Limitations on land use and land division.
17.08.070    Charter authorization for title.

17.08.010 Classifications.
In order to accomplish the purposes and goals of this title, the following primary and combining use classifications are established in which regulations are prescribed concerning the permitted uses; conditional uses; special uses; lot, yard, and building requirements; density; off-street parking; and other requirements:
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Single-family District            | R-S |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Multiple-Family District          | R-M |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Residential Professional District | R-P |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Major Institution District        | M-I |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Commercial Residential District   | C-R |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Downtown Commercial District      | C-D |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| General Commercial District       | C-G |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Waterfront Development District   | W-D |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Light Industrial District         | I-L |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Industrial District               | I   |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Planned Unit Development          | PD  |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Manufactured Home Subdivision     | MHS |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
| Cluster Subdivision               | CS  |
+-----------------------------------+-----+
(Prior code § 11.003.010)

17.08.020 Zoning map.
The location and boundaries of the various zones are shown on the city of Aberdeen Zoning Map. Changes in the boundaries of the zones shall be completed pursuant to Chapter 17.64. A copy of the zoning map shall be maintained by the city and shall be changed to reflect all amendments.
(Prior code § 11.003.020)

17.08.030 Conflicts between the text and the zoning map.
If any conflict between the zoning map and the text of this title arises, the text of this title shall prevail.
(Prior code § 11.003.030)

17.08.040 Interpretation of zoning boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown upon the zoning map or any part thereof, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines or platted lot line lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. In the case of unsubdivided property where a zone boundary divides such property the location of the boundary, unless indicated on the map by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale on the zoning map.
C. Where a public street or alley is officially vacated, the area thereof shall acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts.
D. Where a railroad line is officially abandoned, the area of the right-of-way shall acquire the classification of the zone or zones in which it is located. If the right-of-way was a boundary between zones, the zones shall be evenly extended to the center of the right-of-way.
E. Where a zone boundary is shown on the map as a street, alley, waterway, or railroad, the boundary shall be the center line of the street, alley, waterway, or railroad.
F. The areas of dedicated streets, dedicated alleys, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way shall be deemed unclassified.
(Prior code § 11.003.040)

17.08.050 Interpretation of code.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements of the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Except as specifically herein provided, it is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law, regulation or permit previously issued, relating to the construction, establishment, moving, alteration or enlargement of any building or improvements, nor is it intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties.
(Prior code § 11.003.050)

17.08.060 Limitations on land use and land division.
Except as provided in this title, no building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building, structure or land be used for any purpose except as provided and allowed in the zone in which such building, structure, land, wetland or water is located and the other requirements of this title. Nor shall any lot or parcel of land be created, partitioned, divided or subdivided except as provided and allowed in the district in which the land or lot is located and the other requirements of this title. Nor shall any lot or parcel of land which was created or subdivided in violation of this title be sold.
(Prior code § 11.003.060)

17.08.070 Charter authorization for title.
Section 37 and Section 55 of the city of Aberdeen Charter authorize the city to adopt regulations designed and to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizenry. This title is adopted pursuant to those sections of the city of Aberdeen Charter.
(Prior code § 11.003.070)

Chapter 17.12 R-S SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.12.010    Purpose.
17.12.020    Permitted uses.
17.12.030    Conditional uses.
17.12.040    Special uses.
17.12.050    Unclassified uses.
17.12.060    Minimum lot size and density.
17.12.070    Building height.
17.12.080    Maximum lot coverage.
17.12.090    Yards.
17.12.100    Parking.
17.12.110    General provisions and special conditions.
17.12.120    Signs and lighting.

17.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the R-S district is to protect and maintain Aberdeen's single-family residential neighborhoods in a manner that encourages neighborhood revitalization where needed. Suitable undeveloped areas are designated single-family residential to provide for increased residential development and to designate the major public parks, schools, and semi-public use which currently exist or are proposed. The single-family residential district should provide a full range of low intensity housing opportunities.
(Prior code § 11.004.010)

17.12.020 Permitted uses.
In the R-S district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Single-family dwellings;
B. Mobile homes;
C. Home day care.
(Prior code § 11.004.020)

17.12.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses and expanded uses are allowed within the R-S district subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Duplexes and townhomes;
B. Mini day care;
C. Public and semi-public uses;
D. Nursery, orchards and farming including the retail sales of produce grown on the premises;
E. Group care living facilities;
F. Reuse of public schools for public and private recreational uses and public uses consistent with the other policies of the comprehensive development plan;
G. Bed and breakfast inns within a dwelling which comply with all of the following standards:
    1. No more than four guest rooms are offered for rent,
    2. The operator must live in the dwelling,
    3. One off-street parking space is provided for each guest room in addition to the number required for the dwelling,
    4. Excepting for required fire and safety improvements, no exterior alterations may be made which will change the appearance of the dwelling from that of a single-family residence,
    5. Only resident guests may be served meals,
    6. No guest may stay for more than thirty (30) consecutive days;
H. Aquaculture and fish production structures and facilities (including net pens) operated by for profit organizations;
I. Fish processing facilities operated by for profit organizations provided the facility is accessory to a fish production facility;
J. Mobile home park.
(Prior code § 11.004.030)

17.12.040 Special uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-S district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a special use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72 or as a planned development/cluster subdivision Chapter 17.52:
A. Planned developments;
B. Townhomes and cluster subdivisions on sites at least one acre in size;
C. Mobile home subdivisions.
(Prior code § 11.004.040)

17.12.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-S district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation
(Prior code § 11.004.045)

17.12.060 Minimum lot size and density.
In the R-S district:
A. Minimum lot size. five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density. seven units per acre or six thousand two hundred twenty-three (6,223) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width. fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.004.050)

17.12.070 Building height.
In the RS district:
A. Maximum building height. thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 17.12.090(E)(2).
B. Accessory buildings. one story or twenty (20) feet in height.
C. The average elevation of finished top of the railing for nonroofed decks and landings more than six feet above the average elevation of the finished grade shall comply with Section 17.12.090.
(Prior code § 11.004.060)

17.12.080 Maximum lot coverage.
In the R-S district, maximum lot coverage for all primary and accessory buildings shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
(Prior code § 11.004.070)

17.12.090 Yards.
In the RS district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Minimum front yard: twenty (20) feet.
C. Minimum side yard: five feet, or ten feet abutting a street.
D. Minimum rear yard: five feet.
E. For lots with an average slope of greater than one foot vertical in seven feet of horizontal distance;
    1. The required front yard may be reduced to ten feet.
    2. The height limit may be increased up to ten feet.
F. The distance between on-site buildings shall not be less than six feet.
(Prior code § 11.004.080)

17.12.100 Parking.
In the R-S district, parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.004.090)

17.12.110 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the R-S district.
(Prior code § 11.004.100)

17.12.120 Signs and lighting.
In the R-S district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.004.110)

Chapter 17.16 R-M MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.16.010    Purpose.
17.16.020    Permitted uses.
17.16.030    Conditional uses.
17.16.040    Special uses.
17.16.050    Unclassified uses.
17.16.060    Minimum lot size and density.
17.16.070    Building height.
17.16.080    Maximum lot coverage.
17.16.090    Yards.
17.16.100    Special site improvements.
17.16.110    Parking.
17.16.120    General provisions and special conditions.
17.16.130    Signs and lighting.

17.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the R-M district is to provide for residential neighborhoods with a mix of multi-family residences in areas where the available or planned public facilities are adequate for the allowed density. The area contains provisions to ensure that adequate public facilities and amenities are provided and to designate the major public parks, schools and semi-public uses which currently exist or are proposed. The area also contains requirements to increase compatibility between this area and the single-family residential area.
(Prior code § 11.005.010)

17.16.020 Permitted uses.
In the R-M district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Duplexes and townhomes;
B. Multiple-family dwellings;
C. Single-family dwellings;
D. Home day care and mini day care;
E. Mobile homes.
(Prior code § 11.005.020)

17.16.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-M district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Public and semipublic uses;
B. Fish processing facilities operated by for-profit organizations, provided the facility is accessory to a fish production facility;
C. Group care living facilities;
D. Reuse of public schools for public and private recreational uses and public uses consistent with the other policies of the comprehensive development plan;
E. Bed and breakfast inns within a dwelling which comply with the following standards:
    1. No more than eight (8) guest rooms are offered for rent;
    2. The operator must live in the dwelling;
    3. One (1) parking space is provided for each guest room in addition to the number required for the dwelling;
    4. No exterior alterations may be made which will change the appearance of the dwelling from that of a residence;
    5. Only resident guests may be served meals;
    6. No guest may stay for more than thirty (30) consecutive days;
F. Boarding houses, dormitories, and single-room occupancy dwellings;
G. Aquaculture and fish production structures and facilities (including net pens) operated by for profit organizations;
H. Commercial day care;
I. Mobile home park;
J. Nursery, orchards and farming including the retail sales of produce grown on the premises.
(Ord. 6593 § 2, Amended, 06/08/2016. Prior code § 11.005.030)

17.16.040 Special uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-M district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a special use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72 or as a planned development/cluster subdivision Chapter 17.52:
A. Planned developments.
B. Cluster subdivisions on sites at least one acre in size.
C. Mobile home subdivisions.
(Prior code § 11.005.040)

17.16.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-M district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants.
(Prior code § 11.005.045)

17.16.060 Minimum lot size and density.
In the R-M district:
A. Minimum lot size. five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density. twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width. fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.005.050)

17.16.070 Building height.
In the R-M district, maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided in Section 17.16.090(E)(2).
(Prior code § 11.005.060)

17.16.080 Maximum lot coverage.
In the R-M district, maximum lot coverage for the primary and accessory building shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
(Prior code § 11.005.070)

17.16.090 Yards.
In the R-M district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Minimum front yard: twenty (20) feet.
C. Minimum side yard: five feet, or ten feet abutting a street.
D. Minimum rear yard: five feet.
E. For lots with an average slope of greater than one foot vertical in seven feet of horizontal distance;
    1. The required front yard may be reduced to ten feet.
    2. The height limit may be increased up to ten feet.
F. The distance between on-site buildings shall not be less than six feet.
(Prior code § 11.005.080)

17.16.100 Special site improvements.
All new development in the R-M district, excepting single-family and duplex dwellings, shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed sound by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.005.090)

17.16.110 Parking.
In the R-M district, parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.005.100)

17.16.120 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the R-M district.
(Prior code § 11.005.110)

17.16.130 Signs and lighting.
In the R-M district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.005.120)

Chapter 17.20 R-P RESIDENTIAL PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.20.010    Purpose.
17.20.020    Permitted uses.
17.20.030    Conditional uses.
17.20.040    Special uses.
17.20.050    Unclassified uses.
17.20.060    Minimum lot size and density.
17.20.070    Building height.
17.20.080    Yards.
17.20.090    Signs and lighting.
17.20.100    Special site improvements.
17.20.110    Parking.
17.20.120    General provisions and special conditions.
17.20.130    Landscaping.

17.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the R-P district is to provide a transition between downtown and other intense commercial areas and the adjacent residential neighborhoods and to enable the development of neighborhoods with a mix of high density residential, professional, and service uses in appropriate locations. To accomplish this transitional function, the allowed uses and design standards encourage an overall residential character. Nonresidential uses allowed in this designation typically generate low to moderate levels of traffic and parking demands, and operate during daylight hours so as to minimize potential impacts on adjacent residential uses.
(Prior code § 11.006.010)

17.20.020 Permitted uses.
In the R-P district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Multiple-family dwellings;
B. Personal and professional services and incidental retail sales;
C. Public and semi-public uses;
D. Duplexes and townhomes;
E. Single-family dwellings;
F. Child care facilities;
G. Mobile homes.
(Prior code § 11.006.020)

17.20.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-P district subject to obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Group care living facilities;
B. Reuse of public schools for public and private recreational uses and public uses consistent with the other policies of the comprehensive development plan;
C. Bed and breakfast inns within a dwelling which comply with the following standards:
    1. No more than eight guest rooms are offered for rent,
    2. The operator must live in the dwelling,
    3. One parking space is provided for each guest room in addition to the number required for the dwelling,
    4. No exterior alterations may be made which will change the appearance of the dwelling from that of a residence,
    5. Only resident guests may be served meals,
    6. No guest may stay for more than thirty (30) consecutive days;
D. Mobile home park.
(Prior code § 11.006.030)

17.20.040 Special uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-P district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a special use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72 or as a planned development/cluster subdivision Chapter 17.52:
A. Planned developments;
B. Cluster subdivisions on sites at least one acre in size.
(Prior code § 11.006.040)

17.20.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the R-P district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants.
(Prior code § 11.006.045)

17.20.060 Minimum lot size and density.
In the R-P district:
A. Minimum lot size. five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density. twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width. fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.006.050)

17.20.070 Building height.
In the R-P district, maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet.
(Prior code § 11.006.060)

17.20.080 Yards.
In the R-P district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Minimum front yard: twenty (20) feet.
C. Minimum side yard: five feet, or ten feet abutting a street.
D. Minimum rear yard: five feet.
E. For lots with an average slope of greater than one foot vertical in seven feet of horizontal distance:
    1. The required front yard may be reduced to ten feet.
    2. The height limit may be increased up to ten feet.
F. The distance between on-site buildings shall not be less than six feet.
(Prior code § 11.006.070)

17.20.090 Signs and lighting.
In the R-P district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84 requirements of this district.
(Prior code § 11.006.080)

17.20.100 Special site improvements.
All new development in the R-P district, excepting single-family and duplex dwellings, shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.006.090)

17.20.110 Parking.
In the R-P district, parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.006.100)

17.20.120 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the R-P district.
(Prior code § 11.006.110)

17.20.130 Landscaping.
In the R-P district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Section 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.006.120)

Chapter 17.24 M-I MAJOR INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.24.010    Purpose.
17.24.020    Permitted uses.
17.24.030    Conditional uses.
17.24.040    Special uses.
17.24.050    Unclassified uses.
17.24.060    Minimum lot size and density.
17.24.070    Building height.
17.24.080    Yards.
17.24.090    Signs and lighting.
17.24.100    Special site improvements—Sidewalks.
17.24.110    Parking.
17.24.120    General provisions and special conditions.
17.24.130    Landscaping.

17.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the M-I district is to provide for major public or semi-public institutions and services centers to support the institutions. The area contains design standards to lessen the potential impact on nearby residential areas.
(Prior code § 11.007.010)

17.24.020 Permitted uses.
In the M-I district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Single-family dwellings;
B. Multiple-family dwellings;
C. Duplexes and townhomes;
D. Personal and professional services and incidental retail sales;
E. Hospitals;
F. Sanitaria, convalescent homes and rest homes;
G. Pharmacies and the retail sales, rental and servicing of medical equipment;
H. Child care facilities;
I. Public and semi-public uses.
(Prior code § 11.007.020)

17.24.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the M-I district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Retail sales within a building of less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor space. The retail sales building shall front on and obtain its access exclusively from an arterial or collector street;
B. Sit-down restaurants (including accessory lounges);
C. Group care living facilities, excluding those permitted in Section 17.24.020(F);
D. Bed and breakfast inns within a dwelling which comply with the following standards:
    1. No more than eight guest rooms are offered for rent,
    2. The operator must live in the dwelling,
    3. One parking space is provided for each guest room in addition to the number required for the dwelling,
    4. No exterior alterations may be made which will change the appearance of the dwelling from that of a residence,
    5. Only resident guests may be served meals,
    6. No guest may stay for more than thirty (30) consecutive day;
E. Adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998. Prior code § 11.007.030)

17.24.040 Special uses.
The following uses are allowed within the M-I district subject to obtaining a special use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72 or as a planned development/cluster subdivision Chapter 17.52:
A. Planned developments;
B. Cluster subdivisions on sites at least one acre in size.
(Prior code § 11.007.040)

17.24.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the M-1 district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants.
(Prior code § 11.007.045)

17.24.060 Minimum lot size and density.
In the M-I district:
A. Minimum lot size. ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Density. twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width. fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.007.050)

17.24.070 Building height.
In the M-I district, maximum building height for all uses: fifty-five (55) feet, except as provided in Section 17.24.080(D).
(Prior code § 11.007.060)

17.24.080 Yards.
In the M-I district:
A. Minimum front yard: ten feet.
B. Minimum size yard: five feet, or ten feet abutting a street.
C. Minimum rear yard: five feet.
D. For lots with an average slope of greater than one foot vertical in seven feet of horizontal distance the height limit may be increased up to ten feet.
E. The distance between on-site buildings shall not be less than six feet.
(Prior code § 11.007.070)

17.24.090 Signs and lighting.
In the M-I district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.007.080)

17.24.100 Special site improvements—Sidewalks.
All new development in the M-I district shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.007.090)

17.24.110 Parking.
In the M-I district, parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.007.100)

17.24.120 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the M-I district.
(Prior code § 11.007.110)

17.24.130 Landscaping.
In the M-I district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.007.120)

Chapter 17.28 C-R COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.28.010    Purpose.
17.28.020    Permitted uses.
17.28.030    Conditional uses.
17.28.040    Special uses.
17.28.050    Unclassified uses.
17.28.060    Minimum lot size and density.
17.28.070    Building height.
17.28.080    Yards.
17.28.090    Signs and lighting.
17.28.100    Special site improvements.
17.28.110    Parking.
17.28.120    General provisions and special conditions.
17.28.130    Landscaping.

17.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the C-R district is to provide the opportunity for appropriate types of professional, commercial and multi-family residential development on the major highway routes through Aberdeen while enabling the continuation of existing residential uses. Because of the opportunities provided by the state highways and transit service, a wide range of uses are allowed within the area. Provisions are included to improve compatibility between the wide-range of uses allowed by this zoning district.
(Prior code § 11.008.010)

17.28.020 Permitted uses.
In the C-R district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Personal and professional services (together with incidental retail sales) and offices;
B. Retail sales within a building with a total of less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area and sixteen (16) or fewer parking spaces;
C. Single-family dwellings;
D. Multiple-family dwellings;
E. Duplexes and townhomes;
F. Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, and meeting rooms and facilities;
G. Residences incorporated within an allowed use;
H. Public and semi-public uses;
I. Child care facilities;
J. Outdoor sales accessory to a permitted use only, with the exception of nurseries;
K. Kennels and animal hospitals with inside runs.
(Prior code § 11.008.020)

17.28.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-R district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Retail sales within a building with a total of more than four thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area or sixteen (16) or more parking spaces and retail sales outside of a building of automobiles, light trucks, recreational vehicles, mobile and modular homes, and similar items;
B. Financial services;
C. Eating and drinking establishments;
D. Food processing and baking for retail sales on premises;
E. Indoor entertainments and amusements;
F. Automobile repair services within a building and service stations;
G. Equipment rental;
H. Kennels and animal hospitals with runs;
I. Group care living facilities;
J. Wholesale sales and warehousing, excluding fuel storage or sales, explosive storage or sales, and storage and/or sales of other hazardous goods;
K. Nursery, orchards and farming including the retail sales of products grown on the premises.
(Prior code § 11.008.030)

17.28.040 Special uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-R district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a special use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72 or as a planned development/cluster subdivision Chapter 17.52:
A. Planned developments;
B. Cluster subdivisions.
(Prior code § 11.008.040)

17.28.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-R district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants.
(Prior code § 11.008.050)

17.28.060 Minimum lot size and density.
In the C-R district:
A. Minimum lot size: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density: twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width: fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.008.050)

17.28.070 Building height.
In the C-R district, maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet.
(Prior code § 11.008.060)

17.28.080 Yards.
In the C-R district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Minimum front yard: ten feet.
C. Minimum side yard: five feet.
D. Minimum rear yard: five feet.
E. For lots with an average slope of greater than one foot vertical in seven feet of horizontal distance, the height limit may be increased up to ten feet.
F. The distance between on-site buildings shall not be less than six feet.
(Prior code § 11.008.070)

17.28.090 Signs and lighting.
In the C-R district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.008.080)

17.28.100 Special site improvements.
All new development in the C-R district shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.008.090)

17.28.110 Parking.
In the C-R district, parking shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.008.100)

17.28.120 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the C-R district.
(Prior code § 11.008.110)

17.28.130 Landscaping.
In the C-R district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.008.120)

Chapter 17.32 C-D DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.32.010    Purpose.
17.32.020    Permitted uses.
17.32.030    Conditional uses.
17.32.040    Minimum lot size.
17.32.050    Unclassified uses.
17.32.060    Yards.
17.32.070    Signs and lighting.
17.32.080    Special site improvements.
17.32.090    Parking.
17.32.100    General provisions and special conditions.
17.32.110    Landscaping.

17.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the C-D district is to promote the continued development and revitalization of downtown Aberdeen. The area design standards are intended to facilitate continued redevelopment and retain the desirable, unique characteristics of downtown including the compact development pattern, the pedestrian orientation, and the variety and character of downtown buildings.
(Prior code § 11.009.010)

17.32.020 Permitted uses.
In the C-D district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Retail sales within a building;
B. Personal, professional and business services, including kennels and animal hospitals with inside runs;
C. Financial services;
D. Offices;
E. Eating and drinking establishments;
F. Hotels, meeting rooms and facilities and convention centers;
G. Indoor entertainments, indoor amusements, public and private recreation centers;
H. Residences in the upper floors of buildings;
I. Parking lots and parking structures accessory to another use;
J. Recycling drop boxes accessory to an allowed use or temporary recycling purchase and transshipment centers accessory to an allowed use;
K. Child care facilities.
(Ord. 6593 § 3, Amended, 06/08/2016. Prior code § 11.009.020)

17.32.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-D district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Food processing, baking, sewing, and crafts for retail sales on premises;
B. Automobile repair services within a building, and service stations;
C. Auction houses and secondhand sales within a building;
D. Outdoor sales;
E. Wholesale sales and warehousing;
F. Printing and other service oriented processing uses;
G. Light manufacturing within a building;
H. Multiple-family dwellings;
I. Boarding houses and single-room occupancy dwellings;
J. Kennels and animal hospitals with outside runs;
K. Parking lots and parking structures not accessory to another use;
L. Adult entertainment establishments;
M. Motels and bed and breakfast inns.
(Ord. 6593 § 4, Amended, 06/08/2016; Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998. Prior code § 11.009.030)

17.32.040 Minimum lot size.
In the C-D district:
A. Minimum lot size: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.009.040)

17.32.050 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-D district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation;
H. Treatment and storage of hazardous waste.
(Prior code § 11.009.045)

17.32.060 Yards.
In the C-D district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Front yard: none.
C. Minimum side yard: none.
D. Minimum rear yard: none.
(Prior code § 11.009.050)

17.32.070 Signs and lighting.
In the C-D district, signs and lighting shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.009.060)

17.32.080 Special site improvements.
All new developments in the C-D district shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.009.070)

17.32.090 Parking.
In the C-D district, parking shall be as required by Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.009.080)

17.32.100 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the C-D district.
(Prior code § 11.009.090)

17.32.110 Landscaping.
In the C-D district, landscaping will comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.009.100)

Chapter 17.36 C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.36.010    Purpose.
17.36.020    Permitted uses.
17.36.030    Conditional uses.
17.36.040    Unclassified uses.
17.36.050    Minimum lot size and density.
17.36.060    Building height.
17.36.070    Yards.
17.36.080    Signs and lighting.
17.36.090    Special site improvements.
17.36.100    Parking.
17.36.110    General provisions and special conditions.
17.36.120    Landscaping.

17.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the C-G district is to provide for a wide variety of commercial uses either large in scale and/or dependent upon high traffic volumes and where their intensity will not adversely impact other uses.
(Prior code § 11.010.010)

17.36.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted within the C-G district subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Retail sales and incidental wholesale sales within a building;
B. Personal, professional and business services, including kennels and animal hospitals with inside runs;
C. Financial services;
D. Offices;
E. Eating and drinking establishments;
F. Food processing and baking for retail sales on premises;
G. Automobile repair services within a building and service stations;
H. Equipment repair and servicing within a building;
I. Indoor entertainments and amusements;
J. Recycling drop boxes accessory to an allowed use or temporary recycling purchase and transshipment centers accessory to an allowed use;
K. Parking lots and parking structures not accessory to another use;
L. Parks, recreation centers, public buildings, colleges, vocational education establishments, business schools, utility systems and facilities, other public and semipublic uses;
M. Residences in the upper floors of buildings;
N. Caretakers’ residences incorporated within an allowed use;
O. Child care facilities;
P. Hotels, meeting rooms and facilities and convention centers.
(Ord. 6593 § 5, Amended, 06/08/2016. Prior code § 11.010.020)

17.36.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-G district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Motels and bed and breakfast inns;
B. Auction houses and second hand sales within a building;
C. Shopping malls and shopping centers;
D. Outdoor amusements and outdoor sales of cars, light trucks, heavy trucks and construction equipment, recreational vehicles, boats, manufactured (mobile) homes, modular homes, and construction materials. Construction materials and inoperable heavy trucks and equipment shall be screened from other uses;
E. Wholesale sales and warehousing, excluding fuel and explosive materials storage and warehousing;
F. Light industrial uses within a building;
G. Printing and other service oriented processing uses;
H. Commercial bakeries, laundries, and similar processing facilities;
I. Recycling centers within a building;
J. Kennels and animal hospitals with outside runs;
K. Adult entertainment establishments;
L. Group care living facilities, homes.
(Ord. 6593 § 6, Amended, 06/08/2016; Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998. Prior code § 11.010.040)

17.36.040 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the C-G district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation;
H. Treatment and storage of hazardous waste.
(Prior code § 11.010.045)

17.36.050 Minimum lot size and density.
In the C-G district:
A. Minimum lot size: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density: twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
C. Minimum lot width: fifty (50) feet.
(Prior code § 11.010.050)

17.36.060 Building height.
In the C-G district, maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet.
(Prior code § 11.010.060)

17.36.070 Yards.
In the C-G district:
A. See Section 17.88.040(A) for landscaping in yards.
B. Minimum front yard: none, except ten feet abutting a state route.
C. Minimum side yard: none, except five feet abutting a residence.
D. Minimum rear yard: none.
(Prior code § 11.010.070)

17.36.080 Signs and lighting.
In the C-G district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.010.080)

17.36.090 Special site improvements.
All new development in the C-G district shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed.
(Prior code § 11.010.090)

17.36.100 Parking.
In the C-G district, parking shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.010.100)

17.36.110 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the C-G district.
(Prior code § 11.010.110)

17.36.120 Landscaping.
In the C-G district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.010.120)

Chapter 17.40 W-D WATERFRONT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

Sections:
17.40.010    Purpose.
17.40.020    Permitted uses.
17.40.030    Conditional uses.
17.40.040    Unclassified uses.
17.40.050    Minimum lot size and density.
17.40.060    Building height.
17.40.070    Signs and lighting.
17.40.080    Yards.
17.40.090    Special site improvements.
17.40.100    Parking.
17.40.110    General provisions and special conditions.
17.40.120    Landscaping.

17.40.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the W-D district is to encourage the reuse and redevelopment of Aberdeen's central waterfront and similar waterfront areas by providing for an appropriate mix of uses tailored to their unique opportunities. Compatibility among the variety of allowed uses is encouraged and public access to the shoreline is required where necessary.
(Prior code § 11.011.010)

17.40.020 Permitted uses.
In the W-D district, the following uses are permitted subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.56:
A. Light manufacturing, fabrication and repair within a building;
B. Commercial marine uses including fuel service, docks, wharfs, shipyards, ways, passenger and ferry terminals;
C. Wholesale and retail sales within a building, and warehousing;
D. Personal, professional, financial and business services;
E. Farmers' markets;
F. Truck and equipment rental, repair and servicing within a building;
G. Eating and drinking establishments, outdoor cafes and restaurants, hotels, motels, meeting rooms and facilities, convention centers;
H. Food processing and baking for retail sales on premises;
I. Multiple-family dwellings, residences in the upper floors of buildings, townhouses and residential cluster developments;
J. Child care facilities;
K. Public and semi-public uses, and related support services;
L. Kennels and animal hospitals with inside runs;
M. Service stations.
(Prior code § 11.011.020)

17.40.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the W-D district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Shipping and trucking terminals;
B. Commercial parking lots and structures;
C. Laboratories and research facilities;
D. Kennels and animal hospitals with outside runs.
(Prior code § 11.011.030)

17.40.040 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the W-D district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation;
H. Treatment and storage of hazardous waste.
(Prior code § 11.011.045)

17.40.050 Minimum lot size and density.
In the W-D district:
A. Density: twenty-nine (29) units per acre or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.
B. Minimum lot width: fifty (50) feet.
C. Minimum lot size: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
(Prior code § 11.011.050)

17.40.060 Building height.
In the W-D district:
A. Maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet.
B. Additional height may be allowed by obtaining a conditional use permit.
(Prior code § 11.011.060)

17.40.070 Signs and lighting.
In the W-D district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.011.070)

17.40.080 Yards.
In the W-D district:
A. Minimum front yard: none, except ten feet abutting a state route.
B. Minimum side yard: none, except five feet abutting a residence.
C. Minimum rear yard: none.
(Prior code § 11.011.075)

17.40.090 Special site improvements.
All new development in the W-D district shall be required to construct a sidewalk along all lot lines adjacent to city streets. If existing sidewalks are deemed acceptable by the city engineer, new sidewalks need not be constructed. Public access shall be as required by the Grays Harbor Estuary Plan and the city of Aberdeen Shoreline Master Program.
(Prior code § 11.011.080)

17.40.100 Parking.
In the W-D district, parking shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.011.090)

17.40.110 General provisions and special conditions.
17.56 contains general provisions and special conditions applicable to the W-D district.
(Prior code § 11.011.100)

17.40.120 Landscaping.
In the W-D district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.011.110)

Chapter 17.44 L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.44.010    Purpose.
17.44.020    Permitted uses.
17.44.030    Conditional uses.
17.44.040    Unclassified uses.
17.44.050    Building height.
17.44.060    Yards.
17.44.070    Signs and lighting.
17.44.080    Parking.
17.44.090    Landscaping.

17.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the L-I district is to provide space for transportation, warehousing, contractors' yards, industrial sales, and industrial uses contained within a building.
(Prior code § 11.013.010)

17.44.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted within the L-I district:
A. Light manufacturing, light processing, light assembly and light fabrication all within a building;
B. Warehousing, wholesale sales, industrial sales, building and industrial material retail sales, and retail sales accessory to a related permitted or conditional use;
C. Equipment, auto and truck rental, repair and servicing within a building. Exterior storage of goods and equipment;
D. Laboratories and industrial research facilities;
E. Restaurants accessory to a permitted use;
F. Truck terminals, shipping terminals, docks and contractors' yards;
G. Outside assembly accessory to a permitted or conditional use;
H. Offices accessory to a permitted or conditional use;
I. A caretaker's residence accessory to a permitted or conditional use;
J. Kennels and animal hospitals;
K. Service stations.
(Prior code § 11.013.020)

17.44.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the L-I district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Outdoor storage as a primary use; excluding, however, junk yards, scrap yards, log storage yards, log sorting yards, and automobile wrecking yards;
B. Offices as a primary use;
C. Child care facilities;
D. Adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998. Prior code § 11.013.030)

17.44.040 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the L-I district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation;
H. Treatment and storage of a hazardous waste.
(Prior code § 11.013.040)

17.44.050 Building height.
In the L-I district:
A. Maximum building height: forty-five (45) feet.
B. Additional height may be allowed by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided by Chapter 17.68.
(Prior code § 11.013.045)

17.44.060 Yards.
In the L-I district:
A. Minimum front yard: ten feet.
B. Minimum side yard: none, except five feet when abutting a residence.
C. Minimum rear yard: none.
(Prior code § 11.013.050)

17.44.070 Signs and lighting.
In the L-I district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.013.060)

17.44.080 Parking.
In the L-I district, off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 11.013.070)

17.44.090 Landscaping.
In the L-I district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.013.080)

Chapter 17.48 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:
17.48.010    Purpose.
17.48.020    Permitted uses.
17.48.030    Conditional uses.
17.48.040    Unclassified uses.
17.48.050    Signs and lighting.
17.48.060    Parking.
17.48.070    Landscaping.

17.48.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the I district is to provide the opportunity for intensive industrial uses in appropriate locations.
(Prior code § 11.014.010)

17.48.020 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted within the I district:
A. Manufacturing, light manufacturing, processing, light processing, light assembly, fabricating, and light fabrication and industrial activities all within a building;
B. Equipment, heavy equipment sales, repair and rentals, auto and truck rental, repair and servicing within a building, exterior storage of goods and equipment;
C. Shipping terminals, truck terminals, materials' movement facilities, and docks, wharfs, marine terminals, and contractor's yards;
D. Warehousing, indoor and outdoor storage, wholesale sales, industrial sales, building and industrial material retail sales, and retail sales accessory to a related permitted or conditional use;
E. Offices accessory to a permitted or conditional use;
F. A caretaker's residence accessory to a permitted or conditional use;
G. Kennels and animal hospitals;
H. Service stations;
I. Laboratories and industrial research facilities;
J. Restaurants accessory to a permitted use;
K. Outside assembly accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
(Ord. 6339, Amended, 04/30/2003. Prior code § 11.014.020)

17.48.030 Conditional uses.
The following uses are allowed within the I district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.68:
A. Industrial or manufacturing activities;
B. Public and semi-public uses;
C. Adult entertainment establishments;
D. Child care facilities.
(Ord. 6179, Amended, 02/25/1998)

17.48.040 Unclassified uses.
The following uses are allowed within the I district subject to the applicable provisions of this title and by obtaining an unclassified use permit as provided in Chapter 17.72:
A. Airports, landing fields and heliports;
B. Correctional institutions;
C. Public transit facilities;
D. Power-generating plants;
E. Utility booster stations and conversion plants;
F. Sewage treatment plants;
G. Quarrying and mining, commercial excavation;
H. Treatment and storage of hazardous waste.
(Prior code § 11.014.040)

17.48.050 Signs and lighting.
In the I district, signs shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.84.
(Prior code § 11.014.045)

17.48.060 Parking.
In the I district, parking shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code §11.014.050)

17.48.070 Landscaping.
In the I district, landscaping shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.88.
(Prior code § 11.014.060)

Chapter 17.50 HISTORIC PRESERVATION

Sections:
17.50.010    Purpose.
17.50.020    Definitions.
17.50.030    Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission.
17.50.040    Register of Historic Places.
17.50.050    Review of changes to Historic Register properties.
17.50.060    Review and monitoring of properties for special property tax valuation.
17.50.070    Appeals.

17.50.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the identification, evaluation, designation and protection of designated historic properties within the City of Aberdeen for future generation through special valuation, a property tax incentive as provided in Chapter 84.26 RCW in order to:
A. Safeguard the heritage of the City of Aberdeen as represented by those buildings, districts, objects, sites and structures which reflect significant elements of City of Aberdeen history;
B. Foster civic and neighborhood pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past and a sense of identity based on City of Aberdeen history;
C. Stabilize or improve the aesthetic and economic vitality and values of such sites, improvements and objects;
D. Assist, encourage and provide incentives to private owners for preservation, restoration, redevelopment and use of outstanding historic buildings, districts, objects, sites and structures;
E. Promote and facilitate the early identification and resolution of conflicts between preservation of historic resources and alternative land uses; and
F. Conserve valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use and maintenance of the existing built environment.
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.020 Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this ordinance shall mean as follows, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
A. “Aberdeen Historic Inventory” or “Inventory” means the comprehensive inventory of historic and prehistoric resources within the boundaries of the city.
B. “Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission” or “Commission” means the commission created by AMC 17.50.030(A).
C. “Aberdeen Register of Historic Places”, “Local Register”, or “Register” means the listing of locally designated properties provided for in AMC 17.50.040 herein.
D. “Actual Cost of Rehabilitation” means costs incurred within twenty-four months prior to the date of application and directly resulting from one or more of the following: (a) improvements to an existing building located on or within the perimeters of the original structure; or (b) improvements outside of but directly attached to the original structure which are necessary to make the building fully useable but shall not include rentable/habitable floor-space attributable to new construction; or (c) architectural and engineering services attributable to design of the improvements; or (d) all costs defined as “qualified rehabilitation expenditures” for purposes of the federal historic preservation investment tax credit.
E. A “building” is a structure constructed by human beings. This includes both residential and nonresidential buildings, main and accessory buildings.
F. “Certificate of Appropriateness” means the document indicating that the Commission has reviewed the proposed changes to a local register property or within a local register historic district and certified the changes as not adversely affecting the historic characteristics of the property, which contribute to its designation.
G. “Certified Local Government” of “CLG” means the designation reflecting that the local government has been jointly certified by the State Historic Preservation Officer and the National Park Service as having established its own historic preservation commission and a program meeting Federal and State standards.
H. “Class of properties eligible to apply for Special Valuation” means all properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or certified as contributing to a National Register Historic District which have been substantially rehabilitated as a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 84.26 RCW, until the city becomes a Certified Local Government (CLG). Once a CLG, the class of properties eligible to apply for Special Valuation means only properties listed on the Local Register of Historic Places or properties certified as contributing to a Local Register Historic District which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 84.26 RCW.
I. “Cost” means the actual cost of rehabilitation, which cost shall be at least twenty-five percent of the assessed valuation of the historic property, exclusive of the assessed value attributable to the land, prior to rehabilitation.
J. A “district” is a geographically definable area urban or rural, small or large, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites buildings, structures, and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development.
K. “Emergency repair” means work necessary to prevent destruction or dilapidation to real property or structural appurtenances thereto immediately threatened or damaged by fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster.
L. “Historic property” means real property together with improvements thereon, except property listed in a register primarily for objects buried below ground, which is listed in local register of Certified Local Government or the National Register of Historic Places.
M. “Incentives” are such rights or privileges or combination thereof which the City Council, or other local, state, or federal public body or agency, by virtue of applicable present or future legislation, may be authorized to grant or obtain for the owner(s) of Register properties. Examples of economic incentives include but are not limited to tax relief, conditional use permits, rezoning, street vacation, planned unit development, transfer of development rights, façade easements, gifts, preferential leasing policies, beneficial placement of public improvements or amenities, or the like.
N. “Local Review Board” or “Board” used in Chapters 84.26 RCW and Chapter 254-20 WAC for the special valuation of historic properties means the commission created in AMC 17.50.060.
O. “National Register of Historic Places” means the national listing of properties significant to our cultural history because of their documented importance to our history, architectural history, engineering, or cultural heritage.
P. An “object” is a thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.
Q. “Ordinary repair and maintenance” means work for which a permit issued by the city is not required by law and where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to the real property or structure appurtenance therein and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage.
R. “Owner” of property is the fee simple owner of record as exists on the Grays Harbor County Assessor’s records.
S. “Significance” or “significant” used in the context of historic significance means the following: a property with local, state, or national significance is one which helps in the understanding of the history or prehistory of the local area, state, or nation (whichever is applicable) by illuminating the local, statewide, or nationwide impact of the events or persons associated with the property, or its architectural type or style in information potential. The local area can include the city, Grays Harbor County, the Olympic Region of Washington, or a modest geographic or cultural area, such as a neighborhood. Local significance may apply to a property that illustrates a theme that is important to one or more localities; state significance to a theme important to the history of the state; and national significance to property of exceptional value in representing or illustration an important theme in the history of the nation.
T. A “site” is a place where a significant event or pattern of events occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupation or activities that may be marked by physical remains; or it may be the symbolic focus of a significant event or pattern of events that may not have been actively occupied. A site may be the location of ruined or now non-extant building or structure of the location itself possesses historic cultural or archaeological significance.
U. “Special Valuation for Historic Properties” or “Special Valuation” means the local option program, as authorized by Chapter 84.26 RCW, which when implemented makes available to property owners a special tax valuation for rehabilitation of historic properties under which the assessed value of an eligible historic property is determined at a rate that excludes, for up to ten years, the actual cost of the rehabilitation.
V. “State Register of Historic Places” means the state listing of properties significant to the community, state or nation but which may or may not meet the criteria of the National Register.
W. A “structure” is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern or organization. Generally constructed by man, it is often an engineering project.
X. “UTM” or “Universal Transverse Macerator” means the grid zone in metric measurement providing for an exact point of numerical reference.
Y. “Waiver of a Certificate of Appropriateness” or “Waiver” means the document indicating that the Commission has reviewed the proposed whole or partial demolition of a local register property or in a local register historic district and, failing to find alternatives to demolition, has issued a waiver which allows the building or zoning official to issue a permit for demolition.
Z. “Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties” or “State Advisory Council’s Standards” means the rehabilitation and maintenance standards used by the Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission as minimum requirements for determining whether or not an historic property is eligible for special valuation and whether or not the property continues to be eligible for special valuation once it has been so classified.
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.030 Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Creation and size. There is hereby established an Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission consisting of five (5) members, as provided in subsection B(3) below. Members of the Aberdeen Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be residents of the City of Aberdeen except as provided in subsection (B)2 below. Effective October 1, 2013, the size of the Commission shall be increased to seven (7) members.
B. Composition of the Commission. 
    1. All members of the Commission must have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation and possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgment.
    2. The Commission should include at least two (2) professionals who have experience in identifying, evaluating and protecting historic resources and are selected from among the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation and landscape architecture, or related disciplines. Any Commission action that would otherwise be valid shall not be rendered invalid by the temporary vacancy of one or all of the professional positions, unless the action is related to meeting Certified Local Government (CLG) responsibilities cited in the Certification Agreement between the city and the state Historic Preservation Officer on behalf of the state. The Mayor may grant exception to the residency requirement of Commission members in order to obtain representatives from these disciplines.
    3. In making appointments, the Mayor may consider names submitted from any source, but the Mayor shall notify history and Aberdeen development related organizations of vacancies so that names of interested and qualified individuals may be submitted by such organizations for consideration along with names from any other source.
C. Terms. The original appointment of five (5) members to the commission shall be as follows: one (1) for two (2) years, three (3) for three (3) years and one (1) for four (4) years. Effective October 1, 2013, the Mayor shall appoint two (2) additional members, one with an initial term expiring on May 31, 2014, and one with an initial term expiring May 31, 2015. After expiration of the initial term, appointments shall be made for a three (3) year term. The Mayor shall fill vacancies for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.
D. Meetings. 
    1. The Commission shall adopt a regular meeting schedule and a schedule of submittal deadlines for applications filed pursuant to this chapter.
    2. A public record shall be kept of the Commission’s meetings, resolutions, proceedings and actions.
E. Powers and duties. The major responsibility of the Historic Preservation Commission is to identify and actively encourage the conservation of the city’s historic resources by initiating and maintaining a register of historic places and reviewing proposed changes to register properties; to raise community awareness of the city’s history and historic resources; and to serve, together with the Aberdeen Board of Museum and History, as a resource in matters of history, historic planning and preservation.
    1. The Commission shall establish and adopt its own rules of procedure to comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (Chapter 42.30 RCW) and the responsibilities identified in this Section, and shall select from among its membership a chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary to conduct the Commission’s business.
    2. The Commission shall engage in the following functions:
        a. Conduct and maintain a comprehensive inventory of historic resources within the boundaries of the city and publicize and periodically update inventory results. Properties listed on the Historic Inventory maintained by the Commission shall be recorded on official zoning records with an “HI” (for historic inventory designation). This designation shall not change or modify the underlying zone classification.
        b. Initiate and maintain the Aberdeen Register of Historic Places. This official register shall be complied of buildings, structures, sites, objects and districts identified by the Commission as having historic significance worthy of recognition and protection by the city, including efforts to encourage owners to maintain, rehabilitate and preserve properties.
        c. Review nominations to the Aberdeen Register of Historic Places according to criteria in AMC 17.50.040(B) and adopt standards in its rules to be used to guide this review.
        d. Review proposals to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, move, demolish, or significantly affect properties or districts on the register as provided in AMC 17.50.050; and adopt standards in its rules to be used to guide this review and the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or waiver.
        e. Provide for the review either by the Commission or its staff of all applications for development approvals, permits, environmental assessments or impact statements, and other similar documents pertaining to listed historic resources or adjacent properties.
        f. Review and submit nominations to the State and National Registers of Historic Places and insure public participation in the State and National Register nomination processes under compliance with Open Public Meetings Act (Chapter 42.30 RCW).
        g. Serve as the Special Valuation local review board under Chapter 84.26 RCW to: (i) determine the eligibility of historic properties for special valuation; (ii) verify that the improvements are consistent with the Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Maintenance; (iii) Enter into agreements with property owners for the duration of the special valuation period as required under WAC 254-20-070(2); (iv) approve or deny applications for special valuation; and (v) monitor property for continued compliance with agreements and statutory eligibility requirements during the 10 year special valuation period; and (vi) and comply with all other local review board responsibilities identified in Chapter 84.26 RCW.
    3. In addition to the mandatory regulatory duties in subsection (2) above, the Commission shall have the authority to:
        a. Participate in, promote, and conduct such public information, educational and interpretive programs relating to historic and prehistoric resources as it may determine appropriate.
        b. Serve as the city’s liaison with federal, state and other local government historic preservation programs.
        c. Review and comment to the Mayor and City Council on land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement and other types of planning and programs undertaken by the city, its public development corporations, other neighboring communities, and the state or federal governments as they relate to historic resources of the city.
        d. Advise the Mayor and City Council generally on matters of history and historic preservation.
        e. Provide information to the public on methods of maintaining and rehabilitation historic properties. This may take the form of pamphlets, newsletter, workshops, or similar activities.
        f. Officially recognize excellence in the rehabilitation of historic buildings, structures, sites and districts and new construction in historic areas; and encourage appropriate measures for such recognition.
        g. Distribute information to the public and city departments on incentives for preservation of historic resources, including legislation, regulations and codes which encourage the use and adaptive reuse of historic properties.
        f. Investigate and report to the Mayor and City Council on the use of various federal, state; local or private funding sources available to promote historic resource preservation in the city.
E. Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation.
F. Commission staff. Commission and professional staff assistance shall be provided by the Community Development Department of the city of Aberdeen with additional assistance and information to be provided by other departments as may be necessary to aid the Commission in carrying out its duties and responsibilities under this ordinance.
(Ord. 6549, Amended, 09/11/2013; Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.040 Register of Historic Places.
A. Criteria for determining designation in the Historic Register. Any building, structure, site, object or district may be designated for inclusion in the Historic Register if it is significantly associated with the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or cultural heritage for the community; if it has integrity; is at least 50 years old, or is of lesser age and has exceptional importance; and if it falls in at least two (2) of the following categories:
    1. Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of national, state or local history.
    2. Embodies the distinctive architectural characteristics of a type, period, style, or method of design or construction, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction.
    3. An outstanding work of a designer, builder, or architect who has made a substantial contribution to the art.
    4. Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering or architectural history.
    5. Associated with the lives of persons significant in national, state or local history.
    6. Has yielded or may be likely to yield important archaeological information related to history or prehistory.
    7. A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the only surviving structure significantly associated with an historic person or event.
    8. Is a birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding importance and is the only surviving structure or site associated with that person.
    9. A cemetery, which derives its primary significance from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events, or cultural patterns.
    10. A reconstructed building that has been executed in a historically accurate manner on the original site.
    11. A creative and unique example of folk architecture and design created by persons not formally trained in the architectural design professions, and which does not fit into formal architectural or historical categories.
B. Process for designating properties or districts to the Historical Register. 
    1. Any person, with the owners consent, may nominate a building, structure, site, object or district for inclusion in the Register of Historic Places. The Commission, and any member of the Commission, may solicit nominations. In its designation decision, the Commission shall consider the Aberdeen Historic Register and the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
    2. In the case of individual properties, the designation shall include the UTM reference and all features—interior and exterior—and outbuildings that contribute to its designation.
    3. In the case of districts, the designation shall include description of the boundaries of the district; the characteristics of the district, which justifies its designation; and a list of all properties including features, structures, sites and objects, which contribute to the designation of the district.
    4. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the merits of the nomination according to the criteria in AMC 17.50.040(A) and the nomination review standards established in the Commission’s rules.
    5. The Commission shall provide notice to the public, the owner(s) and the authors of the nomination, if different, and lessees, if any, of the subject property prior to the meeting at which the nomination will be considered. The notice shall include publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Aberdeen area, posting of the property, and written notification as required by the Open Public Meetings Act (Chpt. 42.30 RCW).
    6. If the Commission finds that the nominated property is eligible for the city’s Historic Register, the Commission shall, with the owner’s consent, make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council that the property be listed in the Historic Register. In the case of historic districts, the consent of the owners of 60% of the property, by assessed valuation, within the proposed district boundary shall be required.
    7. The public, property owner(s), and the authors of the nomination, if different, and lessees, if any, shall be notified of the listing.
    8. Properties listed in the city’s Historic Register shall be recorded on official zoning records with an “HR” (for Historic Register) designation. This designation shall not change or modify the underlying zone classification.
C. Removal of properties from the Historic Register. In the event that any property is no longer deemed appropriate for designation in the city’s Historic Register, the Commission may initiate removal from such designation by the same procedure as provided for in establishing the designation in AMC 17.50.040(B). A property may be removed from the city’s Historic Register without the owner’s consent.
D. Effects of listing on the Historic Register. 
    1. Listing on the city’s Historic Register is an honorary designation denoting significant association with the historic, archaeological, engineering or cultural heritage of the community. Properties are listed individually or as contributing properties to an historic district.
    2. Prior to the commencement of any work on a Historic Register property, excluding ordinary repair and maintenance and emergency measures defined in AMC 17.50.050, the owner must request and receive a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission for the proposed work. Violation of this rule shall be grounds for the Commission to review the property for removal from the register.
    3. Prior to whole or partial demolition of a register property, the owner must request and receive a waiver of a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Commission.
    4. Once the city’s Historic Register is recognized as a Certified Local Government Historic Register all properties listed on the city’s Historic Register may be eligible for Special Tax Valuation on their rehabilitation (See, AMC 17.50.060).
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.050 Review of changes to Historic Register properties.
A. Review required. No person shall change the use, construct any new building or structure, or reconstruct, alter, restore, remodel, repair, move, or demolish any existing property on the city’s Historic Register or within an historic district on the City of Aberdeen Register without review by the Commission and without receipt of a Certificate of Appropriateness, or in the case of demolition, a waiver, as a result of the review. The review shall apply to all interior and exterior features of the property that contribute to its designation and are listed on the nomination form.
B. Exemptions. Ordinary repair and maintenance as defined by AMC 17.50.020(Q) and emergency measures as defined by AMC 17.50.020(K), do not require a Certificate of Appropriateness or review by the commission.
C. Review process. 
    1. Requests for review and issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness or waiver. The Community Development Director or his/her designee shall report any application for a permit to work on a Historical Register property or property in a historic district to the Commission. If the activity is not exempt from review, the Commission or staff shall notify the applicant of the review requirements. The city shall not issue any permit for work on the property until a Certificate of Appropriateness or a waiver is received from the Commission. City staff shall assist the Commission in considering building and fire code requirements.
    2. Commission review. 
        a. The owner or his/her agent (architect, contractor, lessee, etc.) shall apply to the Commission for a review of proposed changes on a Historic Register property or within a historic district and request a Certificate of Appropriateness or, in the case of demolition, a waiver. Each application for review of proposed changes shall be accompanied by such information as is required by the Commission in its rules for review of the proposed project.
        b. The Commission shall meet with the applicant and review the proposed work according to the design review criteria established in rules. All action taken on the application shall be taken at a regular meeting of the Commission or, if the review is conducted at a special meeting, action shall be taken only after public notice as provided in AMC 17.50.040B(5).
        c. The Commission shall complete its review and make its recommendations in writing within thirty (30) calendar days from its meeting with the applicant unless the applicant grants an extension or the Commission makes written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed to complete its review of a proposed change.
        d. The Commission’s recommendations shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and conclusions relied upon in reaching its decision. The Commission shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness upon the owner’s acceptance of the Commission’s recommendations. Any conditions agreed to by the applicant shall become conditions of approval of the permits granted by the city.
        e. The Commission’s recommendations and any Certificate of Appropriateness issued shall be transmitted to the building or zoning official. No permit shall be issued by the city unless a Certificate of Appropriateness has been issued.
D. Demolition. 
    1. A waiver of the Certificate of Appropriateness is required before a permit may be issued to allow whole or partial demolition of a Historical Register property or property in a Historic District. The Commission shall grant a waiver if it finds the property in question meets any of the following criteria and if the proposed demolition is determined to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions:
        a. The property constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure’s occupants; or
        b. The property is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances; or
        c. Retaining the property will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or
        d. Retaining the property is not in the interest of the majority of the community.
    2. The owner or his/her agent shall apply to the Commission for a review of the proposed demolition and request a waiver. The applicant shall meet with the Commission in an attempt to find alternatives to demolition. The Commission shall issue its decision, in writing, within forty-five (45) calendar days from the initial meeting with the applicant, unless the applicant grants an extension or the Commission makes written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed to complete its review of the application. If no alternative to demolition has been agreed to during the review process, the Commission shall issue a written decision granting or denying the waiver. A copy of the Commission’s decision shall be provided to the official in charge of issuing the demolition permit.
    3. The official in charge of issuing the demolition permit may include a condition allowing the Commission up to 45 additional calendar days to develop alternatives to demolition. 4. The board may require any owner granted a waiver to document the loss of the Historic Register property by means determined by the Commission, which shall at a minimum include recent or historic photographs of the interior and exterior, construction plans if available, and a written history of the building outlining the historic significance.
    5. Any conditions agreed to by the applicant in the review process shall become conditions of approval of the permits granted by the city.
    6. The Commission shall remove the property from the city’s Historic Register after the property is demolished.
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.060 Review and monitoring of properties for special property tax valuation.
A. Time lines. 
    1. The Community Development Director shall forward applications for special property tax valuation to the Grays Harbor County Assessor and the Commission within 10 calendar days of receipt by the city.
    2. The commission shall review applications before December 31 of the calendar year in which the application was submitted.
    3. Commission decisions regarding the applications shall be in writing and filed with the Assessor within 10 calendar days of issuance.
B. Procedure. 
    1. The Assessor and the Commission shall review applications to determine if the applications are complete and if the properties meet the criteria set forth in WAC 254-20-070(1) and AMC 17.50.060(C).
        a. If the Commission determines that a property meets all the criteria it shall approve the application subject to execution of a Historic Preservation Special Valuation Agreement between the Commission, acting on behalf of the city, and the owner as provided in WAC 254-20-120 and AMC 17.50.060(D).
        b. If the Commission determines that a property does not meet all the criteria, then it shall deny the application.
    2. The Commission shall issue its decision in writing stating the facts and conclusions upon which the approvals or denials are based. Copies of the Commission’s decisions shall be filed with the Assessor and the state review board and shall include copies of the agreements, applications and supporting documentation as required by WAC 254-20-090(4) and AMC 17.50.060(C)
    3. The Commission shall monitor approved properties for continued compliance with the agreements throughout the 10-year special valuation period.
C. Criteria. 
    1. Historic Property Criteria. The class of historic property eligible to apply for Special Valuation means all properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or certified as contributing to a National Register Historic District which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 84.26 RCW, until the city becomes a Certified Local Government (CLG). The class of property eligible to apply for Special Valuation after the city becomes a CLG shall be limited to property listed on the city’s Historic Register which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in Chapter 84.26 RCW.
    2. Application Criteria. Complete applications shall consist of the following documentation:
        a. A legal description of the historic property;
        b. Comprehensive exterior and interior photographs of the historic property before and after rehabilitation;
        c. Architectural plans or other legible drawings depicting the completed rehabilitation work;
        d. A notarized affidavit attesting to the actual cost of the rehabilitation work completed prior to the date of application and the period of time during which the work was performed and documentation of both to be made available to the Commission upon request; and
        e. For properties located within historic districts, in addition to the standard application documentation, a statement from the Secretary of the Interior or appropriate local official, as specified in local administrative rules or by the local government, indicating the property is a certified historic structure is required.
    3. Property Review Criteria. In its review the Commission shall determine if the properties meet all the following criteria:
        a. The property is historic property;
        b. The property is included within a class of historic property determined eligible for Special Valuation by the city under AMC 17.50.040;
        c. The property has been rehabilitated at a cost which meets the definition set forth in RCW 84.26.020(2) and in AMC 17.50.020(I) within twenty-four months prior to the date of application; and
        d. The property has not been altered in any way which adversely affects those elements which qualify it as historically significant as determined by applying the Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties under WAC 254-20-100(1) and AMC 17.50.060(4).
    4. Rehabilitation and Maintenance Criteria. The Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties in WAC 254-20-100 shall be used by the Commission as minimum requirements for determining whether or not an historic property is eligible for special valuation and whether or not the property continues to be eligible for special valuation once it has been so classified.
D. Agreement. The historic preservation special valuation agreement in WAC 254-20-120 shall be used by the Commission as the minimum agreement necessary to comply with the requirements of RCW 84.26.050(2).
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

17.50.070 Appeals.
A. Appeals from decisions on applications for special property tax valuation. Any decision by the Commission on an application for classification as historic property eligible for special valuation may be appealed to superior court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598 in addition to any other remedy at law. Any decision on the disqualification of historic property eligible for special valuation, or any other dispute relating to the tax valuation of the property, may be appealed to the county board of equalization in accordance with RCW 84.40.038.
B. Appeals from historical register decisions. 
    1. Any Commission decision regarding a historical register designation, issuance or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness, or waiver of a Certificate of Appropriateness may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days from the date the decision is mailed to the applicant.
    2. Standing to appeal the Commission’s decision shall be limited to the applicant, the owner of property to which the Commission’s decision is directed, and any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the Commission’s decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or modification of the Commission’s decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following conditions are present:
        a. The Commission’s decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that person;
        b. That person's asserted interests are among those that the Commission was required to consider when it made its decision; and
        c. A city council decision in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the Commission’s decision.
    3. Appeals must be in writing and clearly state the errors of fact or law alleged.
    4. The appeal shall be reviewed by the City Council only on the records of the Commission.
    5. Any appeal from the decision of the City Council must be filed in Superior Court and served on the city no later than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date of the City Council’s decision or appeal is thereafter barred.
(Ord. 6496, Added, 03/10/2010)

Chapter 17.52 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS, MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS, CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER COMBINING DISTRICTS

Sections:
Article 1.  General Provisions
    17.52.010    Combining district regulations.
    17.52.020    Planned developments.
    17.52.030    Purpose.
    17.52.040    Authorization.
    17.52.050    Permitted uses.
    17.52.060    Open space requirements.
    17.52.070    Authority to modify zoning district development standards.
    17.52.080    Planned development design and development standards.
    17.52.090    Application procedures.
    17.52.100    Review procedure.
    17.52.110    Review criteria for planned developments.
    17.52.120    Time limits.
    17.52.130    Administration.
    17.52.140    Required maintenance provisions.
    17.52.150    Compliance with approved final plan.
Article 2.  Manufactured Homes Subdivisions
    17.52.160    Manufactured home subdivisions.
    17.52.170    Purpose.
    17.52.180    Authorization.
    17.52.190    General use regulations.
    17.52.200    Permitted uses within manufactured home subdivisions.
    17.52.210    Manufactured home design regulations.
    17.52.220    Manufactured home design regulations.
    17.52.230    Streets.
    17.52.240    Landscaping.
    17.52.250    Manufactured home subdivision application and approval procedure.
    17.52.260    Review criteria for manufactured home subdivisions.
Article 3.  Cluster Subdivisions
    17.52.270    Cluster subdivisions.
    17.52.280    Purpose.
    17.52.290    Authorization.
    17.52.300    Open space requirements.
    17.52.310    Allowed uses.
    17.52.320    Authority to modify zoning district development standards.
    17.52.330    Information provided on plats for cluster subdivisions.
    17.52.340    Compliance with approved final plat.
    17.52.350    Review criteria for cluster subdivisions.

Article 1. General Provisions

17.52.010 Combining district regulations.
Whenever any of the following combining districts are combined with a primary district, the regulations of the combining district(s) shall be in addition to those specified for the primary district and, in the case of conflict, the combining district provisions shall apply.
(Prior code § 11.018.050)

17.52.020 Planned developments.
The planned development combining district is intended to provide an alternative which will produce a development which is as good or better than that resulting from lot by lot development, by applying to large areas the same principles and purposes inherent in the regulations which provide for interrelated land uses and permit flexibility in design, location and height of building, location, size and use of open space, parking areas and circulation facilities, and to best utilize the potential of sites with special characteristics.
(Prior code § 11.018.100)

17.52.030 Purpose.
This chapter establishes procedures and regulations for flexibility in both the subdivision of property and the design of residential developments. Planned developments provide opportunities for decreased lot size, a greater mixture of residential types and the creation of open space. The goal is to provide a means to reduce to development costs while increasing amenities for residents, particularly common open space. The chapter also seeks to ensure that proposed developments under this chapter are compatible with the community.
(Prior code § 11.018.110)

17.52.040 Authorization.
Planned developments may be allowed within the R-S, R-M, R-P and C-R Zone; provided, that planned development approval is obtained as provided in this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.018.120)

17.52.050 Permitted uses.
A. Planned Developments Within Residential Zones. 
    1. Single-family dwellings;
    2. Duplexes and townhomes;
    3. Mobile homes which comply with the requirements of Sections 17.56.100 or 17.56.110;
    4. Accessory uses that are limited to:
        a. Recreational facilities,
        b. Public/semipublic uses,
        c. Real estate sales office;
    5. Retail sales serving developments greater than two hundred (200) units and no greater in area than five percent of the total development, including required parking.
B. Planned Developments Within the Commercial Zone. 
    1. All uses allowed as permitted uses in the underlying zone;
    2. Any other use; provided, it is specifically included on the approved final development plan for the planned development.
(Prior code § 11.018.130)

17.52.060 Open space requirements.
To compensate for any decrease in lot size, the development shall set aside common open space. The amount of usable open space to be provided shall be determined by:
A. Subtracting the required square footage requirement set forth in the underlying zoning district from the amount of each lot that is smaller than required; and then
B. Adding together the results obtained in subsection (A) of this section for each lot.
C. Maintenance of common open space shall be assured by covenants or other permanent legal mechanisms acceptable to the city attorney. Such covenants shall determine maintenance responsibilities and a financial plan for their payment.
D. Developments that exceed design features, open space requirements and recreational facilities for the underlying zone, or utilizes alternative energy conservation measures, may request an increase in allowed residential density for five percent or less.
(Prior code § 11.018.040)

17.52.070 Authority to modify zoning district development standards.
A. The following development standards of the underlying zoning district(s) may be modified or eliminated in a planned development: minimum lot size; minimum lot width; the front, rear and side yard setbacks; and building height.
B. The setback from shoreline and recreational requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) shall not be modified or eliminated.
(Prior code § 11.018.150)

17.52.080 Planned development design and development standards.
A. Minimum site area: one acre.
B. Common open space requirements shall be as follows:
    1. Common open space may consist of either natural vegetation, water, landscaping or improved recreational facilities. However, no greater than fifty (50) percent of the required density shall be in water, natural vegetation or slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent. A permanent legally enforceable provision for the retention and maintenance of the open space shall be provided.
    2. Common open space and recreation areas shall be provided in such a manner that they are usable and accessible to all residents of the subdivision, or to the public when deeded to the city.
C. Boundary Setbacks. Separation from the uses adjacent to the planned development shall include:
    1. The boundary of a planned development shall be designed to provide a transition between the planned development and adjacent uses. To lessen any impacts on the surrounding neighborhood, landscaping may be required by the planning commission or city council.
    2. A permanent open space area at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall border a planned development when abutting a single-family or multiple-family residential zone. The permanent open space shall be maintained in landscaping.
    3. Boundary setbacks and landscaping along the perimeter of a planned development shall be considered as required open space.
D. A six foot space shall be provided between all buildings to provide for privacy, light, air and uses.
E. Access meeting city standards shall be provided to all uses within a planned development.
F. All utilities, including electrical, telephone, and TV cables, shall be placed underground.
G. Standards for Recreational and Commercial Uses Within planned developments. 
    1. No intensive recreational or commercial use shall be allowed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the boundary to any adjacent residential zoning district.
    2. Planned developments in residential districts shall be designed to minimize the impacts of recreational and commercial uses on adjacent residences.
    3. Commercial uses in a planned development located in a residential zone shall be located adjacent to a collector or an arterial street.
H. All planned developments shall comply with Chapter 17.60 parking requirements.
(Prior code § 11.018.160)

17.52.090 Application procedures.
A. All applications for planned developments must be complete before the permit issuing authority is required to consider the application. An application is complete when it contains all of the information that is necessary for the permit issuing authority to evaluate a project. A completed application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
B. A complete preliminary development plan shall provide the following information:
    1. The boundaries of the site;
    2. All existing and proposed public and private streets and ways within and adjacent to the site. Private streets and ways shall be labeled as private streets or ways. Pedestrian ways shall be included on the development plan;
    3. The location and design of parking facilities, including points of ingress and egress;
    4. The proposed location, vertical height and envelope of all proposed buildings;
    5. The location, vertical height and envelope of all existing buildings;
    6. All proposed and existing lot lines;
    7. The number of proposed residential units and location of proposed commercial or industrial spaces in each building;
    8. The development plan or a separate document shall include a typical elevation of all buildings proposed for the planned development, except for single-family dwellings and duplexes;
    9. All open space and recreational areas;
    10. Information on existing and proposed topography shall be shown with contour intervals of no greater than five feet;
    11. A general plan of the proposed landscaping and the location and composition of the landscaping;
    12. All existing and proposed bodies of water, drainage ways and the proposed drainage improvements;
    13. The location of all existing and proposed utilities;
    14. Any areas, facilities or ways to be dedicated to the public shall be clearly marked on the development plan;
    15. The proposed treatment of the exterior boundary of the site;
    16. A vicinity map;
    17. Quantitative data for the following: total site area, public open space, private open space, usable recreation space, total number of dwelling units, number of dwelling units by type, and the acreage used for roads and vehicle accessways.
C. The application shall be submitted to the department. The department may request additional information which is necessary for review of the application.
(Ord. 6592 § 12, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.018.170)

17.52.100 Review procedure.
A. Preapplication Review. Prior to formally submitting an application, applicants are encouraged to contact the various city departments for information regarding development requirements.
B. Review of the Preliminary Development Plan. 
    1. An application containing the information required in Section 17.52.090 shall be submitted to the department.
    2. Final action shall be taken by the hearing examiner within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of a determination that the application is complete in accordance with RCW 36.70B.070. If the hearing examiner is unable to issue a final decision within the time limits provided for in this section, the hearing examiner shall provide written notice of this fact to the applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been meet and an estimated date for final action on the application. Exceptions to the one-hundred-twenty (120) day time limit include:
        a. Proposals which require amendments to the comprehensive plan or development regulations;
        b. Any time required to correct plans, perform studies or provide additional information. The director shall determine whether the information is adequate to resume the project and inform the applicant of this decision;
        c. Substantial project revisions made or requested by an applicant, in which case the one hundred (100) days will be calculated from the time that the city determines the revised application to be complete;
        d. All time required for the preparation and review of an environmental impact statement;
        e. Any period for administrative appeals of project permits;
        f. An extension of time mutually agreed upon in writing by the city and the applicant;
        g. Projects that require the approval of a new fully contained community, a master planned resort, or the siting of an essential public facility as provided in RCW 36.70B.090.
    3. The department shall place the application on the agenda for the first regularly scheduled or special public meeting of the planning commission which satisfies public notice requirements. Notice of the public meeting shall be in substantially the same form as provided in Section 17.64.080 for public hearings. The planning commission may continue its review of the application to its next regularly scheduled public meeting without further notice. The planning commission may hold an informal public hearing at its meeting to obtain comments from the public or other agencies. The proceedings may be recorded and comments from the public may be considered by the planning commission in preparing its report to the hearing examiner.
    4. The planning commission shall review the proposed planned development for compliance with the review criteria for planned developments and other city regulations. After its review, the planning commission shall report to the hearing examiner as to whether the planned development should be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The report and recommendation of the planning commission shall be completed and forwarded to the department within ninety (90) days from the determination that a completed application has been filed and shall be included in the department’s project permit application file.
    5. The hearing examiner shall schedule an open record public hearing on the application to receive testimony, documents, evidence, and other information to create the record on which the hearing examiner’s decision shall be made. Notice of the open record hearing shall be as provided in Section 17.64.080. The open record hearing shall be held after the planning commission has filed its report with the department, or within ninety (90) days after the determination that the application is complete, whichever occurs first.
    6. The hearing examiner shall determine whether the proposed planned development and rezone is in compliance with all city codes and policies. The hearing examiner may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The hearing examiner shall follow the procedure established by Chapter 2.30 in conducting the hearing and issuing a decision.
    7. The decision of the hearing examiner may be appealed within twenty-one (21) calendar days as provided in Section 2.30.130.
C. Review of the Final Development Plan. 
    1. A final development plan containing the information required in Section 17.52.090 shall be submitted to the department. All drawings pertaining to the final development plan shall be prepared on mylar sheets eight (8) by twenty-four (24) inches in dimension. A margin line shall be drawn completely around each sheet leaving an entirely blank margin of two and one-half (2.5) inches on the left and one-half (0.5) inch on all remaining sides. Written material shall be submitted unbound, typed and on eight and one-half (8.5) by eleven (11) inch paper. The information provided shall reflect the planned development as approved by the hearing examiner.
    2. The department shall review the final development plan for compliance with the approved preliminary development plan, including any required conditions. The department may approve minor adjustments; provided, the adjustments do not affect the basic character or arrangements of buildings, density of the development or minimum requirements for total open space. Minor adjustments may affect the precise dimensions or location of buildings and accesses; provided, the adjustments do not vary by more than ten (10) percent from the preliminary development plan.
    3. A final development plan meeting all requirements shall be signed by the department and placed on file with the city and the Grays Harbor County Auditor. Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the department to the hearing examiner within ten (10) days of the decision. No development shall occur on the subject property until the appeal period has expired.
    4. If the department determines the final development plan is not in compliance with the approved preliminary development plan, the applicant shall either resubmit the final development plan, appeal the determination to the hearing examiner, or withdraw from the planned development review process. All appeals shall be made within ten (10) days of the decision of the department.
    5. The department’s review of the final development plan shall be completed within forty-five (45) days of submittal. If no determination to accept or reject the final development plan is made within the forty-five (45) day period, the plan shall be automatically approved as presented.
    6. If an appeal of the department’s decision is filed, the department shall schedule the appeal for a public hearing before the hearing examiner as provided in Chapter 2.30. Notice of the hearing shall be as provided in Section 17.64.080. At such public hearing, the hearing examiner shall determine whether the final development plan is in compliance with the approved preliminary development plan. If the hearing examiner determines that compliance has been met, then the department shall be directed to approve the final development plan in accordance with subsection (C)(3) of this section. If the final development plan is determined by the hearing examiner not to comply with the approved preliminary development plan, then the final development plan shall be corrected accordingly by the applicant and resubmitted to the department.
D. Following approval of the final development plan, the department shall amend the zoning map of the city of Aberdeen to reflect the addition of the PD combining district to the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 6592 § 13, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6367, Amended, 09/22/2004. Prior code § 11.018.180)

17.52.110 Review criteria for planned developments.
Planned developments shall be evaluated in accordance with the following criteria:
A. Compliance with the policies of the comprehensive development plan and the requirements of this chapter.
B. Compatibility of the proposed planned development with other allowed uses within the vicinity.
The hearing examiner may require such conditions and improvements as are necessary to ensure the review criteria are satisfied.
(Ord. 6592 § 14, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.018.190)

17.52.120 Time limits.
A. If a final development plan is not submitted for approval within three years of the effective date of the ordinance approving the preliminary development plan, the ordinance authorizing the development shall expire.
B. If the department returns a final development plan for correction or revision, the preliminary development plan shall expire if a revised final development plan is not resubmitted to the department within two hundred forty (240) calendar days or the department's decision is not appealed within ten days.
C. If a complete building permit application has not been submitted for approval within three years of the date the final development plan was approved, the final development plan and the planned development combining district shall expire and the property shall revert to the zoning classification in effect upon the date of application for the preliminary development plan.
(Prior code § 11.018.200)

17.52.130 Administration.
Upon approval of the final development plan, the department may approve minor adjustments; provided, the adjustments do not affect the basic character or arrangements of buildings, density of the development or minimum requirements for total open space. Minor adjustments may affect the precise dimensions or location of buildings and accesses; provided, the adjustments do not vary by more than ten percent from the preliminary development plan.
(Prior code § 11.018.220)

17.52.140 Required maintenance provisions.
Agreements and/or plans for the permanent maintenance of all common areas or improvements within or serving a planned development which are not dedicated to and accepted by a public agency shall be provided within the final development plan. Such agreements shall clearly delineate maintenance responsibilities and financial arrangements. The city shall maintain no responsibility for enforcement of any maintenance provisions.
(Prior code § 11.018.230)

17.52.150 Compliance with approved final plan.
Any development or action failing to conform to the final development plan as approved constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.018.240)

Article 2. Manufactured Homes Subdivisions

17.52.160 Manufactured home subdivisions.
The division of land into five or more lots, tracts, parcels, or sites for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer to allow for the placement of mobile homes as defined in Chapter 17.04.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005. Prior code § 11.018.300)

17.52.170 Purpose.
The purpose is to increase housing choices for citizens by providing the opportunity for the placement of manufactured homes on individual lots within a unified development of five acres or more. Because manufactured home subdivisions restrict residential structures to manufactured homes only and require the use of landscaping buffers, the provisions of Section 17.56.100 do not apply. These regulations are intended to supplement RCW 58.17 and city subdivision ordinances.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.180 Authorization.
Manufactured home subdivisions shall be a special use in the single-family residential zoning district (R-S) and multiple-family residential zoning district (R-M).
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.190 General use regulations.
A manufactured home shall not be occupied or used for dwelling purposes within a mobile home subdivision until it is properly placed; connected to water, sewer and electrical utilities; complies with the requirements of the Department of Labor and Industries; complies with all requirements of this chapter; and a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.200 Permitted uses within manufactured home subdivisions.
Permitted uses within the manufactured home subdivisions include:
A. New and used manufactured homes;
B. Accessory buildings;
C. Recreational facilities and parks serving residents;
D. Retail sales serving developments greater than two hundred (200) units and no greater in area than five percent of the total development, including required parking;
E. Home occupations in accordance with Section 17.56.030 and beauty shops in accordance with Section 17.56.040.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.210 Manufactured home design regulations.
Site design regulations in manufactured home subdivisions are:
A. Minimum lot size: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Density: nine units per acre.
C. Minimum yards: the yards shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005. Prior code § 11.018.360)

17.52.220 Manufactured home design regulations.
A. M anufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with current state Department of labor and Industries standards (see, WAC 296-150B-200 through WAC 296-150B-255.
B. The tongue, axle, traffic safety lights, and any traffic warning signs shall be removed.
C. Skirting or extended exterior siding shall be installed between the ground and the mobile home siding.
D. Permanent landings, porches or decks with steps and handrails shall be affixed to all doors.
E. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home as provided by Section 17.60.030(B). Parking shall not be located within the front yard setback.
F. No more than one manufactured home shall be located on a lot.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.230 Streets.
Street design and construction standards shall be as required by the city of Aberdeen subdivision ordinance and the preliminary plat approval.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.240 Landscaping.
A Type II landscaping buffer at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be required to surround the perimeter of all manufactured home subdivisions. The ordinance approving the subdivision may specify the types and density of plannings and any fencing.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.250 Manufactured home subdivision application and approval procedure.
Manufactured home subdivision application and approval procedures shall be directed in the same manner as any long subdivision.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.52.260 Review criteria for manufactured home subdivisions.
Applications for manufactured home subdivisions shall be reviewed on the following criteria:
A. That the requirements under Chapter 58.17 RCW and other city ordinances have been satisfied;
B. That the development is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive development plan; and
C. The compatibility of the development and its uses with the surrounding vicinity.
The hearing examiner may require amendments, deletions or modifications to the proposed manufactured home subdivision as necessary to ensure the review criteria are met.
(Ord. 6592 § 15, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

Article 3. Cluster Subdivisions

17.52.270 Cluster subdivisions.
The division of land into five or more lots, tracts, parcels or sites for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer, which includes the process of crediting areas in common or public ownership to the individual lot in determining compliance with the minimum lot area requirements of the zone in which the subdivision is to be located.
(Prior code § 11.018.500)

17.52.280 Purpose.
In any single-family residential zone, a developer may create lots that are smaller than those required under the minimum lot size of individual zoning districts if such developer complies with the provisions of this chapter. The intent is to authorize the developer to decrease lot sizes with the land "saved" being utilized as usable open space, thereby lowering development costs and increasing the amenity of the project without increasing the density beyond what would be permissible if the land were subdivided into the size lots required under each zoning district.
(Prior code § 11.018.510)

17.52.290 Authorization.
Cluster subdivisions are special uses as authorized within individual zoning districts and are supplemental to the formal subdivision requirements of RCW 58.17 and city ordinances.
(Prior code § 11.018.520)

17.52.300 Open space requirements.
To compensate for the decrease in lot size, the development shall set aside common open space. The amount of usable open space that must be provided shall be determined by:
A. Subtracting the required square footage requirement set forth in the underlying zoning district from the amount of each lot that is smaller than required; and then, adding together the results obtained for each lot.
B. Maintenance of common open space shall be assured by covenants or other permanent legal mechanisms acceptable to the city attorney. Such covenants shall determine maintenance responsi-bilites and a financial plan for their payment.
(Prior code § 11.018.530)

17.52.310 Allowed uses.
A. Permitted Uses. Those uses listed as permitted uses in the underlying district.
B. Conditional Uses. Those uses listed as conditional uses in the underlying district provided a conditional use permit is obtained per Chapter 17.68.
(Prior code § 11.018.540)

17.52.320 Authority to modify zoning district development standards.
A. The following development standards of the underlying zoning district(s) may be modified or eliminated in a cluster subdivision: minimum lot width; the front, rear and side yard setbacks; and building height.
B. The minimum lot size in a cluster subdivision may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) percent of minimum lot size required in the underlying zoning district.
(Prior code § 11.018.550)

17.52.330 Information provided on plats for cluster subdivisions.
Subdivisions utilizing the cluster approach shall include the following data on the face of the subdivision plat:
A. Outlines of all building envelopes;
B. Number of housing units in each building;
C. Number of buildings on each lot;
D. Size and dimensions of all proposed lots;
E. Building setback lines;
F. Open space areas.
(Prior code § 11.018.560)

17.52.340 Compliance with approved final plat.
Any development or land division which fails to conform to the final plat as approved constitutes a violation of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.018.570)

17.52.350 Review criteria for cluster subdivisions.
Proposals for cluster subdivisions shall be reviewed on the following criteria:
A. That the requirements under Chapter 58.17 RCW and other city ordinances have been satisfied;
B. That the development is consistent with the policies of the comprehensive development plan; and
C. The compatibility of the development and its uses with the surrounding vicinity.
The hearing examiner may require amendments, deletions or modifications to the proposed cluster subdivision as necessary to ensure the review criteria are met.
(Ord. 6592 § 16, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.018.580)

Chapter 17.56 SPECIAL CONDITIONS

Sections:
17.56.010    Purpose.
17.56.020    Temporary amusements and public assembly.
17.56.025    Adult entertainment establishments.
17.56.030    Home occupations.
17.56.035    Sidewalk Sales.
17.56.040    Beauty shops.
17.56.045    Sidewalk Cafes.
17.56.050    Child care facilities.
17.56.060    Surface excavations.
17.56.070    Animals.
17.56.075    Storage of crude oil prohibited.
17.56.080    Storage of vehicles and other items.
17.56.090    Firewood manufacturing and sales.
17.56.095    Garage sales.
17.56.100    Requirements for manufactured homes to be sited on individual lots within residential districts.
17.56.110    Special manufactured home permit procedure.
17.56.120    Accessory buildings.
17.56.125    Assessory dwelling unit standards.
17.56.130    Temporary construction buildings.
17.56.140    Architectural features.
17.56.150    Fences, hedges and walls.
17.56.160    Required vision clearance triangle.
17.56.170    Residential decks.
17.56.180    Special height restrictions.
17.56.190    Lots divided by zoning districts.
17.56.200    Access requirement.
17.56.220    Cargo containers.

17.56.010 Purpose.
This chapter contains supplementary regulations applicable to all zoning districts by providing for the location and control of certain accessory uses and structures and general prohibitions applicable to all zoning districts.
(Ord. 6594 § 1, Amended, 07/13/2016. Prior code § 11.019.010)

17.56.020 Temporary amusements and public assembly.
A. Carnivals, circuses, amusement rides, revival tents or any temporary amusement, entertainment, public assembly or activity which does not involve public attendance for more than eighteen (18) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period may be permitted in commercial and industrial zoning districts after obtaining a temporary use permit from the Aberdeen city council. The permit may authorize the use for a maximum of thirty (30) days. The city council may require such conditions as are necessary to ensure compliance with the following criteria:
    1. There will be no interference with the activities of nearby residents or businesses;
    2. Traffic circulation will not be unnecessarily impeded and there will be provisions for adequate parking and means of ingress and egress;
    3. Sound or lighting will not be a nuisance to neighboring residents or businesses;
    4. There will be adequate provisions for water supply and sanitary facilities;
    5. Police and fire chief have approved the activity.
B. Outdoor public assemblies, music festivals, and similar uses which involve public attendance for more than eighteen (18) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period shall not be permitted.
(Prior code § 11.019.110)

17.56.025 Adult entertainment establishments.
Adult entertainment establishments must be located at least 2000 feet from each of the following:
1. Schools;
2. Childcare facilities;
3. Public parks;
4. Public libraries;
5. Previously licensed adult entertainment establishments.
(Ord. 6179, Added, 02/25/1998)

17.56.030 Home occupations.
A. A home occupation permit is the method used to allow and to regulate nonresidential activity within the city's residential districts.
B. Home occupations shall be an outright permitted use in all zoning districts and shall meet the following minimum requirements as a condition of approval:
    1. No person other than a resident of the dwelling unit is engaged or employed in the home occupation, and the number of residents employed in the home occupation shall not exceed two individuals.
    2. No sign is displayed which would be visible from outside the dwelling unit.
    3. No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, medical waste, radioactive, or other restricted materials are used or stored on the site.
    4. No outside operations, storage or display of materials or products.
    5. The total area utilized for home occupations on a premise shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of the total floor area of a residence.
    6. There will be no sales on the premises and no commercial truck deliveries in connection with the home occupation. Parcel delivery services may deliver parcels to the home occupation.
    7. No newspaper, radio or television service shall be used to advertise the location of home occupation to the general public.
    8. No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single residence or accessory building.
    9. No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noises, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the normal senses beyond the boundaries of the property.
    10. No repair of small engines or motor vehicles is permitted.
C. Permit Procedures. 
    1. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the department. The department will make a decision and notify the applicant in writing within fifteen (15) working days of the date the application is received.
    2. In cases where the department considers the application not within the scope of the home occupation criteria, the application will be denied.
    3. The department may impose any additional reasonable conditions upon the permit that are necessary to protect the residential character, health, safety and welfare of the surrounding neigh- borhood.
    4. The decision of the department concerning approval or revocation shall be final unless a written appeal is filed with the board of adjustment within ten calendar days of the decision. An appeal may only be filed by the applicant or persons residing within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property.
    5. Home occupation applicants shall permit a reasonable inspection of the premises by the department to determine compliance with this chapter.
D. Enforcement Procedures. 
    1. Any aggrieved person believing that a violation or violations of this chapter is occurring and who desires that action be taken by the city, shall notify the department in writing of such alleged violations. The department shall complete an investigation of the allegation(s) to determine the merits thereof.
    2. If the department determines that no violation as alleged or otherwise is occurring, then notification of that decision in writing shall be given to the complaining person.
    3. If the department determines that a violation is occurring or has occurred, then notification of that decision and a time for compliance shall be sent to both the violator and complaining person. The notification shall also state what action, if any, will be taken if compliance is not timely affected. If compliance is not met by the violator within the time frame provided, the department may revoke the home occupation permit.
E. Nonconforming Home Occupations. Home occupations lawfully established and maintained prior to the enactment of this chapter are exempt from the requirements of Section 17.56.030(C).
(Prior code § 11.019.120)

17.56.035 Sidewalk Sales.
Outdoor sales on public rights of way are permitted in the downtown commercial district subject to issuance of a permissive use permit under chapter 12.04 AMC.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

17.56.040 Beauty shops.
Beauty shops may be permitted in a residential zone subject to obtaining a home occupation permit and compliance with the conditions of Section 17.56.030 for home occupation and subject to compliance with the following additional conditions:
A. No more than one licensed operator may be employed in the home occupation and the licensed operator shall be a member of the resident family.
B. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in addition to any other required parking for the residence, with the number of spaces determined by the number of customers using the shop at any given time. The number of required parking spaces shall be included as a condition of permit issuance.
(Prior code § 11.019.130)

17.56.045 Sidewalk Cafes.
Outdoor food service areas on public rights of way or other public property may be permitted under chapter 12.42 AMC in commercial, industrial, waterfront, or institutional districts, and as conditional uses in all other districts.
(Ord. 6416, Added, 11/29/2006)

17.56.050 Child care facilities.
A. All child care facilities and providers shall meet Washington State child day care licensing requirements and shall register with the department by completing a child care registration form provided by the department prior to initiation of the use. Upon registration, the child care provider must be able to demonstrate compliance with the applicable conditions of the city code.
B. In all residential districts, home day care facilities and mini day care facilities shall comply with the following requirements:
    1. No structural or decorative alterations are allowed which will alter the residential character of an existing or proposed structure.
    2. Signs shall be less than six feet square.
    3. A safe passenger loading zone shall be provided. Day care centers shall provide parking as provided in Section 17.60.040.
(Prior code § 11.019.140)

17.56.060 Surface excavations.
A. The excavation of soil, gravel, sand, or any natural deposits by an owner of property for materials to be used exclusively for improvements to contiguous property under the same ownership shall be a permitted use in all zones outside of the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act.
B. The excavation of soil and other materials from the site of a building, street, or other construction project shall be a permitted use in all zones. For construction projects requiring a building permit, no excavation shall occur until a building permit is issued.
C. The commercial excavation of soil, gravel, sand or natural deposits, except as provided in Section 17.56.060(A) and (B), may be allowed in all zoning districts through the unclassified use permit procedure in Chapter 17.72.
D. Any excavation or landfill shall require a grading permit pursuant to Chapter 15.08, with the excavation or landfill of five hundred (500) cubic yards or more requiring an environmental review as provided in Chapter 14.04.
(Prior code § 11.019.150)

17.56.070 Animals.
A. Animals kept per dwelling unit within all residential districts shall be limited to three cats or three dogs, with the total number of animals not to exceed three over the age of six months.
B. Animals shall be permitted in the single-family residential district provided the requirements listed are fulfilled:
    1. Horses, ponies, mules, cows and other large mammals provided that the property has:
        a. At least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area per animal;
        b. A residence located on the property; and
        c. No structure providing shelter or care for such animals located within fifty (50) feet of any off-premises dwelling.
    2. Sheep, goats and similar animals provided that the property has:
        a. At least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land area per animal;
        b. A residence located on the property; and
        c. No structure providing shelter or care for such animals located within thirty (30) feet of any off-premises dwelling.
    3. Gnawing mammals such as rabbits, chinchillas and nutria; and fowl such as chickens, ducks and geese provided that:
        a. The penned animals are kept in the rear yard at least ten feet from a residence;
        b. The pens are located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any other residence; and
        c. Roosters are not allowed within city limits.
C. Additional dogs, cats, and other types of animals, except those listed in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, may be allowed as conditional uses as provided in Chapter 17.68.
(Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011. Prior code § 11.019.160)

17.56.075 Storage of crude oil prohibited.
A. Bulk crude oil storage and handling facilities shall not be located within the city limits of Aberdeen.
B. “Bulk crude oil storage and handling facility” means any structure, group of structures, equipment, or device that stores or transfers crude oil. The term does not include facilities that store and handle finished products derived from petroleum.
C. “Crude oil,” “crude,” and “crude petroleum” mean any naturally occurring liquid petroleum extracted from geological formations beneath the earth’s surface which require further refinement before consumer use, including conventional crude oil, heavy oil, extra heavy oil, tight oil, light tight oil, and oil sands/bitumen. The terms include material with USDOT placard numbers 1267 and 1288. The terms do not include biofuel.
(Ord. 6594 § 2, Added, 07/13/2016)

17.56.080 Storage of vehicles and other items.
A. No vehicle that is abandoned, discarded, junked, unlicensed, (missing either vehicle plates or current tabs), uninsured, partially dismantled, or otherwise inoperable may be stored outside of an enclosed building unless the vehicle is stored or parked on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced as required by RCW 46.80.130.
B. Except in those zoning districts which specifically allow outdoor sales or storage, recreational vehicles, campers, boats and similar items stored or parked on private property for more than five consecutive days shall be located within a building or behind the front setback line.
C. Firewood, logs or similar wood materials shall not be placed or stored within a required front yard setback for more than thirty (30) days in any one calendar year except in the industrial zoning district. Except in the industrial zoning district, firewood, logs or similar wood materials placed or stored within two feet of a lot line shall comply with the same height requirements as fences found in Section 17.56.150 and vision clearance triangles found in Section 17.56.160.
D. Junk or scrap material shall not be located or stored outside of a building except at a scrap or junk yard; such material may be located or stored at a construction site for not more than thirty (30) days after completion of the project.
E. Used building materials may be stored in a residential district provided the materials are located behind the front, side and rear yard setback lines and behind a six-foot high sight-obscuring fence.
(Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011; Ord. 6446, Amended, 09/12/2007. Prior code § 11.019.170)

17.56.090 Firewood manufacturing and sales.
The commercial cutting, splitting, seasoning, sales and storage of firewood shall only be allowed within the industrial zoning district; provided, that in any zoning district firewood may be stored, cut and split on the same lot as the residence where the firewood will be used for fuel.
(Prior code § 11.019.180)

17.56.095 Garage sales.
A. Garage sales are allowed under the following conditions:
    1. No residential premises shall have more than four (4) sales per calendar year, with no more than three (3) consecutive days for each sale, for a total of not more than twelve (12) days per calendar year;
    2. All displays of merchandise and sale activities must be conducted on the residential premises; and
    3. All signs advertising garage sales shall be removed twenty-four (24) hours after the sale is completed. Sale signs shall not be attached to any public structures, signs or traffic control devices or utility poles.
    4. The limit on sales per calendar year in subsection (A)(1) of this section does not include city-wide garage sale events sponsored or approved by the city to be held on a specific date.
B. Garage sales complying with the above conditions are a permitted accessory use to all residential and uses and do not require authorization from the community development director. A garage sale violating any of the above conditions shall be considered a commercial use and shall be subject to all applicable commercial licensing and land use restrictions.
(Ord. 6612 § 1, Amended, 09/27/2017; Ord. 6521, Added, 10/26/2011)

17.56.100 Requirements for manufactured homes to be sited on individual lots within residential districts.
All manufactured homes sited on individual lots outside of mobile home parks and subdivisions are permitted uses in all residential zones and shall be regulated for the purposes of siting in the same manner as site built homes, or factory built (modular) homes. In addition, manufactured homes shall meet each of the following standards:
A. The manufactured home shall be comprised of at least two fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than twelve feet wide by thirty-six feet long.
B. The manufactured home shall comply with the current installation requirements of the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the state of Washington Department of Labor and Industries (see, WAC 296-150M-0600 through WAC 296-150M-0670) and shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and the space from the bottom of the home to the ground be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which can either be load bearing or decorative.
C. Permanent steps with handrails shall be provided at all exits. The steps and handrails shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.
D. The tongue, axle, traffic safety lights and any traffic warning lights shall be removed.
E. The primary use of the manufactured home shall be residential.
F. No manufactured home shall be converted or changed from one type of manufactured home to another type. The manufactured home must comply with all design standards applicable to other homes within the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located.
G. The home is thermally equivalent to the state energy code.
H. T he siding shall be composed of exterior siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built International Residential Code single-family residences.
I. The roof shall have been originally constructed with, and shall now have, a composition of wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal 3:12 pitch.
J. Each manufactured home shall have a garage, carport or an on-site exterior storage structure with not less than forty (40) square feet of usable floor area and a minimum height of six feet.
K. The manufactured home must have been manufactured within five years of the date it is sited on the lot.
L. The manufactured home shall have eaves on the gable ends and shall have gutters and downspouts.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005. Prior code § 11.019.190)

17.56.110 Special manufactured home permit procedure.
Manufactured homes which do not comply with standards set forth in Section 17.56.100(I) through (L) may request a variance as provided in Chapter 17.68 before being sited on individual lots. In its review of such variance requests, the board of adjustment shall consider the aesthetic impact of a proposed variance upon the residential neighborhood.
(Ord. 6379, Amended, 04/27/2005)

17.56.120 Accessory buildings.
Detached accessory buildings shall comply with all yard and lot coverage requirements for the zone in which they are located provided:
A. Accessory buildings shall only be constructed concurrently with, or subsequent to, the dwelling or building housing the primary use.
B. No accessory building shall be located in a vision clearance triangle.
C. No detached accessory building shall be larger than 900 square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the living area of the primary residence, whichever is greater, to a maximum of 1,200 square feet.
D. No standard of this section shall be construed to permit maximum lot coverage standards to be exceeded.
(Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011. Prior code § 11.019.210)

17.56.125 Assessory dwelling unit standards.
A. The purpose of adopting uniform Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) standards is to:
    1. Provide homeowners with a means of obtaining rental income, companionship, security and services through tenants in either the ADU or the primary residence;
    2. Add affordable units to the existing housing;
    3. Make housing units available to moderate-income people who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes within the city;
    4. Develop housing units in single family neighborhoods that are appropriate for people at a variety of stages in the life cycle; and
    5. Protect neighborhood stability, property values and the single family residential appearance of the neighborhood by adopting uniform ADU standards.
B. Accessory dwelling units are permitted in residential and institutional zones subject to the following standards:
    1. At least one room of not less than 150 square feet of habitable area.
    2. At least one additional room of not less than 70 square feet of habitable area.
    3. At least one bathroom containing a toilet, a sink and a shower stall or bathtub.
    4. At least one, and no more than one, kitchen or cooking area containing at least a sink, a cooking appliance and a refrigeration unit.
    5. The maximum size of an ADU shall be 800 square feet of habitable area or thirty-five percent (35%) of the living area of the primary residence, whichever is smaller; except that, if the ADU is located on a single floor and there is not increase in the size of the primary residence, the Community Development Director may allow an increase in the permitted size to efficiently use the floor area.
    6. There shall be only one entrance on the front of the primary residence. Additional entrances are permitted at the side or rear of the house.
    7. One off-street parking space is required in addition to the off-street parking spaces required for the primary residence. Parking must be provided in the rear of the lot or on a driveway.
    8. An addition to a primary residence for the purpose of creating an ADU is a permitted use in residential and institutional zones.
    9. Either the primary residence or the ADU must be occupied by an owner of the property.
    10. In order to encourage the development of ADU’s for people with disabilities, the Building Official may allow reasonable deviation from the stated requirements to install features that facilitate accessibility.
C. Habitable Area. Habitable area shall be the sum of the following areas within one accessory dwelling unit:
    1. Living room, bedroom, dining room, family room and similar living areas with a ceiling height of a least seven feet six inches (7’ 6”).
    2. Kitchen, hallway, bathroom with a ceiling height of at least seven feet (7’).
    3. In rooms with sloping ceiling, at least one half of the room area need meet the ceiling height prescribed above, except that no area with a ceiling height of less than five feet (5’) shall be considered habitable area.
D. Application for an ADU shall be made in accordance with permit procedures established in the building code.
E. Accessory dwelling units shall adhere to the setback requirements of the zoning code.
F. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be separated from the residence and all other buildings by at least six feet (6’).
(Ord. 6521, Added, 10/26/2011)

17.56.130 Temporary construction buildings.
Temporary structures for the housing of tools and equipment, or containing supervisory offices in connection with construction on such projects, are permitted and shall be abated within thirty (30) days after completion of the project, or thirty (30) days after cessation of work.
(Prior code § 11.019.220)

17.56.140 Architectural features.
A. Chimneys, cornices, canopies, eaves or similar architectural features may project eighteen (18) inches into any required yard setback area.
B. Fire escapes, outside stairways and porches which are only enclosed up to the height of the handrails, may project not more than six feet into any required front yard, and not more than three feet into any required side or rear yard.
C. Accessible ramps may be constructed in any required yard areas.
(Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011. Prior code § 11.019.230)

17.56.150 Fences, hedges and walls.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that fences are located correctly with respect to property lines, rights-of-way, easements, setbacks and any other applicable boundaries. The city does not locate property lines or other applicable boundaries. Approval of a fence design and issuance of a fence permit do not clear the property owner of the responsibility to construct the fence at the appropriate location. Any fence proposed within a city right-of-way requires a permissive use permit prior to construction.
A. Purpose. The fence standards promote the positive benefits of fences without negatively impacting the community or endangering public or vehicle safety. Fences near streets are kept low in order to allow visibility into and out of the site and to ensure visibility for motorists and pedestrians. Fences in any side or rear yard setback area are limited in height so as to not conflict with the purpose for the setback.
B. Location, Height and Design. All fences where allowed by this title shall meet the following standards unless otherwise regulated within this code:
    1. Front Yard. Four (4) foot maximum height within front yard setback (which extends ten (10) or twenty (20) feet back from parcel line).
    2. Side Yard on a Street or Alley. Four (4) foot maximum height within a street side yard setback (which extends ten (10) feet back from parcel line).
    3. Side Yard Not on a Street or Alley. Six (6) foot maximum height within a nonstreet side yard setback (which extends five (5) feet back from parcel line).
    4. Rear Yard. Six (6) foot maximum height within a rear yard setback (which extends five (5) feet back from parcel line).
    5. Intersection of Street ROW with Street ROW. Three (3) foot maximum height within twenty (20) foot vision clearance triangle formed by the intersection of two (2) street rights-of-way.
    6. Intersection of Alley ROW with Street ROW or Alley ROW. Three (3) foot maximum height within ten (10) foot vision clearance triangle formed by the intersection of an alley right-of-way and a street right-of-way or by the intersection of two (2) alley rights-of-way.
    7. Fences and walls must be wholly contained on an owner’s property or located on a property line when both abutting property owners provide written agreement.
    8. Fences and walls must not be placed in a manner that hinders access to an easement.
    9. A permissive use permit (see Chapter 12.04) is required prior to fence construction in a city right-of-way or on city property.
    10. No maximum fence or wall height shall apply to nonresidential public playgrounds, public utility installations or other public installations when the city engineer has determined that no part of the construction endangers life, health or safety.
C. Permits Required. 
    1. A fence permit is required for all fences and walls.
    2. Fences over seven (7) feet tall, in addition to a fence permit, will also require engineering.
    3. A permissive use permit is required for fences, walls and hedges within a city right-of-way.
D. Industrial and Commercial Zones. 
    1. No maximum fence or wall height shall apply in general commercial, light industrial, industrial or waterfront development zones after the city engineer has determined that no part of the construction endangers life, health or safety;
    2. Any fence located in the downtown commercial zone shall be constructed with materials approved by the community development department, including any fencing that abuts the city sidewalk. Chain link fencing shall not be permitted in this zone unless the department determines that it is necessary for construction and/or demolition projects or for the safety of pedestrians and vehicles from a derelict building.
E. Allowed or Permitted Materials. 
    1. Fences may be constructed of wood, masonry, wire or similar materials employed by standard building practice. Fences may also be formed of dense landscaping. Fences shall not be made of tires, wheels, or salvage materials not originally designed as structural components of fences or buildings.
    2. Electrical fences are not permitted in the city except when used to contain grazing animals. Electric fences must be set back at least five (5) feet from the property line or shall be enclosed by additional fencing or other barriers which prevent access to the electric fence. Electric fences must have “electric fence” warning signs attached at no less than twenty (20) lineal foot intervals.
    3. Barbed wire razor wire, and other similar dangerous fence materials are unlawful in any residential zone except for use in security structures around utility or communications facilities, schools, or other special property uses with security requirements which cannot feasibly be addressed by other means or which have established state or federal standards calling for the use of such fencing material. In commercial and industrial zones, these fencing materials are permitted only atop a fence or wall at least six (6) feet above ground level or the surface of adjacent streets or sidewalks and where the fencing material does not overhang a public right-of-way.
    4. It is prohibited to treat, cause to be treated, or knowingly using materials that have been treated with chemicals or other substances designed to cause injury to humans for the construction of fences, except for the express purposes such treatment has been authorized.
F. Variance. An administrative approval, by the community development department, to exceed maximum fence height and other provisions of these standards, can be applied for with a variance application and under which all of the following conditions exist:
    1. Variation of existing grade on either side of the fence results in a fence lower than the maximum height as measured from the highest point of grade within five (5) feet of either side of the fence; or other special circumstances relating to the size, shape, topography, location or surroundings of the subject property warrant an exception to permit a fence comparable with use rights and privileges permitted to other properties in the vicinity and in the zone in which the subject property is located;
    2. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant;
    3. Granting of the exception will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon uses of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is located;
    4. The granting of the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone in which subject property is situated;
    5. The exception is the minimum necessary to provide the right and privileges described above;
    6. The city engineer may grant the applicant permission to exceed maximum fence height in a vision clearance triangle if the fence or any portion above three (3) feet is constructed of material that is at least fifty (50) percent open work (chain link, woven wire, etc.) and does not exceed a height of five (5) feet; and
    7. The city engineer may grant the applicant permission to exceed maximum fence height in the city right-of-way; provided, that the applicant has received approval through the city’s variance process.
G. Violation. All fences not in compliance with this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and are subject to abatement under Chapter 8.08 in addition to all penalties authorized by Chapter 17.96.
(Ord. 6631 § 1, Amended, 11/28/2018; Ord. 6521, Amended, 10/26/2011; Ord. 6425, Amended, 12/13/2006)

17.56.160 Required vision clearance triangle.
In all residential zoning districts, buildings, structures and fences shall not be constructed within:
A. A twenty-foot vision clearance triangle formed by the intersection of two street rights-of-way;
B. A ten-foot vision clearance triangle formed by the intersection of an alley and a street right-of-way.
(Prior code § 11.019.250)

17.56.170 Residential decks.
Decks are allowed as a residential accessory use; provided, that the deck, any portion of which is more than six feet above grade, shall comply with the setbacks of the zone in which it is located.
(Prior code § 11.019.260)

17.56.180 Special height restrictions.
A. Towers, gables, scenery lofts, cupolas, water tanks, mechanical appurtenances and similar structures may be erected on a building to a height greater than the limit established in any district; provided, that all such exceptions shall cover no more than fifteen (15) percent of the area of the building.
B. Chimneys, water tanks, civil defense sirens, flag poles, monuments, radio or TV antennas, government or public utility structures and similar freestanding structures may be erected to a height greater than the limit established by any zoning district; provided, the total of such exceptions on any one lot shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the site.
(Prior code § 11.019.270)

17.56.190 Lots divided by zoning districts.
When a lot is divided by two or more zoning districts, the zoning district which occupies the largest portion of the lot shall have jurisdiction. If a parcel is divided into two or more equal portions by zoning districts, the total area of the bisected lot shall acquire the same zone classification as that portion abutting the front lot line.
(Prior code § 11.019.280)

17.56.200 Access requirement.
A lot in a residential zoning district shall have at least twenty (20) feet of frontage on a public street.
(Prior code § 11.019.290)

17.56.220 Cargo containers.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for the placement of cargo containers and transport containers used for storage of material and/or equipment or for uses other than that for which they were primarily designed. It is the intent of this section to allow such use of cargo containers within non-residential zones only. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude temporary use of cargo containers on permitted construction sites during periods of construction.
B. Placement and use restrictions. Cargo containers shall comply with the detached accessory buildings standards in AMC 17.56.120, all applicable provisions of the building and fire codes, and the following restrictions on placement and use:
    1. Cargo containers placed in commercial zones must be placed in the side or rear yard setback area and in an approved designated area on the same property as the principal use and be included in the overall lot coverage. The cargo container storage area shall be enclosed by a security fence and be screened from abutting properties and rights-of-way by a sight-obscuring fence or effective landscaping at a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Temporary storage of cargo containers is a permitted use in commercial zones. Permanent installation or long-term use of cargo containers is not permitted in the commercial zones.
    2. Cargo containers placed in the industrial and institutional zones must be placed in the side or rear yard setback area and in an approved designated area on the same property as the principal use and be included in the overall lot coverage. The cargo container storage area shall be enclosed by a security fence and be screened from abutting properties and rights-of-way by a sight-obscuring fence or effective landscaping at a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Cargo containers placed in the industrial zones or the institutional zone for long-term or permanent placement may be required to be painted or stained a neutral shade which blends with the surrounding premises or nearby structures on the same property.
    3. Cargo containers shall not occupy required off-street parking, loading or landscaping areas.
    4. Cargo containers may not be stacked except in industrial zoning districts.
(Ord. 6521, Added, 10/26/2011)

Chapter 17.60 PARKING

Sections:
17.60.010    Purpose.
17.60.020    Parking requirements.
17.60.030    Residential uses.
17.60.040    Commercial uses.
17.60.050    Industrial uses.
17.60.060    Public and semi-public uses.
17.60.070    Mini-warehouses/self-service storage facilities.
17.60.080    Location of parking spaces.
17.60.090    Improvement of parking spaces and access to parking spaces.
17.60.100    Downtown areas exempt from non-residential off-street parking requirements.
17.60.110    Loading space.
17.60.120    Nonconforming parking regulations.
17.60.130    Heavy truck and heavy equipment yards not parking areas.
17.60.140    Joint use of required parking spaces.

17.60.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public welfare by requiring adequate numbers of parking spaces and improvements other than those on the public right-of-way to lessen the potential for impacts of developments on neighboring uses and the community.
(Prior code § 11.020.010)

17.60.020 Parking requirements.
A. The minimum required parking spaces for the various uses shall be as listed in Sections  17.60.030 through 17.60.070. Where the requirements produce a fractional result, the number shall be increased to the next highest unit. The parking requirement for a use not specifically mentioned in this chapter shall be the same as the use which is most similar. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirement of parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
B. All proposed new or altered parking areas within the city shall adhere to low impact development (LID) requirements in accordance with Section 13.70.130.
(Ord. 6644 § 5, Amended, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 11.020.020)

17.60.030 Residential uses.
A. Detached single-family residences: two spaces per dwelling unit. Driveways may be used for parking, but shall not be used for purposes of calculating required parking.
B. Mobile homes: two spaces per dwelling unit.
C. Duplexes and townhomes: two spaces per dwelling unit.
D. Multi-family residences (except those listed below): two spaces per dwelling unit.
E. Multi-family residences limited to low- and moderate-income residents: one space per dwelling unit.
F. Multi-family residences limited to residents age sixty (60) and/or older: one-half space per dwelling unit.
G. Rooming and boarding houses: one space for every bed.
H. Group homes and other supervised residential living arrangements: three spaces for every five beds, except for uses exclusively serving children under sixteen (16) and the handicapped, whereby one space shall be provided for every four beds.
I. Home occupations and beauty shop: See Sections 17.56.030 and 17.56.040.
J. Accessory dwellings: one space for the accessory dwelling in addition to the two spaces required for the main dwelling unit.
K. Bed and breakfast inns: one space for each guest room in addition to the number required for the dwelling.
(Prior code § 11.020.030)

17.60.040 Commercial uses.
A. Personal and professional services, financial services, beauty schools, veterinarians and business offices: one space for every three hundred (300) feet of gross floor area. Each drive-through window used shall provide reservoir lanes with a capacity for a minimum of five waiting vehicles.
B. Child care facilities in all districts: one space per employee plus one space per thirteen (13) children.
C. Convenience stores: one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four spaces.
D. Grocery stores, drug stores, department stores, self-service laundry and retail sales within a building: one space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four spaces.
E. Furniture, appliance, feed stores, secondhand sales and retail sales of bulky items: one space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four spaces.
F. Motor vehicle and mobile home sales, rental or repair: one space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four spaces.
G. Service stations: one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area of the building devoted primarily to gasoline sales operations and a reservoir lane with a capacity for five waiting vehicles.
H. Car washes: conveyor type, one space for every three employees on the maximum shift plus reservoir capacity equal to five times the capacity of the washing operation. Self-service type, two spaces for drying and cleaning purposes per stall plus two reservoir spaces in front of each stall.
I. Wholesale stores and machinery and equipment sales and repair: one space per employee on the peak shift with a minimum of four spaces.
J. Retail sales: one space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of four spaces.
K. Retail sales outside fully enclosed building: one space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor with a minimum of two spaces.
L. Hotels, motels and bed and breakfast inns: one space for each room or suite and one space for every employee on the largest shift with a minimum of four spaces.
M. Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor athletic courts, pool halls and exercise facilities: one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area; a minimum of four spaces required.
N. Outdoor recreation facilities such as miniature golf courses, skate board parks, and similar uses: one space per three hundred (300) square feet of activity area plus one space per two hundred (200) square feet of building gross floor area. Driving range: one space per tee plus one space per two hundred (200) square feet of building gross floor area; a minimum of four spaces required.
O. Social, fraternal clubs, lodges, union halls, and similar uses: one space for every four persons; a minimum of four spaces required.
P. Theaters: one space for every four seats with a minimum of four spaces.
Q. Dance halls and similar uses without fixed seats: one space for every four persons; a minimum of four spaces is required.
R. Restaurants, taverns, cocktail lounges with inside tables and only incidental take-out services: one space per seventy-five (75) feet of gross floor area. If the use has outside tables one additional space shall be provided for each four outside seats. A minimum of four spaces is required.
S. Drive-in restaurants where food is eaten in vehicles: one space per seventy-five (75) feet of gross floor building area and one space per employee on the largest shift. If the use has outside tables one additional space shall be provided for each four outside seats. Each drive-in window shall provide a reservoir lane with a capacity for five waiting vehicles. A minimum of four spaces total is required.
T. Kennels, animal boarding and similar uses: one space per employee on the largest shift and one space reserved for customer pick up.
U. Recreational vehicles in a recreational vehicle park: one space per recreational vehicle space with a minimum of four spaces.
(Prior code § 11.020.040)

17.60.050 Industrial uses.
Warehousing, fabricating, manufacturing, processing, and all other industrial uses: one space for every two employees on the largest shift with a minimum of four spaces.
(Prior code § 11.020.050)

17.60.060 Public and semi-public uses.
A. Elementary schools, middle schools and junior high schools: one space for every fifteen (15) students; provided, that the number of spaces for public assembly areas shall be determined separately.
B. High schools: one space for every ten students; provided, that the number of spaces for public assembly areas shall be determined separately.
C. Colleges, trade schools, business colleges: one space for every eight students; provided, that the number of spaces for public assembly areas shall be determined separately.
D. Public assembly areas including auditoriums, stadiums, performing halls and gymnasiums: one space for every four seats or if fixed seats are not provided, one space for every four persons. For public assembly areas included on a campus or school grounds, the number of spaces required for the school or college may be counted towards the spaces required for the public assembly area.
E. Libraries, museums, art galleries, art centers and similar uses: one space for every four hundred (400) square feet with a minimum of four spaces.
F. Churches, other places of worship, and mortuaries: one space for every five seats in the portion of the building uses for services.
G. Public and private hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent homes, nursing homes and rest homes: one space for every three patient beds and one additional space for each employee on the largest shift with a minimum of four spaces required.
H. Correction facilities: one space for every two employees on the largest shift.
(Prior code § 11.020.060)

17.60.070 Mini-warehouses/self-service storage facilities.
A. Self-service storage facilities with a live-in manager unit: one space per dwelling unit.
B. Self-service storage facilities which contain a leasing office: one space per two hundred (200) units, with a minimum of two spaces.
C. All self-service storage facilities shall meet the following aisle width requirements to accommodate parking and to provide for a proper lane of travel for vehicles:
    1. One-way aisles shall provide a fifteen-foot lane of travel with a ten-foot parking lane adjacent to storage units.
    2. Two-way aisles shall provide two twelve-foot lanes of travel with a ten-foot parking lane adjacent to storage units.
D. The parking lanes may be eliminated when the driveway does not serve storage units.
E. For storage units with no outside access and located in a single or multi-story building, two load/unload spaces shall be provided.
(Prior code § 11.020.070)

17.60.080 Location of parking spaces.
A. Required parking shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the use to be served and any off-site parking facility shall be connected to the use served by sidewalks ; except that residential parking in the downtown area defined in AMC 17.60.100 shall be physically contiguous and functionally connected to the use which it serves.
B. Parking areas serving uses not allowed in a residential zoning district shall not be located in a residential zoning district.
C. Parking shall not be located within the required front yard setback in the R-P and M-I zones. Parking for residential uses in all zones shall not be located within a required front yard. Where four or more residential units are served by the same parking lot, outdoor parking shall be no closer than five feet to any on—site building and not closer than three feet to any property line.
D. Prior to establishing off-site parking or any use to be served thereby, the property owner or owners shall file with the Grays Harbor County Auditor and with the city of Aberdeen Planning and Community Development Department a written agreement approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development providing for the off-site or shared parking use. The agreement shall be recorded on the title records of each affected property et to any property line.
(Ord. 6445, Amended, 08/29/2007)

17.60.090 Improvement of parking spaces and access to parking spaces.
All off-street parking required by this chapter shall be designed and constructed to comply with Chart P-1 and Figure P-2 for compliance with the following:
A. Any parking facility, including access driveways and aisles, for three or less vehicles shall meet the following minimum standards:
    1. The parking facility shall be minimally surfaced with three inches of crushed rock or of equivalent materials approved by the city engineer. See Figure P-3(A).
    2. The driveway access to the parking facility shall be hard surfaced, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, for a length of at least ten feet from the street surface.
B. Any parking facility, including access driveways and aisles, for four or more vehicles shall meet the following minimum standards:
    1. The parking facility, aisles and access driveways shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water to the satisfaction of the city engineer and in compliance with any approved drainage plan for the property.
    2. The parking facility, aisles and access driveways shall be surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, bituminous surface treatment or an equivalent satisfactory to the city engineer. See Figure P-3(B).
    3. The parking facility, aisles and access driveways shall be maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash, debris, pot-holes, etc., and the parking space lines and markings shall be kept clearly visible and distinct.
    4. The parking facilities and aisles shall not be located so as to require backing across a sidewalk or street.
    5. Individual parking spaces shall be designated by contrasting paint or markers. See Figure P-4.
    6. Where parking spaces front on a property line, wall, fence or sidewalk, wheel stops or similar barriers shall be provided. See Figure P-5.
    7. At least seventy (70) percent of the parking spaces shall be standard size stalls and thirty (30) percent or less of the parking spaces may be compact size stalls, as indicated by Chart P-1 and Figure P-2. All compact parking spaces shall be labeled "compact." See Figure P-4.
    8. Driveways providing access to a parking facility shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide for each lane of travel.
    9. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall meet the minimum standards as defined by the parking area dimensions chart and diagram.
    10. Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with parking areas. See Figure P-6.
    11. Parking facilities for nonresidential uses which will be used after dark shall be lighted; provided, the light source shall be designed to reflect light away from any adjoining residential premises or streets.
    12. Where parking spaces or an aisle serving a parking facility are adjacent to property zoned for residential uses, a sight-obscuring fence of at least four feet high shall be provided in addition to the required landscaping.
    13. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be consistent with the provisions of WAC 51.20 and design criteria of Figure P-7.
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
|    A    |      B       |      C      |      D      |       E       |       F       |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| PARKING | STALL WIDTH  | CURB LENGTH | STALL DEPTH |  AISLE WIDTH  |  UNIT DEPTH   |
|  ANGLE  |              |             |             |               |               |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| "       | "            | "           | "           | 1-WAY | 2-WAY | 1-WAY | 2-WAY |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| 0       | Desired 8.0* | 20.0*       | 8.0*        | 12.0  | 20.0  | **    | **    |
|         | Desired 9.0  | 22.5        | 9.0         | 12.0  | 20.0  | 30.0  | 38.0  |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| 30      | Desired 8.0* | 16.0*       | 15.0        | 10.0  | 20.0  | **    | **    |
|         | Desired 9.0  | 18.0        | 17.0        | 10.0  | 20.0  | 44.0  | 54.0  |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| 45      | Desired 8.0* | 11.5*       | 17.0        | 12.0  | 20.0  | **    | **    |
|         | Desired 9.0  | 12.5        | 19.5        | 12.0  | 20.0  | 51.0  | 59.0  |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| 60      | Desired 8.0* | 9.5*        | 18.0        | 18.0  | 20.0  | **    | **    |
|         | Desired 9.0  | 10.5        | 21.0        | 18.0  | 20.0  | 60.0  | 62.0  |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
| 90      | Desired 8.0* | 8.0*        | 16.0        | 23.0  | 23.0  | **    | **    |
|         | Desired 9.0  | 9.0         | 20.0        | 23.0  | 23.0  | 63.0  | 63.0  |
+---------+--------------+-------------+-------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+
*for compact stall only
**variable with compact and standard combinationsFigure P-2. 
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-2.jpg>]Figure P-3. 
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-3A.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-3B.jpg>]
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-4_001.jpg>] | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-4_002.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-4_003.jpg>] | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-4_004.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
+----------------------------------+------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  | 3”x10” timber    |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_001.jpg>] | steel post       | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_002.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  | 4” x 6” timber   |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_003.jpg>] |                  | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_004.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  | 4” x 4” timber & |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_005.jpg>] | brakt.           | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_006.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+------------------+----------------------------------+
|                                  | type C curbing   |                                  |
| [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_007.jpg>] |                  | [IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-5_008.jpg>] |
+----------------------------------+------------------+----------------------------------+Figure P-6. 
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-6_001.jpg>]
45°
ONE-WAY
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-6_002.jpg>]
90°
TWO-WAYFigure P-7. 
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-7_001.jpg>]
[IMAGE: <17.60.140_P-7_002.jpg>]
(Prior code § 11.020.090)

17.60.100 Downtown areas exempt from non-residential off-street parking requirements.
A. For the purpose of this Section, the downtown area shall be defined as that area enclosed by the following streets and rivers: west of the Wishkah River, west of Fuller Way, west of North "F" Street, south of the alley between First and Second Streets, east of "L" Street, and north of State Street until State Street meets "F" Street then south on "F" Street extended until it meets the Chehalis River, then along the north bank of the Chehalis River and the west bank of the Wishkah River.
B. Commercial, Industrial, public and semi-public uses within the downtown area designated in this section shall be exempt from the off-street parking requirements in AMC 17.60.040, 050 and 060; except, that any loading spaces required by Section 17.60.110 shall be provided. Residential uses within the downtown area shall comply with all off-street parking requirements.
C. If any use or building in the downtown area elects to provide parking or has been required to provide parking through any other review procedure, the parking facility, aisles and access driveways shall comply with the applicable requirements of AMC 17.60.090.
(Ord. 6445, Amended, 08/29/2007)

17.60.110 Loading space.
For commercial, industrial and public and semi-public buildings and uses of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area, space either inside or outside the building for the loading and unloading of goods and materials shall be provided. Such space shall not be less than ten feet wide, twenty-five (25) feet long, nor less than fifteen (15) feet in height if covered. Such space shall be provided with direct access to an alley or street.
(Prior code § 11.020.110)

17.60.120 Nonconforming parking regulations.
Parking facilities existing at the time of adoption of this title and accessory to a lawfully established use, but nonconforming as to the provisions of this chapter, shall satisfy the parking required for that specific use. Any change in the use, the building, and/or the parking facilities shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. An existing parking facility accessory to a lawfully established use shall not be reduced in area or redesigned so that the facility is less in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. If a building or use is expanded, parking as required by this chapter shall be provided for the expanded portion of the use. Any existing parking shall be retained or replaced by an equivalent or grater number of parking spaces or the number of spaces required by this chapter, whichever is less.
C. If the use of land or a building is changed to a use with a grater parking requirement, parking equal to the difference between the requirements for the existing and the proposed use, as contained herein, shall be provided in accordance with this chapter. Existing parking shall be retained or be replaced by an equivalent number of parking spaces or the number of spaces required by this chapter, whichever is less.
(Prior code § 11.020.120)

17.60.130 Heavy truck and heavy equipment yards not parking areas.
Heavy truck and equipment maintenance and storage areas shall not be considered parking areas for the purposes of this chapter and shall not have to comply with the improvement requirements of Section 17.60.090.
(Prior code § 11.020.130)

17.60.140 Joint use of required parking spaces.
A. One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the required space(s) assigned to one use may not be credited to any other use.
B. Developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking spaces but predominately operate at different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses.
C. A use or development wishing to take advantage of joint use of required parking spaces must present satisfactory written evidence that the use or development has the permission of the owner or the person in charge of the parking spaces to use such spaces. The evidence must specify the number of spaces the use or development is allowed to use. The principal of the use or development must sign an acknowledgement that the continuing validity of the permit depends on the continuing ability to provide the required number of spaces.
(Prior code § 11.020.140)

Chapter 17.62 MARIJUANA-RELATED USES

Sections:
17.62.010    Medical cannabis collective gardens - prohibited.
17.62.020    State licensed facilities - definitions.
17.62.030    Marijuana related uses.

17.62.010 Medical cannabis collective gardens - prohibited.
"Collective gardens" as defined in RCW 69.51A.085 are prohibited in the following zoning districts:
A. All Single-Family, Multiple-Family and mixed residential zones, including R-S, R-M, R-P, C-R MHS and CS;
B. The Waterfront Development Zone and all Commercial zones including C-D, C-G, and W-D;
C. All Light Industrial and Industrial zones, including I-L and I;
D. All Major Institution and Planned Unit Developments zones, including M-I and PD; and
E. Any new zoning district established after October 23, 2013. In addition to any other applicable remedy and/or penalty, any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by the corporation counsel under applicable provisions of this code or state law, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapters 1.12, 8.08 and 17.96 AMC.
(Ord. 6550, Added, 10/23/2013)

17.62.020 State licensed facilities - definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the definitions of "Marijuana", "Marijuana processor", Marijuana producer", Marijuana-infused products", "Marijuana retailer", and "Usable marijuana" set forth in RCW 69.50.101 are adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though fully set out.
(Ord. 6550, Added, 10/23/2013)

17.62.030 Marijuana related uses.
A. The production, processing and retailing of marijuana is and remains illegal under federal law. Nothing herein or as provided elsewhere in the ordinances of the city of Aberdeen is an authorization to circumvent federal law or provide permission to any person or entity to violate federal law. Only state-licensed marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers may locate in the city of Aberdeen and then only pursuant to a license issued by the state of Washington. The purpose of these provisions is solely to acknowledge the enactment by Washington voters of Initiative 502 and a state licensing procedure and to permit to, but only to, the extent required by state law marijuana producers, marijuana processors, and marijuana retailers to operate designated zones of the city.
B. Marijuana producers may be located only in the Light-Industrial (L-I) and Industrial (I) Districts of the city. Such facilities and uses may be located only at designated sites licensed by the state of Washington and fully conforming to state law.
C. Marijuana processors may locate only in the Light-Industrial (L-I) and Industrial (I) Districts of the city, but only at designated sites licensed by the state of Washington and fully conforming to state law.
D. Marijuana retailers may locate only in the General Commercial (C-G), Downtown Commercial (C-D), Light-Industrial (L-I) and Industrial (I) Districts of the city, at designated sites licensed by the state of Washington and fully conforming to state law.
E. In addition to any other applicable remedy and/or penalty, any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by the city attorney under the applicable provisions of this code or state law, including but not limited to the provisions of Chapters 1.12, 8.08, and 17.96 AMC.
(Ord. 6556, Amended, 04/23/2014; Ord. 6550, Added, 10/23/2013)

Chapter 17.64 AMENDMENTS AND REZONES

Sections:
17.64.010    Purpose.
17.64.020    Who may apply.
17.64.030    Submittal requirements.
17.64.040    Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
17.64.050    Rezone review procedure.
17.64.060    Decisions criteria.
17.64.070    Zoning map change.
17.64.080    Public hearing notice.
17.64.100    Limitation on refiling applications.
17.64.120    Concomitant agreement.
17.64.130    Time limitation on development under rezone.
17.64.140    Performance bond required.

17.64.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for changing the zoning of property or the text of the zoning ordinance to reflect changing circumstances, needs, and policies.
(Prior code § 11.021.010)

17.64.020 Who may apply.
A. Reclassification of Property. The property owner or an authorized agent of the owner may apply for a site-specific rezone (limited to property owned by the applicant and not of general applicability beyond the specific site). The city may initiate a rezone of general applicability (legislative decision) through action of the planning commission or by the city council passing a motion. Any person or department staff may request that the planning commission or city council initiate a rezone of general applicability. The department shall complete all necessary forms and provide all other information needed for applications initiated by the planning commission or city council.
B. Amendment to Zoning Regulations. Any person or the city may apply. For the city to apply, the amendment shall be initiated by a motion passed by either the planning commission or the city council. Any person or department staff may request that the planning commission or city council initiate an amendment. The department shall complete all necessary forms and provide all other information needed for applications initiated by the planning commission or city council.
(Ord. 6592 § 17, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.021.020)

17.64.030 Submittal requirements.
The department shall specify the application forms and submittal requirements, including the type, detail and number of copies for a rezone or amendment application and shall determine whether it is complete and acceptable for filing.
(Prior code § 11.021.020)

17.64.040 Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
The Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) policies and procedures will generally apply to actions taken under this chapter. Title 14 of the Aberdeen Municipal Code sets forth policies and procedures for SEPA compliance.
(Prior code § 11.021.040)

17.64.050 Rezone review procedure.
A. The applicant for a site-specific rezone shall submit an application and any required fees to the department. The application shall not be deemed filed until the department has determined that the application is complete and all required fees have been paid.
B. The department shall provide a copy of the application to the SEPA responsible official within five (5) working days of the determination that the application is complete. SEPA review shall then be conducted as provided by Chapter 14.04. A SEPA determination should be issued within sixty (60) days of the determination that a complete application has been filed.
C. The department shall schedule a hearing on the application before the hearing examiner as provided in Chapter 2.30. Notice of the public hearing shall be as provided in Section 17.64.080.
D. The hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing on the application as provided in Chapter 2.30.
E. The hearing examiner shall decide the application based on the decision criteria in Section 17.64.060 after conclusion of the open record public hearing.
F. The hearing examiner may condition the proposal or may adopt a more restrictive zoning district than requested in the application. If the hearing examiner considers placing modifications on an application to such an extent that it results in a proposal dissimilar from the description of the proposal contained in the hearing notice, the hearing examiner shall hold a new hearing on the modified proposal before approving the application. Notice of this public hearing shall be provided as required by Section 17.64.080.
G. The hearing examiner shall follow the procedure established by Chapter 2.30 in conducting the hearing and issuing a decision.
H. The hearing examiner’s decision should be issued within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of the determination that the application is complete in accordance with RCW 36.70B.070. If the hearing examiner is unable to issue a final decision within the time limits provided for in this section, written notice of this fact shall be provided to the applicant. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for final action on the application. The exceptions to the one-hundred-twenty (120) day time limit stated in Section 17.52.100 shall also apply, as appropriate, to rezone applications.
I. The applicant or any other party authorized to conduct activities or uses by the decision may commence activity or obtain other required approvals authorized by the decision of the hearing examiner on the application seven (7) days following the effective date of the hearing examiner’s decision. Activity commenced before the expiration of the full appeal period provided in Section 17.64.110 is at the sole risk of the applicant or other party undertaking the activity.
J. The decision of the hearing examiner on the application is the final decision of the city and may be appealed to the superior court as provided in Section 2.30.130.
(Ord. 6592 § 18, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6367, Amended, 09/22/2004)

17.64.060 Decisions criteria.
The city may approve applications for rezones as presented, with conditions or with modifications if each of the following criteria is met:
A. The rezone bears a substantial relationship to the public's health, safety or welfare.
B. The rezone is in accordance with the comprehensive development plan and the policies of the proposed zoning district.
C. The rezone is warranted because of changed circumstances, the need for additional property in the proposed zoning district, or because the proposed zoning district is appropriate for reasonable development of the subject property.
D. The subject property is suitable for development in general conformance with zoning standards under the proposed zoning district.
E. The rezone will benefit the city as a whole, but will not be substantially detrimental to nearby uses.
F. The rezone complies with all other applicable criteria and standards of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 11.021.060)

17.64.070 Zoning map change.
Following approval of a rezone and adoption of an ordinance, the department shall alter the zoning map of the city of Aberdeen to reflect the change in the zoning district. The department shall also indicate on the zoning map the number of the ordinance adopting the change and the county auditor filing number of any concomitant agreement.
(Prior code § 11.021.070)

17.64.080 Public hearing notice.
Notices for public hearings for rezones and amendments shall follow the procedures established in Chapter 17.68.
(Ord. 6610 § 2, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.021.080)

17.64.100 Limitation on refiling applications.
After a final decision denying an application, the department shall not accept any application for substantially the same proposal within one year from the date of denial.
(Prior code § 11.021.100)

17.64.120 Concomitant agreement.
The city of Aberdeen may require that the applicant enter into a concomitant agreement with the city as a condition of the rezone and may, through that agreement, impose conditions designed to mitigate potential impacts of the rezone and the development pursuant to the rezone. After approval, all concomitant agreements shall be filed for record with the real property records of the Grays Harbor County Auditor. All concomitant agreements filed for record shall contain a legal description of the real property to which they apply.
(Prior code § 11.021.020)

17.64.130 Time limitation on development under rezone.
The city may, in the ordinance approving the rezone, establish a reasonable time within which development of the subject property must begin. If the city has established such a time limitation, the rezone will be considered revoked if the applicant, or a successor in interest to the applicant, has not obtained the necessary development permits and completed substantial construction by the specified date.
(Prior code § 11.021.130)

17.64.140 Performance bond required.
In appropriate circumstances, the city may require a reasonable performance assurance device in conformance with Section 17.96.140 to assure compliance with the ordinance of the zoning regulations, any development conditions or any concomitant agreement.
(Prior code § 11.021.140)

Chapter 17.68 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES

Sections:
17.68.010    Scope.
17.68.020    Who may apply.
17.68.030    Submittal requirements.
17.68.040    Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
17.68.050    Conditional use permit and variance review procedure.
17.68.060    Conditional use permit decision criteria.
17.68.065    Variances.
17.68.070    Variance application and decision criteria.
17.68.075    Notification of variance application.
17.68.080    Issuance of variances.
17.68.090    Public hearing notice.
17.68.130    Time limitation on conditional use permits and variances.
17.68.140    Expiration of conditional use permit.
17.68.150    Performance bond required.
17.68.160    Transfer of a conditional use permit or variance.
17.68.170    Expansion of a conditional use.

17.68.010 Scope.
This chapter establishes the procedure and criteria utilized in processing applications for conditional use permits and variances under Title 17 and Chapter 14.100 AMC (critical areas ordinance) .
(Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

17.68.020 Who may apply.
The property owner or a lessee may apply for a conditional use permit or a variance.
(Prior code § 11.022.020)

17.68.030 Submittal requirements.
The department shall specify the application forms and submittal requirements including the type, detail and number of copies for a conditional use permit and variance to be deemed complete and to be accepted for filing.
(Prior code § 11.022.030)

17.68.040 Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
The Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) may apply to certain actions taken under this chapter. See Title 14 for procedures.
(Prior code § 11.022.040)

17.68.050 Conditional use permit and variance review procedure.
A. The applicant shall submit an application and any required fees to the department. The department shall review the application and determine if it is complete. The application shall not be deemed filed until the department determines the application is complete and all required fees are paid.
B. Within five (5) working days of the filing of the application, the department shall provide a copy of the application to the SEPA responsible official for threshold review.
C. After a SEPA exemption, SEPA determination of nonsignificance, or SEPA final environmental impact statement has been issued for an application, the department shall schedule a public hearing before the hearing examiner as provided in Chapter 2.30.
D. The hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing on the application as provided in Chapter 2.30.
E. The hearing examiner shall decide applications for conditional use permits on the decision criteria in Section 17.68.060. The hearing examiner may condition or modify the proposal. If the hearing examiner considers placing modifications on an application to such an extent that it results in a proposal dissimilar from the description of the proposal contained in the hearing notice, the hearing examiner shall hold a new hearing on the modified proposal before approving the application. Notice of this hearing shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.78.
F. The hearing examiner shall follow the procedure established by Chapter 2.30 in conducting the hearing and issuing a decision.
G. The decision of the hearing examiner on the application may be appealed to the superior court as provided in Section 2.30.130.
H. The applicant or any other party authorized to conduct activities or uses by the decision of the hearing examiner may commence or obtain additional required development permits seven (7) days after the approval of the application. Activity commenced before the expiration of the full appeal period provided in Section 17.68.120 is at the sole risk of the applicant or other party.
(Ord. 6610 § 3, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6592 § 19, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009. Prior code § 11.022.050)

17.68.060 Conditional use permit decision criteria.
A. The hearing examiner shall evaluate applications for conditional use permits, excepting for those requesting restoration of destroyed nonconforming uses, for conformance with all of the following criteria:
    1. The proposed use is compatible with existing and potential uses in the general area;
    2. The proposed use will be served by adequate public facilities, including streets, fire protection, water, storm water and sanitary sewer;
    3. The proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive development plan;
    4. The proposed use complies with the requirements of the zoning district where it will be located. A conditional use permit shall not be used to reduce the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is to locate;
    5. The conditional use permit complies with all other applicable criteria and standards of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
B. The hearing examiner shall evaluate applications for conditional use permits involving restoration of destroyed nonconforming uses for conformance with all of the following criteria:
    1. The use bears a substantial relationship to the public health, safety or welfare;
    2. The use has value for the community as a whole;
    3. Relocating the use is either not possible or would create a hardship beyond the purchase and development of real property and the construction of improvements;
    4. The use is compatible with existing and potential uses in the general area;
    5. The design and layout of any structure(s) or use(s) is harmonious and appropriate in design, character and appearance with the existing character and quality of development in the immediate vicinity of the subject property, including the physical characteristics of the subject property;
    6. Adequate public facilities, including streets, fire protection, water, storm water and sanitary sewer, are available to service the use;
    7. There will not be an increase in the nonconformity of the use above the level existing at the time the use was destroyed;
    8. A conditional use permit shall not be used to further reduce the requirements of the zoning district where the use is located beyond that which existed at the time the use was destroyed;
    9. The conditional use permit complies with all other provisions of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Ord. 6610 § 4, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.022.060)

17.68.065 Variances.
Variances from the terms of the zoning ordinances shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. A variance shall not be granted for a parcel which authorizes a use which is not otherwise authorized. A variance shall not be granted to any administrative or procedural provision of the zoning regulations.
(Ord. 6610 § 5, Added, 08/08/2017)

17.68.070 Variance application and decision criteria.
The owner or his/her agent may make application for a variance on a form prescribed by the director and submitted to the community development department accompanied by the required fee and such plans, elevations and other information as are required for evaluation of the applicant’s request, and written statements and evidence showing that:
A. Because of special circumstances or conditions, applicable to the property, building, or use, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classifications and that the special circumstances or conditions were not created or caused by the applicant.
B. Granting the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.
C. Granting of the variance does not authorize a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the property.
D. Granting of the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights of the applicant.
E. Granting of the variance will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be substantially detrimental to the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the applicant and will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be substantially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood.
(Ord. 6610 § 6, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.022.070)

17.68.075 Notification of variance application.
At least ten (10) days prior to taking action on a variance application, the community development department shall notify adjacent property owners either in person or by mail. Such notification shall indicate the nature and location of the requested variance and shall solicit an expression of opinion.
(Ord. 6610 § 7, Added, 08/08/2017)

17.68.080 Issuance of variances.
Variances may be granted by the director or referred to the hearing examiner. A variance may only be granted or conditionally granted when findings consistent with the criteria of Section 17.68.070 can be made. Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application, the director shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the criteria are met and shall grant, conditionally grant, deny or refer the application to the hearing examiner. A variance application shall be referred to the hearing examiner if the applicant is also applying for a rezone, conditional use, or other land use activity that requires approval by the hearing examiner.
(Ord. 6610 § 8, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.022.080)

17.68.090 Public hearing notice.
Public notice of any hearing before the hearing examiner shall be published in accordance with Chapter 17.78.
(Ord. 6610 § 9, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6592 § 20, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.022.090)

17.68.130 Time limitation on conditional use permits and variances.
A conditional use permit or variance shall become null and void if not exercised within the time limit specified or, if no time limit is specified, within three (3) years of the date of approval or the date of the final resolution of any appeals, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 6610 § 11, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.022.130)

17.68.140 Expiration of conditional use permit.
A conditional use permit shall become null and void if the use or activity authorized by the permit has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year or more.
(Prior code § 11.02.140)

17.68.150 Performance bond required.
The hearing examiner may require a performance bond as provided in Section 17.96.140 as a condition of approval for a conditional use permit to ensure conformance with the hearing examiner’s decision.
(Ord. 6610 § 12, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.022.150)

17.68.160 Transfer of a conditional use permit or variance.
An approved conditional use permit or variance may be transferred from the original applicant to any successors in interest to the applicant for the property for which the conditional use permit or variance was approved; provided, that all of the conditions and requirements of the approved permit or variance shall continue in effect as long as the use is pursued.
(Prior code § 11.022.160)

17.68.170 Expansion of a conditional use.
A conditional use shall not be extended, expanded or intensified beyond the limits allowed in the approved permit unless a new permit is approved in compliance with this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.022.170)

Chapter 17.72 SPECIAL USE PERMITS AND UNCLASSIFIED USE PERMITS

Sections:
17.72.010    Special use permit—Purpose.
17.72.020    Unclassified use permit—Purpose.
17.72.030    Who may apply.
17.72.040    Submittal requirements.
17.72.050    Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
17.72.060    Special use and unclassified use review procedure.
17.72.070    Special use permit decision criteria.
17.72.080    Unclassified use permit decision criteria.
17.72.090    Public hearing notice.
17.72.110    Limitation on refiling applications.
17.72.130    Time limitation on development under special use or unclassified use permit.
17.72.140    Expiration of special use permit and unclassified use permit.
17.72.150    Performance bond required.
17.72.160    Transfer of a special use permit or unclassified use permit.
17.72.170    Surface excavation exemptions.
17.72.180    Requirements and standards for surface excavations.
17.72.190    Existing surface excavations to obtain an unclassified use permit within two years of adoption of this title.
17.72.200    Expansion of a special use or unclassified use.

17.72.010 Special use permit—Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to provide a permit review process that evaluates those uses listed as "special uses" within zoning districts to ensure their compatibility with other uses in the same zoning district. Special use permits are issued upon the recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the city council and typically involve a concurrent subdivision action.
(Prior code § 11.023.010)

17.72.020 Unclassified use permit—Purpose.
All of the uses regulated in this chapter, and all matters directly related thereto, are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their being included automatically in any classes of use as set forth in the various classifications herein defined, and the authority for the location and operation thereof shall be subject to review and the issuance of a use permit. The purpose of a review shall be to determine that the characteristics of any such use shall not be unreasonably incompatible with the type of uses permitted in surrounding areas and for the further purpose of stipulating such conditions as may reasonably assure that the basic purpose of this chapter shall be served.
(Prior code § 11.023.020)

17.72.030 Who may apply.
The property owner, lessee or the authorized agent of the property owner or lessee. The property owner or lessee must sign the application.
(Prior code § 11.023.030)

17.72.040 Submittal requirements.
A. The department shall specify the application forms and submittal requirements for a special use or unclassified use permit application.
B. Applications for an unclassified use permit for a surface excavation shall include the following details:
    1. The excavation and processing methods to be used, including the kinds of equipment to be operated on the site, timetables for excavation, measures to prevent air, soil and water pollution, and measures to screen the excavation and processing operations;
    2. Reclamation method and actions to be taken, including storm water runoff control measures, grading contours, and a time schedule for completing the reclamation activities;
    3. Streets and roads to be used in hauling, including what kinds of materials will be hauled, equipment used, estimated load weights, and measures to be taken to protect and restore public roads used to haul materials to and from the excavation.
C. The department may waive specific submittal requirements determined to be unnecessary for review of an application.
(Prior code § 11.023.040)

17.72.050 Washington State Environmental Policy Act review.
The Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) may apply to actions taken under this chapter. See Title 14 for procedures.
(Prior code § 11.023.050)

17.72.060 Special use and unclassified use review procedure.
A. The applicant shall submit an application and any required fees to the department. The department shall review the application and determine if it is complete. The application shall not be deemed filed until the department determines the application is complete and all required fees are paid.
B. Within five (5) working days of the filing of the application, the department shall provide a copy of the application to the SEPA responsible official for review.
C. After a SEPA exemption, determination of nonsignificance, or final environmental impact statement has been issued for an application, the department shall schedule a public hearing before the hearing examiner as provided in Chapter 2.30. The department shall give notice of the hearing as provided in Section 17.72.090.
D. The hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing on the application and issue a decision as provided in Chapter 2.30. The decision on a special use permit shall be based on the decision criteria in Section 17.72.070. The decision on an unclassified use permit shall be based on the decision criteria in Section 17.72.080.
E. The applicant or any other party authorized to conduct activities or uses by the decision may begin activity or obtain other required approvals authorized by the decision of the hearing examiner on the application seven (7) days after the decision. Activity commenced before the expiration of the full appeal period provided in Section 2.30.130 is at the sole risk of the applicant or other party.
F. The decision of the hearing examiner on the application is the final decision of the city and may be appealed to the superior court as provided in Section 2.30.130.
(Ord. 6592 § 21, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.023.060)

17.72.070 Special use permit decision criteria.
The city shall evaluate special use permit applications based upon meeting all of the following criteria:
A. The proposed use is similar in design, character and appearance with the immediate vicinity and the subject property;
B. The proposed use will be served by adequate public facilities, including streets, fire protection, water, storm water and sanitary sewer;
C. The proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive development plan;
D. The proposed use complies with the requirements of the zoning district where it is located. A special use permit shall not be used to reduce the requirements of the zoning district where the use is to locate;
E. The proposed use complies with all other provisions of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 11.023.080)

17.72.080 Unclassified use permit decision criteria.
The city shall evaluate unclassified use permit applications based upon the capability to be conditioned to meet all of the following criteria:
A. The proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning district;
B. The proposed use is similar in design, character and appearance with the immediate vicinity and the subject property;
C. The proposed use is compatible with existing and potential uses in the general area;
D. The proposed use will be served by adequate public facilities, including streets, fire protection, water, storm water and sanitary sewer;
E. The proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive development plan;
F. If the proposed use is a surface excavation, the surface excavation complies with the requirements and standards in Section 17.72.180;
G. The proposed use complies with the requirements of the zoning district where it is located. An unclassified use permit shall not be used to reduce the requirements of the zoning district;
H. The unclassified use permit complies with all other requirements of the Aberdeen Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 11.023.080)

17.72.090 Public hearing notice.
Notices for public hearings for special use and unclassified use permits shall follow the procedures established in Chapter 17.68.
(Ord. 6610 § 13, Amended, 08/08/2017. Prior code § 11.023.090)

17.72.110 Limitation on refiling applications.
After a final decision denying an application, the department shall not accept any further application for substantially the same proposal for one year from the date of the denial.
(Prior code § 11.023.110)

17.72.130 Time limitation on development under special use or unclassified use permit.
A special use permit or unclassified use permit shall become null and void if not exercised within the time limit specified in the permit or, if no time limit is specified, within three years of the date of approval by the city council or the date of the final resolution of any appeals, whichever is later.
(Prior code § 11.023.130)

17.72.140 Expiration of special use permit and unclassified use permit.
A. A special use or unclassified use permit shall become null and void if the use or activity authorized by the permit has been abandoned or discontinued for more than one year.
B. Unclassified use permits authorizing surface excavations shall not be granted for more than five years at any one time. If the excavation is to continue beyond five years, a new application must be submitted and approved in compliance with this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.023.140)

17.72.150 Performance bond required.
A. The city council may require a reasonable performance bond as provided in Section 17.96.140 as a condition of approval to ensure conformance with its decision.
B. Surface excavation activities shall not begin until a bond to guarantee completion of an approved reclamation plan has been obtained by the applicant. If a Washington Department of Natural Resources (DNR) surface excavation permit is required for the project, the city council may allow substitution of the DNR bond to meet this requirement. The bond shall be maintained in force until reclamation is complete and approved by the department.
(Prior code § 11.023.150)

17.72.160 Transfer of a special use permit or unclassified use permit.
An approved special use or unclassified use permit may be transferred from the original applicant to any successors in interest to the applicant for the property which the permit was approved; provided, however, that all of the conditions and requirements of the approved permit shall continue in effect as long as the use continues, or in the case of surface excavations, the site is reclaimed.
(Prior code § 11.023.160)

17.72.170 Surface excavation exemptions.
An unclassified use permit shall not be required for:
A. Surface excavations by an owner of property for materials to be used exclusively for improvements to property under the same ownership;
B. Excavations for the construction of structures for which a building permit has been issued.
(Prior code § 11.023.170)

17.72.180 Requirements and standards for surface excavations.
All surface excavations authorized through an unclassified use permit shall comply with the following requirements and standards:
A. The surface excavation shall be screened from all adjacent state highways, parks, schools, residential areas and commercial areas as required in Chapter 17.88.
B. The operation shall maintain noise levels no greater than those established in the comprehensive development plan and Chapter 173-60 of the Washington Administrative Code.
C. Operations shall be limited to those hours set by the city council.
D. All surface and ground water discharges from the property where the excavation occurs shall comply with state of Washington standards both during operational and reclamation phases.
E. Peak storm water runoff shall not be increased beyond levels naturally occurring at the site prior to commencement of excavation.
F. Excavations made to depths of two feet or more below the low groundwater mark that create a standing body of water shall be reclaimed in the following manner:
    1. All banks of soil, sand, gravel or other unconsolidated materials shall be sloped to four feet below the summer low water level at a grade no greater than a 3:1 ratio;
    2. Portions of solid rock banks shall be stepped or other measures taken to permit a person to escape from the water.
G. Side slopes of unconsolidated materials within an excavation pit shall be no steeper than one and one-half feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
H. The slopes of walls in rock or other consolidated materials shall have no prescribed angle of slope, but where a hazardous condition is created that is not indigenous to the immediate area, the quarry shall be either graded or backfilled to a slope of one foot horizontal to one foot vertical.
I. The peaks and depressions of all spoil banks, berms, or dikes shall be reduced to a gently rolling topography to minimize erosion and to resemble contours within the general vicinity.
J. Stagnant water shall not be allowed to collect or remain on the surface excavation area. Drainage systems shall be constructed or installed to avoid such conditions if natural drainage is not possible.
K. All materials used in reclamation of the excavation site shall be of nonhazardous, nonnoxious, nonreactive, nonflammable, noncombustible solids unless a permit has been granted for a construction material or sanitary landfill.
L. Acid-forming materials within excavation sites shall be covered with at least two feet of clean fill to prevent the water pollution. The final surface covering shall be graded so that surface water will drain away from the disposal area.
M. The site shall be revegetated as appropriate to the future use of the site.
N. Surface excavations disturbing streams must comply with requirements established by the state of Washington for excavation, reclamation, and landscaping.
O. Soils susceptible to erosion must be shielded and/or contained on the site.
P. Dust shall be controlled so that none drifts beyond the boundaries of the property of the excavation.
Q. Excavation is permitted only for the amount provided in the permit.
R. All reclamation activities shall be completed within two years of the cessation of excavation.
S. The property owner and any successors in interest shall maintain the reclaimed site in compliance with the reclamation plan and any conditions of approval. Any modifications to the approved reclamation plan shall be processed as a new permit application.
T. Reclamation plans shall be initiated at the earliest possible time after completion or discontinuance of mining any segment of the excavation.
U. The types of landscaping utilized around the excavation site should be compatible with nearby uses.
(Prior code § 11.023.180)

17.72.190 Existing surface excavations to obtain an unclassified use permit within two years of adoption of this title.
Except for those surface excavations exempted in Section 17.72.170, all existing surface excavations within the city of Aberdeen shall obtain an unclassified use permit in compliance with this chapter or cease operations within two years of the effective date of this title. Any surface excavations ceasing operation shall comply with any reclamation requirements applicable to development.
(Prior code § 11.023.190)

17.72.200 Expansion of a special use or unclassified use.
A special use or unclassified use shall not be extended, expanded or intensified beyond the limits allowed in the approved permit unless a new permit is approved in compliance with this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.023.200)

Chapter 17.76 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS

Sections:
17.76.010    Scope – Definitions.
17.76.020    Who may appeal.
17.76.030    Submittal requirements.
17.76.040    Appeal period for administrative decisions.
17.76.050    Stay of enforcement during appeal.
17.76.060    Appeal procedures for administrative decisions.
17.76.070    Appeal criterion.
17.76.080    Public hearing notice.

17.76.010 Scope – Definitions.
This chapter establishes procedures and limitations for appealing administrative decisions under Title 17, Zoning, and Chapter 14.100, Critical Area Protection, to the hearing examiner.
(Ord. 6610 § 14, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6592 § 22, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

17.76.020 Who may appeal.
Any aggrieved person(s) who has applied for a permit approval, requested an administrative decision, or has been adversely affected by an administrative decision, may appeal.
(Prior code § 11.024.020)

17.76.030 Submittal requirements.
A person appealing the decision or order of the department shall submit to the department the required fee and a written statement containing the facts that:
A. Establish the appellant's right to appeal the decision;
B. The specific exceptions and objections to the decision or order that is being appealed;
C. The relief expected from the decision being appealed;
D. Any other information as is reasonably necessary to make a decision on the appeal.
(Prior code § 11.024.030)

17.76.040 Appeal period for administrative decisions.
A written statement appealing the decision or order must be filed with the department no later than thirty (30) days from the date the decision is mailed or otherwise becomes effective. All development, construction and/or uses performed during this appeal period are at the risk of the person or persons undertaking the activity or use.
(Prior code § 11.024.040)

17.76.050 Stay of enforcement during appeal.
The filing of an appeal stays all actions by the department from seeking enforcement or compliance against the decision being appealed; provided, however, that the department may require that the activity or use cease or be removed if its continuance would result in an imminent threat to life or property. In such an event, the stay will remain in place until a decision is reached by the hearing examiner.
(Ord. 6610 § 15, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

17.76.060 Appeal procedures for administrative decisions.
A. The appeal shall be commenced by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with Section 17.76.030. The appeal shall be conducted, and a decision issued, in accordance with Chapter 2.30, Land Use Hearing Examiner.
B. The appellant or any other party authorized to conduct activities or uses by the decision may commence activity or obtain other required approvals authorized by the decision of the hearing examiner on the appeal seven (7) days following the decision on the appeal. Activity commenced before the expiration of the full appeal period provided in Section 2.30.130 is at the sole risk of the applicant or other party.
(Ord. 6592 § 23, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009; Ord. 6367, Amended, 09/22/2004. Prior code § 11.024.060)

17.76.070 Appeal criterion.
The hearing examiner shall evaluate an appeal only as it relates to interpreting specific terms or procedures within the zoning code or critical areas ordinance and not the merits of the proposal or the property affected by the decision.
(Ord. 6610 § 16, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009)

17.76.080 Public hearing notice.
Notices for public hearings for appeals of administrative decisions shall follow the procedures established in Chapter 17.68.
(Ord. 6610 § 17, Amended, 08/08/2017; Ord. 6592 § 24, Amended, 05/25/2016; Ord. 6475, Amended, 02/25/2009. Prior code § 11.024.080)

Chapter 17.78 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION

Sections:
17.78.010    Purpose.
17.78.020    Public notice on administrative decisions.
17.78.030    Public hearing notice.

17.78.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish notice procedures for public hearings and administrative decisions.
(Ord. 6610 § 18, Added, 08/08/2017)

17.78.020 Public notice on administrative decisions.
A. The department shall prepare a notice for administrative decisions on variance applications under this title and for critical areas where another permitting action is required, a reasonable use exception issued or a variance as described under Section 14.100.034(B). Public notices shall include the following information:
    1. The name of the applicant and, if applicable, the project name;
    2. The street address of the subject property or a description of the property in nonlegal terms sufficient to identify the location;
    3. A vicinity map indicating the location of the subject property;
    4. A summarization of the proposal;
    5. A description of the critical area that might be affected and what is required (critical areas only);
    6. The decision of the director;
    7. The deadline for comment;
B. The department shall provide notice in the following manner:
    1. Publishing within a newspaper of general circulation within the city or county;
    2. Mailing notice of the decision to the applicant, the property owner, to each person requesting such notice and to each person identified by the real property records of the Grays Harbor County Assessor as the owner of real property within the following distances, either from any boundary of the subject property or any contiguous property in the applicant’s ownership: one hundred (100) feet for variances.
(Ord. 6610 § 18, Added, 08/08/2017)

17.78.030 Public hearing notice.
A. The department shall prepare notice for all public hearings and include the following information:
    1. The name of the applicant or appellant and, if applicable, the project name;
    2. The street address of the subject property or a description of the property in nonlegal terms sufficient to identify the location;
    3. Mailed notices shall contain a vicinity map indicating the location of the subject property;
    4. A summarization of the proposal, appeal, text or language amendment (including existing zoning designation(s), conditional use, special use or unclassified use permits. Public notices required under Section 14.100.034 shall include the decision of the director in addition;
    5. The deadline for comment;
    6. The date, time and place of the public hearing;
    7. A statement of the right of any person to participate in the public hearing;
B. The department shall provide notice for all public hearings in the following manner:
    1. Publishing within a newspaper of general circulation within the city or county;
    2. Mailing notice of the public hearing to the applicant or appellant, the property owner, to each person requesting such notice and to each person identified by the real property records of the Grays Harbor County Assessor as the owner of real property within the following distances, either from any boundary of the subject property or any contiguous property in the applicant’s ownership: three hundred (300) feet for conditional use, special use and unclassified use permits, amendments and rezones and one hundred (100) feet for variances. For appeals of administrative decisions the public hearing notice to the appellant and any affected project proponent shall be mailed. Failure to receive a properly mailed notice shall not affect the validity of any testimony or the legality of any action taken;
    3. Posting on the city’s website; and
    4. Prominently displayed at the main entrance to City Hall.
(Ord. 6610 § 18, Added, 08/08/2017)

Chapter 17.80 ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW

Sections:
17.80.010    Purpose.
17.80.020    Site plans required.
17.80.030    Submittal requirements.
17.80.040    Development compliance with approved site plan.
17.80.050    Authorizing use or occupancy prior to completion.

17.80.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish how and when proposals are reviewed to ensure that uses and developments are in compliance with land use policies and regulations. This review process is typically initiated when a use is established or development occurs which requires a permit or review process.
(Prior code § 11.025.010)

17.80.020 Site plans required.
A site plan shall be submitted to the department for review when any development or use established falls under any one of the following categories:
A. The construction of any new structure or additions to an existing structure;
B. The construction or expansion of parking lots for more than four spaces;
C. Changes in use that will increase parking requirements, lie within shoreline master program jurisdiction or qualify as an action under the state Environmental Policy Act.
(Prior code § 11.025.020)

17.80.030 Submittal requirements.
The department shall specify the submittal requirements for a site plan to be deemed complete and acceptable for filing.
(Prior code § 11.025.030)

17.80.040 Development compliance with approved site plan.
All development, construction, occupancy or use of any property shall be in compliance with the approved site plan prior to the beginning of a use or occupancy of a structure, except as provided by Section 17.80.050.
(Prior code § 11.025.040)

17.80.050 Authorizing use or occupancy prior to completion.
A. In the event that weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the applicant, exclusive of financial hardship, renders it unreasonable to require the applicant to fully comply with the site plan prior to the beginning of a use or occupancy of any building, the department may authorize relaxation of this requirement on the condition that the applicant completes all requirements within a specified time, not to exceed one year. If the requirements are not completed within the required period, the use or occupancy of the property and/or buildings shall cease until all requirements are satisfied.
B. If such a relaxation is granted, the department may require a performance bond in conformance with Section 7.96.140 to assure compliance with the requirements of the approved site plan.
(Prior code § 11.025.050)

Chapter 17.84 SIGNS

Sections:
17.84.010    Purpose.
17.84.020    Permits required for signs.
17.84.030    Signs exempt from permit requirements.
17.84.040    Computation of sign area.
17.84.050    Total advertising area allowed.
17.84.060    Freestanding signs.
17.84.070    Location and height requirements.
17.84.080    Sign illumination and signs containing lights.
17.84.090    Miscellaneous sign provisions.
17.84.100    Nonconforming signs.
17.84.110    Boone Street area specific sign regulations.
17.84.120    Lighting.

17.84.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use, construction, size and placement of signs to ensure the public's safety and welfare by lessening the potential for adverse impacts on traffic, the community and adjacent uses.
(Prior code § 11.026.010)

17.84.020 Permits required for signs.
Except as provided in Section 17.84.030, no sign shall be constructed, erected, moved, enlarged, illuminated or substantially altered without an approved sign permit, and if required, building and/or electrical permit. A permissive use permit is required for any sign located within a city right-of-way, including those exempted from obtaining a sign permit under Section 17.84.030.
(Prior code § 11.026.020)

17.84.030 Signs exempt from permit requirements.
Signs that fall under one or more of the following categories are exempt from having to obtain a sign permit:
A. Residential signs not exceeding four square feet in total area;
B. Signs less than six square feet erected for home occupations and beauty shops as regulated in Sections 17.56.030 and 17.56.040;
C. Official signs of a noncommercial nature erected by public utilities or government agencies;
D. Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed four square feet each and that bear no advertising message;
E. Election or political campaign signs. No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days from the date of vote;
F. Signs proclaiming religious, political or other similar noncommercial messages and do not exceed one per abutting street, thirty-two (32) square feet in area and are not internally illuminated;
G. No more than two signs identifying a residential subdivision, mobile home park, multi-family dwelling or housing development that do not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in advertising area and are not illuminated. The signs shall be located on the premises of the development they identify and shall be at least ten feet from any right-of-way or access easement;
H. Unilluminated signs not exceeding a total of six square feet each and not more than two in number pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the residential property upon which the sign is located;
I. Unilluminated signs not exceeding a total of thirty-two (32) square feet each and not more than two in number pertaining to the rental, sale or lease of the commercial, mixed use or industrial zoned property upon which the sign is located;
J. Construction site identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer planner, contractors and subcontractors, funding sources, and may contain related information. Not more than one such sign may be erected per site and it may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of the building permit and shall be removed within ten days after the issuance of the occupancy permit.
K. Holiday decorations and banners displaying no commercial message.
L. Flags of political jurisdiction.
(Prior code § 11.026.030)

17.84.040 Computation of sign area.
A. The total surface area of site signage shall be the advertising area.
B. Advertising area means the total number of square feet within the boundaries of a parallelogram or triangle which encloses the message, work, symbol, design, picture or visual medium visible on the surface of any sign. For signs where single letters are located on separate surfaces facing the same direction, the advertising area shall be computed by adding together the advertising area of each separate letter. Where a sign includes surfaces facing in different directions, the advertising area shall be the largest total of advertising area visible from any one direction and in the case of a cylindrical or spherical-shaped sign, the advertising area shall be the diameter. The total advertising area shall include all on-site and off-premise signage for the use.
(Prior code § 11.026.040)

17.84.050 Total advertising area allowed.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the total advertising area devoted to all signs for any use shall not exceed the limitations set forth in this section, and all signs, except those excluded from the requirement to obtain a permit by Section 17.84.030, shall be included in this calculation.
B. Subject to the other provisions of this section, the maximum advertising area permitted for any use shall be three hundred fifty (350) square feet.
C. Not more than one identification sign and bulletin board for a church, child care service, school or other public or semi-public use within a residential district. Each sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and must be located on the premises, provided that no portion thereof shall be closer than ten feet from any right-of-way.
D. Nonconforming commercial, public or industrial uses within a residential district are allowed not more than one identification sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and located on the premises; provided, that no portion thereof shall be closer than ten feet from any right-of-way.
(Prior code § 11.026.050)

17.84.060 Freestanding signs.
A. A single side of a freestanding sign may not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet in surface area.
B. No development may have more than one freestanding sign, except under the following circumstances:
    1. If a development is located on a corner lot that has more than fifty (50) feet of frontage on each of the two intersecting public streets, then the development may have more than one freestanding sign on each side of the development bordered by such streets.
    2. If a development is located on a lot that is bordered by two public streets that do not intersect at the lot's boundaries (double front lot), then the development may have no more than one freestanding sign on each side of the development bordered by such streets.
C. Not more than one freestanding identification sign and not more than one freestanding bulletin board for a church, child care service, school or other public or semi-public use within a residential district.
(Prior code § 11.026.060)

17.84.070 Location and height requirements.
A. No sign or supporting structure may be located in or over the roadway of any public rights-of-way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building and a permissive use permit has been obtained from the city. Signs projecting over public rights-of-way shall be at least ten feet from the ground or sidewalk unless attached to a projecting canopy. Signs attached to the underside of a projecting canopy shall not be closer than eight feet to the ground or sidewalk.
B. No part of any freestanding sign may exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet measured from ground level.
(Prior code § 11.026.070)

17.84.080 Sign illumination and signs containing lights.
A. Lighting directed toward a sign and internally illuminated signs shall be shielded so that only the face of the sign is illuminated. The light must not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residen- tial premises.
B. Illuminated tubings or strings of lights not associated with the observance of holidays that outline property lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows or similar areas are prohibited.
C. No sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity, except signs indicating the time, date, weather conditions and brief messages.
D. Neon tubing of a diameter no greater than one-half inch may be used as a permanent architectural feature on a building.
(Prior code § 11.026.080)

17.84.090 Miscellaneous sign provisions.
A. Off-premises signs no greater than fifty (50) square feet except those exempted from the requirement to obtain a permit by Section 17.84.030 may be allowed in commercial and industrial zones as conditional uses. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, off-premises signs shall be included in computing the number of signs and the total advertising area of signs for a use.
B. Unilluminated off-premises directional signs pertaining to semi-public uses, the general location of tourist facilities, the general location of shopping facilities, and the general location of significant residential developments may be allowed adjacent to or on the street right-of-way of a state highway, collector street or arterial street subject to obtaining a conditional use permit. Each sign shall not be more than four square feet in area and be in conformance with standards established in the Washington State Department of Transportation Manual of Signing. Signs allowed under this subsection shall not be considered freestanding signs and shall not be included in computing the number of signs and the area of signs on a lot.
C. Plans for projecting signs, except projecting canopy signs, more than twenty (20) feet high shall be signed by a registered engineer.
D. No sign may be located so that it interferes with the view necessary for motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads.
E. Signs shall not generate sound intended to attract attention or provide a message.
F. If streamers, pennants, propellers and similar components are used on or in a sign, they shall be included in the calculation of a sign's area.
G. No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature or message, it would obstruct the view of or be confused with traffic signs or other sings erected by governmental agencies.
H. If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall, within thirty (30) days after such abandonment, be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign.
(Prior code § 11.026.090)

17.84.100 Nonconforming signs.
A. No nonconforming sign may be enlarged, illuminated, altered or intensified in such a manner as to increase a nonconforming condition.
B. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, it may not be repaired, reconstructed or replaced.
C. Any signs, existing on the effective date of this title, but not conforming to the provisions of this code, shall be permitted to continue; provided, that signs for discontinued use shall be removed within thirty (30) days of discontinuance of the use. If not removed before the deadline, the city shall have the right to remove such sign and to collect any expense from the property owners. If the advertising area or structure of a nonconforming sign is altered in any way such sign shall be brought into compliance with the provision of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11.026.100)

17.84.110 Boone Street area specific sign regulations.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the following additional regulations apply to Boone Street from the Chehalis River south to the city limits and one block to its east and west:
A. Changeable letter signs shall be allowed only as a portion of a freestanding sign or attached to a building;
B. Off-premise advertising and portable signs are not permitted, except those noted in Sections 17.84.030(C) and (F);
C. No signage shall exceed a total advertising area of more than two hundred (200) square feet;
D. No sign shall exceed a total height of twenty (20) feet,
(Prior code § 11.026.110)

17.84.120 Lighting.
All lighting for required parking facilities or signage shall be designed to reflect light away from adjacent residential areas and streets.
(Prior code § 11.026.120)

Chapter 17.88 LANDSCAPING

Sections:
17.88.010    Purpose.
17.88.020    General landscaping standards.
17.88.030    Description of landscaping.
17.88.040    Type of landscaping required.
17.88.050    Landscaping plan requirements.
17.88.060    Installation and performance bond requirements.
17.88.070    Maintenance and enforcement.

17.88.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the landscaping requirements of this chapter is to increase compatibility between different intensities of land uses by providing visual barriers, and providing a visual separation and physical buffer between varying intensities of abutting land uses; to encourage the retention of significant existing vegetation to the extent feasible; to reduce erosion and water runoff; to minimize impacts of noise, light and glare; and to aid in regulating vehicular circulation.
(Prior code § 11.028.010)

17.88.020 General landscaping standards.
Where required by this title or as a condition for a rezone, conditional use permit, special use permit, or unclassified use permit, the proposed development shall provide landscaping so that:
A. Neighboring properties are shielded from any adverse external effects of that development;
B. The development is shielded from the negative impacts of adjacent uses such as streets or railroads;
C. When determining which buffering requirements apply between two (2) different principal uses on the same lot and another adjacent use, the city shall utilize the more intensive use to select the appropriate buffer;
D. Significant existing vegetation is retained and incorporated into the new landscaping design;
E. The development shall adhere to low impact development (LID) requirements in accordance with Section 13.70.130.
(Ord. 6644 § 6, Amended, 03/27/2019. Prior code § 11.028.020)

17.88.030 Description of landscaping.
The following are types of landscaping as required in Section 17.88.040; all proposed plant material, sizes and characteristics shall be in accordance with current American Association of Nurseymen Standards:
A. Type I - Screen. Type I landscaping shall generally consist of a mix of predominantly evergreen plantings including living trees, shrubs and ground covers. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum height of four feet at time of planting. Plantings shall be chosen and spaced so as to grow together within three years sufficient to obscure sight through the barrier. The entire planting strip shall be landscaped; however, those plantings used to achieve the sight-obscuring screen shall cover at least five feet of the width of the strip, and shall be located farthest from the property line. Existing vegetation may be incorporated into the landscape providing it contributes to achieving the intent of this subsection. See Figure L-1.
B. Type II - Visual Buffer. Type II landscaping shall consist of a mix of evergreen and deciduous plantings including living trees, shrubs and ground covers. Plantings of shrubs and ground covers shall be chosen and spaced to result in a total covering of the landscape strip. Shrubs shall be of a type that achieve a height of approximately six feet within three years, and effectively screen views along the length of the planting strip. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of one and three-quarter inches at time of planting; evergreen trees shall be a minimum four feet tall at time of planting. All trees shall be spaced at intervals resulting in touching of branches after ten years of normal growth. Trees shall be staggered in two or more rows when the minimum width of the landscaping strip is twenty (20) feet or more. Existing vegetation may be incorporated into the landscape design provided it contributes to achieving the intent of this subsection. See Figure L-1.
C. Type III - See Through Buffer. Type III landscaping shall consist of a mix of evergreen and deciduous plantings including living trees, shrubs and ground covers. Plantings of shrubs and ground covers shall be chosen and spaced to result in a covering of the landscape strip within three years. Shrubs shall be of a type that do not exceed a height at maturity of approximately three to four feet. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of one and three-quarter inches at time of planting, and be spaced so as to result in touching of branches after ten years of normal growth. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of four feet tall at time of planting and spaced so as to result in a space between trees approximately equal to the mature spread of the trees used. See Figure L-1.
D. Type IV - Open Area Landscaping. Type IV landscaping shall consist of canopy-type deciduous trees or spreading evergreen trees planted in wells or strips, with a mix of living evergreen and deciduous ground covers and low shrubs. Shrubs shall be of a type that do not exceed a eight at maturity of approximately three to four feet. Planting wells or strips shall be a minimum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area, with the narrowest dimension not less than four feet. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of one and three quarter inches at time of planting. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of four feet tall at time of planting. See Figure L-1.Figure L-1. 
[IMAGE: <17.88.030_L-1_001.jpg>]
Type I. A visual screen with plantings chosen and spaced to grow together within three years sufficient to obscure sight through the screen.
[IMAGE: <17.88.030_L-1_002.jpg>]
Type II. A visual buffer to effectively screen views at eye level within three years. Trees are to be spaced so that branches touch within ten years.
[IMAGE: <17.88.030_L-1_003.jpg>]
Type III. A see-through buffer which permits relatively unobstructed views while providing benefits of landscaping.
[IMAGE: <17.88.030_L-1_004.jpg>]
Type IV. Open area landscaping, typically used in parking lots to provide shading and relief from paved areas.
(Prior code § 11.028.030)

17.88.040 Type of landscaping required.
Landscaping shall be provided in all developments subject to this title as set forth below, except for single-family residences and duplexes:
A. Table L-2 sets forth the type and width of landscaping required along side and rear property lines not abutting public right-of-ways, streets or alleys. The proposed use shall buffer less intensive uses adjacent to it.
B. Five feet of Type III landscaping is required adjacent to all streets, except where permitted structures and driveways are proposed.
C. Type IV landscaping shall be provided within all surface, open air parking lots, as follows:
    1. At least ten percent of the total parking area, excluding any other required landscaping, shall be utilized for landscaping when said areas exceed twenty (20) parking stalls;
    2. At least one tree for every five parking stalls shall be provided, to be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot;
    3. No parking stall shall be more than sixty (60) feet from the nearest landscaping;
    4. Permanent curbs and structural barriers shall be provided to protect the plantings from vehicle overhang. See Figure P-4 in Chapter 17.60 for design details;
    5. A minimum of forty (40) percent of the trees shall be evergreen.
D. Landscaping is not required adjacent to alleys.
E. The buffer requirement between uses not specifically mentioned in this chapter shall be the same as the most similar above circumstance.
(Prior code § 11.028.040)

17.88.050 Landscaping plan requirements.
The plan shall be accurately drawn, using an appropriate engineering or architect scale, and show the following:
A. Boundaries and dimensions of the site;
B. Location and identification of all streets, alleys and easements on the site;
C. Proposed location and dimensions of all on-site buildings;
D. Proposed landscaping including species, and size at the time of planting;
E. Existing vegetation;
F. Details of any proposed architectural barriers;
G. Locating of existing and proposed driveways and parking surfaces, curbs and sidewalks.
(Prior code § 11.028.050)

17.88.060 Installation and performance bond requirements.
Landscaping required pursuant to this chapter shall be installed in accordance with the approved site plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. The department, the board of adjustment, the planning commission, or the city council may require performance bonds or other appropriate security, including letters of credit and set aside letters, to insure that the landscaping will be installed and maintained for one year, according to the approved plan and specifications.
(Prior code § 11.028.060)

17.88.070 Maintenance and enforcement.
All landscaped areas required by this chapter shall be planted according to accepted practice in good soil with a water source within seventy-five (75) feet, and maintained with respect to pruning, trimming, watering and other methods to create an attractive appearance and a healthy growing condition. Dead, diseased, stolen or vandalized plantings shall be replaced within three months. Property owners shall keep the planting area free of weeds and trash; lack of maintenance shall constitute a violation of this code. The department shall have the authority to enforce the standards set forth in this chapter and the conditions attached to all permits for development pursuant to application of this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.96.
(Prior code § 11.028.070)
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
|        ZONE        |   ADJACENT ZONE    | TYPE and WIDTH |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| R-M, R-P           | R-S                | I      | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | R-M, R-P           | III    | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | C-R, C-D, C-G, M-I | II     | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | W-D, L-I, I        | I      | 15'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| C-R, C-D, C-G, M-I | R-S                | I      | 10'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | R-M, R-P           | II     | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | C-R, C-D, C-G, M-I | III    | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | W-D, L-I, I        | II     | 10'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| W-D, L-I, I        | R-S                | I      | 15'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | R-M, R-P           | I      | 15'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | C-R, C-D, C-G, M-I | II     | 10'   |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+
| "                  | W-D, L-I, I        | III    | 5'    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------+-------+

Chapter 17.92 NONCONFORMITIES

Sections:
17.92.010    Applicability.
17.92.020    Definitions.
17.92.030    Nonconforming uses.
17.92.040    Nonconforming structure regulations.
17.92.050    Abandonment.
17.92.060    Destruction and restoration.
17.92.070    Conversion.
17.92.080    Nonconforming lot regulations.
17.92.090    Nonconforming recreational open space.

17.92.010 Applicability.
This chapter establishes regulations pertaining to any use, structure or parcel of land existing prior to the effective date of this code and does not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district it is located.
(Prior code § 11.029.010)

17.92.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:
"Enlargement of a use" means the expansion of or addition to a use by increasing the amount of land or building area which is devoted to the use.
"Enlargement of structure" means any action which increases the exterior dimensions of a structure.
"Intensification" means any action which results in an increase in the level of use or activity within a defined structure or area.
"Nonconforming" means any use, structure or parcel of land existing prior to the effective date of this code and does not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district it is located.
(Prior code § 11.029.020)

17.92.030 Nonconforming uses.
A. A nonconforming use may be continued or enlarged provided that it conforms with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Nonconforming single-family residences may be replaced with a single-family residence of a larger size; provided, that the replacement does not exceed setback and parking requirements. This subsection is subject to the limitations of Section 17.92.050 for abandonment.
C. When a nonconforming single-family residence is replaced in a zone without setback requirements, the setbacks applicable to the single-family residential zoning district shall apply.
(Prior code § 11.029.030)

17.92.040 Nonconforming structure regulations.
Structures which are nonconforming with regard to yard, area, bulk, height or density may be maintained and repaired; provided, that said action does not increase the extent or degree of nonconformi-ty.
(Prior code § 11.029.040)

17.92.050 Abandonment.
A nonconforming use which has been abandoned for a period of one year shall not be returned to use. A use shall be considered abandoned if the premises have not been maintained to the extent necessary to continue the use or where applicable permits, licenses or approvals necessary for the use have been allowed to lapse, regardless of the condition of the premises.
(Prior code § 11.029.050)

17.92.060 Destruction and restoration.
A. Except for single-family residences, a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by accident, fire, explosion, natural disaster or public enemy, may apply for a conditional use permit to restore or replace the structure. The application must comply with the criteria in Section 17.68.060(B).
B. A nonconforming single-family dwelling may be constructed without obtaining a conditional land use permit if the replacement does not create new nonconformities with respect setback and parking requirements. This subsection is subject to the abandonment criteria of Section 17.92.050.
(Prior code § 11.029.060)

17.92.070 Conversion.
A structure containing a nonconforming use may be used for a different nonconforming use only upon the approval of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit may be granted upon finding that all of the following criteria have been met:
A. No conforming use is practical because of the type of the building;
B. The proposed use will be as compatible to surrounding uses as was the previous nonconforming use;
C. The criteria in Section 17.68.060(B) for conditional land uses are met;
D. The conversion does not violate the abandonment criteria of Section 17.92.050.
The board of adjustment shall attach such conditions as are deemed necessary to assure compliance with the above findings to assure that the use will not become a nuisance or a hazard.
(Prior code § 11.029.070)

17.92.080 Nonconforming lot regulations.
A. A lot which was legally created under the terms of the land use and subdivision requirements prior to the effective date of this title but does not conform to the area and/or dimensional requirements currently applicable, shall be afforded the same status as a conforming lot.
B. A lot that has been rendered nonconforming as to area and/or dimensional requirements after the establishment of this chapter by the result of a court order, condemnation by an entity with the power of eminent domain, or any other action which was not initiated, caused or promoted by the owner at the time of the division, shall be considered a conforming lot.
C. A lot not covered in subsections (A) and (B) of this section but which does not conform to the area and/or dimensional requirements of this code may be afforded the same status as a conforming lot provided that a conditional use permit is approved by the board of adjustment. In considering the conditional use permit, the board shall make findings regarding all of the following criteria:
    1. The current owner of the lot in question was an innocent purchaser for value or the successor thereof;
    2. No reasonable possibility of recombination with other portions of the original parcel from which the subject lot was divided existed at the time that the owner of the property received notice of the status of the lot;
    3. That the lot is otherwise reasonably capable of use under the requirements of all applicable regulations;
    4. That no reasonably available information indicates that a discrepancy or conflict exists with regard to the boundaries or ownership of the parcel;
    5. In addition, the board of adjustment shall have the authority to attach such conditions to ensure compatibility with uses in the vicinity.
D. The provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section do not apply if two or more existing lots nonconforming as to area and/or dimensional requirements fall adjacent to one another, remain under common ownership, and could be developed as a single conforming parcel.
(Prior code § 11.029.080)

17.92.090 Nonconforming recreational open space.
Uses or structures established prior to the effective date of this chapter which do not meet the minimum recreational open space standards, shall not be considered nonconforming; provided, however, that if such recreational open space does exist on said property, it may not be reduced below the minimum standards currently required.
(Prior code § 11.029.090)

Chapter 17.96 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
17.96.010    Purpose.
17.96.020    Compliance with the comprehensive development plan.
17.96.030    Conflict of provisions.
17.96.040    Severability.
17.96.050    Permit compliance with zoning requirements.
17.96.060    Enforcement by department.
17.96.070    Inspections.
17.96.080    Violation of this title.
17.96.090    Penalties and remedies for violations.
17.96.100    Order to stop work.
17.96.110    Actions brought prior to enactment of this title.
17.96.120    Effect of concomitant agreements.
17.96.130    Employees not personally liable for enforcement acts.
17.96.140    Performance bond required.
17.96.150    Official interpretations.
17.96.160    Fees.
17.96.170    Determining days for time limits in this title.

17.96.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes provisions for the interpretation, general administration and enforcement of the zoning land use regulations.
(Prior code § 11.030.010)

17.96.020 Compliance with the comprehensive development plan.
Each decision or action of the city or its officials pursuant to the zoning regulations shall be made in compliance with the comprehensive development plan goals and policies.
(Prior code § 11.030.020)

17.96.030 Conflict of provisions.
Should a conflict occur between the provisions of this title or between this title and the laws, regulations, codes or rules promulgated by other authority having jurisdiction within the city, the most restrictive requirement shall apply, except when constrained by federal or state law.
(Prior code § 11.030.030)

17.96.040 Severability.
If any provision of this title, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the title, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end the provisions of this title are declared to be severable.
(Prior code § 11.030.040)

17.96.050 Permit compliance with zoning requirements.
All building permits, temporary certificates of occupancy, or certificates of occupancy issued by the city of Aberdeen shall comply with this title.
(Prior code § 11.030.050)

17.96.060 Enforcement by department.
The planning and economic development department shall administer this title. The department is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this title.
(Prior code § 11.030.060)

17.96.070 Inspections.
Whenever the department has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or premises any condition nonconforming with this title, the department may enter such building or premises. If the building or premises is occupied, the department shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if the building or premises is unoccupied, the department shall first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused the department shall have recourse to secure entry.
(Prior code § 11.03.070)

17.96.080 Violation of this title.
It is unlawful for any person(s), firm, or corporation to take any action with any building or structure, utilize any property or subdivide any parcel in a manner not in conformance with any provision of this title. Failure to comply with decisions of the department or hearing examiner or permits issued under this title constitute violations of this title.
(Ord. 6592 § 25, Amended, 05/25/2016. Prior code § 11.030.080)

17.96.090 Penalties and remedies for violations.
A. The city of Aberdeen, through its authorized agents, may initiate injunction, abatement proceedings or any other appropriate action in the courts against any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this title.
B. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this title, or the owner of property upon which a violation of this title is located, shall be subject to a maximum penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day or portion of a day that the violation continues; provided, however, that an owner of property who has not perpetrated the violation shall be subject to penalty only if demand for abatement or alteration of the violation has been mailed to said owner at his/her last known address by registered mail, return receipt requested, and the demand has remained unmet for more than thirty (30) days.
C. In addition to incurring civil liability under Section 17.96.090(B), the violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this title is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, a violator shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than ninety (90) days for each separate offense. Each day or portion thereof upon which a violation appears constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior code § 11.030.090)

17.96.100 Order to stop work.
Whenever any building or premises is being constructed contrary to the provisions of this title, the department may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the legal or equitable property owner or any person causing such work to be done. Work shall remain stopped until such time that the structure or use is made in compliance with this title and the department authorizes that work may proceed.
(Prior code § 11.030.100)

17.96.110 Actions brought prior to enactment of this title.
Enforcement of an action brought by the city under zoning provisions existing prior to the enactment of this title shall not be affected by enactment of this title nor shall the rights of parties to such action be affected.
(Prior code § 11.030.110)

17.96.120 Effect of concomitant agreements.
All concomitant agreements or contract rezones entered into between the city of Aberdeen and owners of property within the city prior to the effective date of this title shall remain in effect following the effective date of this title.
(Prior code § 11.030.120)

17.96.130 Employees not personally liable for enforcement acts.
Any employee charged with the enforcement of this title, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of duties, shall not render himself/herself liable personally and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of duties. Any suit brought against the employee, because of such act or omission performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provisions of this title, shall be defended by the city until final termination of the proceedings.
(Prior code § 11.030.130)

17.96.140 Performance bond required.
A. Where authorized by this title, the permit issuing authority may require a bond to ensure compliance with any requirements. The bond may be a nonrevocable letter of credit, set-aside letter, assignment of funds, certificate of deposit, deposit account, or other accessible source of funds in a form acceptable to the city. Interest from any interest-bearing form of bond will accrue to the benefit of the depositor. The bond shall specify the date and time by which the work which it guarantees shall be completed and state the date and time by which the city can negotiate the bond to obtain the funds to do the work it guarantees. In all cases the date and time for bond negotiation shall be at least sixty (60) days after the deadline.
B. The amount of the bond shall be calculated on the following basis as follows:
    1. The amount will be one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the work or improvements and shall be based on estimated costs immediately following the expiration of the bond together with the city's cost of obtaining funds from the bond and administering the project.
    2. A maintenance bond will not be less than twenty (20) percent of the cost of replacing the improvement covered by the bond based on estimated costs on the last day covered by the bond together with the city's cost of obtaining funds from the bond and administering the project.
C. In each case where the city requires or allows an applicant to establish a bond, the owner of subject property shall give the city a signed, notarized, irrevocable license to run with the property to allow the employees, agents or contractors of the city to go on the subject property for the purpose of inspecting and, if necessary, doing the work or making the improvements covered by the bond. The applicant shall file this license with the department.
D. After the work or improvements covered by a performance bond have been completed to the satisfaction of the city or at the end of the time covered by a maintenance bond, the applicant may request the city to release the bond. The city shall release such bond as expeditiously as possible after receipt of a request for release.
E. If during the period of time covered by a bond the department determines that the work or improvements have not been complied with, the applicant will be notified. The notice must include the following information:
    1. The work that must be done or the improvement that must be made to comply with the requirements and the bond;
    2. The amount of time that the applicant has to commence and complete the required work or improvements;
    3. That, if the work or improvements are not commenced and completed within the time specified, the city will use the proceeds of the bond to have the required work or improvements completed.
F. If the work or improvements covered by the bond are not completed within the time specified in the notice provided under subsection (E) of this section, the city shall obtain the proceeds of the bond to perform the necessary work or improvements. The property owner is responsible for all costs incurred by the city. Upon completion, the city shall release or refund any proceeds of a performance bond after subtracting all costs involved. The owner of subject property shall reimburse the city for any amount expended by the city that exceeds the proceeds of the bond. The city shall retain a lien against the subject property for the amount of any excess.
G. In each case where the city uses any of the proceeds of the bond, it shall give the owner of the subject property an itemized statement of all proceeds and funds used.
(Prior code § 11.030.140)

17.96.150 Official interpretations.
The department shall be responsible for interpreting this title, tables and maps. Requests for an official interpretation may be made in writing to the department. All official interpretations shall be in writing and copies of the interpretations shall be maintained by the department. All interpretations may be appealed to the board of adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.76.
(Prior code § 11.030.150)

17.96.160 Fees.
The city council shall establish by resolution fees or charges for applications, notices, plan reviews, permits, administrative actions, or appeals authorized under this Title. Applicants shall pay the appropriate fees or charges in effect at the time a completed application is submitted to the reviewing department. No application shall be reviewed or approved unless the appropriate fees and charges have been paid.
(Ord. 6382, Amended, 09/28/2005)

17.96.170 Determining days for time limits in this title.
A. "Day" means a calendar day beginning at midnight and ending on the following midnight.
B. When counting the number of days for notices required by this title, the day a notice is mailed, posted or published is not counted by the day of the hearing is counted.
C. When counting the number of days or years for other time limits established by this title, the day a decision is made is not counted in the time limit.
(Prior code § 11.030.170)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Aberdeen Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 6645, passed May 8, 2019.
Disclaimer: The city clerk’s office has the official version of the Aberdeen Municipal Code. Users should contact the city clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.aberdeenwa.gov
City Telephone: (360) 537-3231
Code Publishing Company