


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    Noncharter Code City Classification

1.12    Wards

1.16    Right of Entry

1.20    Working Prisoners

1.24    Violations and Penalties

1.30    Public Records

1.34    Enforcement of Civil Infractions Pursuant to Chapter 7.80 RCW

1.44    Compliance and Enforcement, Nuisances and Civil Violations


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.010 Adoption.

Pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570, there is adopted the “Burlington Municipal Code” as compiled, edited and published by Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 1362 § 1, 1998; Ord. 941 § 1, 1979).


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Burlington Municipal Code,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Burlington Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Burlington Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Burlington Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 941 § 2, 1979).


1.01.030 Codification authority.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Burlington, Washington, codified pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570. (Ord. 941 § 3, 1979).


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 920, passed November 21, 1978. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 920, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code:

Ordinance No. 925 passed May 24, 1979;

Ordinance No. 928 passed May 24, 1979;

Ordinance No. 931 passed July 12, 1979;

Ordinance No. 932 passed September 13, 1979. (Ord. 941 § 4, 1979).


1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Burlington Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Burlington, Washington, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 941 § 5, 1979).


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 941 § 6, 1979).


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 941 § 7, 1979).


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of Burlington shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 941 § 8, 1979).


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter which adopts this code as the “Burlington Municipal Code” becomes effective. (Ord. 941 § 9, 1979).


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 941 § 10, 1979).


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction of provisions.

1.04.090    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Burlington, Washington, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

A. “City” and “town” each mean the city of Burlington, Washington, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Burlington, Washington, and such territory outside of the city of Burlington over which the city of Burlington has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

B. “Council” means the city council of the city of Burlington. “All its members” or “all councilmen” means the total number of councilmen holding office.

C. “County” means the county of Skagit.

D. “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Washington, the ordinances of the city of Burlington, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

E. “May” is permissive.

F. “Month” means a calendar month.

G. “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

H. “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

I. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

J. “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

K. “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

L. “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

M. “Property” includes real and personal property.

N. “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

O. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

P. “State” means the state of Washington.

Q. “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

R. “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

S. “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

T. “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 918 § 1, 1978).


1.04.020 Title of office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Burlington. (Ord. 918 § 2, 1978).


1.04.030 Interpretation of language.

All words or phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 918 § 3, 1978).


1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Burlington, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 918 § 4, 1978).


1.04.050 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 918 § 5, 1978).


1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Burlington, any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 918 § 6, 1978).


1.04.070 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 918 § 7, 1978).


1.04.080 Construction of provisions.

The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Burlington, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 918 § 8, 1978).


1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 918 § 9, 1978).


Chapter 1.08 NONCHARTER CODE CITY CLASSIFICATION

Sections:

1.08.010    Adoption.

1.08.020    Copy of ordinance to be provided.

1.08.030    Ordinance filing required.


1.08.010 Adoption.

There is hereby adopted for the city of Burlington, Washington, the classification of noncharter code city retaining the mayor-council plan of government under which the city of Burlington is currently operating. (Ord. 1604 § 1, 2006).


1.08.020 Copy of ordinance to be provided.

The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to forward to the Secretary of State a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter for filing pursuant to RCW 35A.02.040. (Ord. 1604 § 2, 2006).


1.08.030 Ordinance filing required.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.02.040, the city of Burlington shall become classified as a noncharter code city upon the filing with the Secretary of State a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1604 § 3, 2006).


Chapter 1.12 WARDS

Sections:

1.12.010    Wards established – Purpose.

1.12.020    City council – Election.

1.12.030    City council – Voting.

1.12.040    City council – Term of office.

1.12.050    City council – Oath of office.


1.12.010 Wards established – Purpose.

For convenience in municipal government of the city, and in the management of municipal affairs thereof, and of the holding of elections and the election of officers therein, the territory embraced within the corporate limits of the city of Burlington, Washington, be and the same is divided into six wards, which wards shall be numbered and shall have boundaries as provided as follows:

A. Burlington City Council Ward 1.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard and West Victoria Avenue;

Thence west along the centerline of said West Victoria Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Norris Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Norris Street to its intersection with South Norris Street;

Thence continuing south along the centerline of South Norris Street approximately 1,766 feet;

Thence due west approximately 293 feet to the centerline of Interstate Highway 5;

Thence south along said centerline of Interstate Highway 5 to its intersection with the centerline of State Route 20;

Thence east along said centerline of State Route 20 to the intersection of East Rio Vista Avenue and South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence south along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Lila Lane;

Thence west along said centerline of Lila Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Fenton Lane;

Thence south along said centerline of Fenton Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Andis Road;

Thence east along said centerline of Andis Road to its intersection with the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence south along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Gilkey Road;

Thence east along said centerline of Gilkey Road to its intersection with the centerline of South Spruce Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Spruce Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of South Walnut Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Walnut Street to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad; 

Thence southwest along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence north along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard;

Thence continuing north along said centerline of North Burlington Boulevard to the point of beginning.

B. Burlington City Council Ward 2.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard and West Victoria Avenue;

Thence north along the centerline of said West Victoria Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Norris Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Norris Street to its intersection with South Norris Street;

Thence continuing south along the centerline of South Norris Street approximately 1,766 feet;

Thence due west approximately 293 feet to the centerline of Interstate Highway 5;

Thence south along said centerline of Interstate Highway 5 to its intersection with the centerline of South Norris Street;

Thence west along said centerline of South Norris Street to its intersection with the centerline of Peterson Road;

Thence northerly and westerly along said centerline of Peterson Road to its intersection with the centerline of Quinnat Drive;

Thence south along said centerline of Quinnat Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Keta Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of Keta Avenue to its intersection with the west city limit boundary of the city of Burlington;

Thence north following said city limit boundary of the city of Burlington to its intersection with the centerline of North Skagit Street, said intersection also being a point along the city limit boundary of the city of Burlington;

Thence south along said centerline of North Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avon Avenue;

Thence west along the centerline of Avon Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Regent Street;

Thence north along the centerline of North Regent Street to its intersection with the centerline of State Route 20;

Thence southwest along the centerline of State Route 20 to its intersection with the centerline of Cascade Highway;

Thence southwest along said centerline of Cascade Highway to its intersection with the centerline of East Victoria Avenue;

Thence west along the centerline of East Victoria Avenue, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence continuing west along the centerline of East Victoria Avenue, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard;

Thence north along the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard to the point of beginning.

C. Burlington City Council Ward 3.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard and East Victoria Avenue;

Thence east along the centerline of East Victoria Avenue, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence continuing east along the centerline of East Victoria Avenue, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of Cascade Highway;

Thence northeast along said centerline of Cascade Highway to its intersection with the centerline of State Route 20;

Then northeast along said centerline of State Route 20 to its intersection with the centerline of North Regent Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Regent Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Victoria Avenue;

Thence east along said centerline of East Victoria Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Skagit Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Skagit Street;

Thence south along said centerline of South Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of Greenleaf Avenue;

Thence continuing south along the centerline of South Skagit Street a distance of approximately 15.8 feet;

Thence east to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of South Skagit Street and the southerly right-of-way line of Tiger Lane;

Thence approximately S 88d 40'38" E a distance of approximately 397 feet;

Thence approximately S 01d 53'07" W a distance of approximately 98 feet;

Thence approximately S 73d 00'58" E a distance of approximately 126 feet;

Thence approximately S 46d 58'10" E a distance of approximately 43 feet to a point along the centerline of Filbert Lane;

Thence south along said centerline of Filbert Lane to its intersection with the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of South Skagit Street;

Thence south along said centerline of South Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of Sharon Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of Sharon Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of South Anacortes Street;

Thence south along said centerline of South Anacortes Street to its intersection with the centerline of Pease Road;

Thence west along said centerline of Pease Road to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence north along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of Gilkey Road, if extended easterly;

Thence west along said centerline of Gilkey Road, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of South Spruce Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Spruce Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of South Walnut Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Walnut Street to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad; 

Thence southwest along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence north along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of North Burlington Boulevard;

Thence continuing north along said centerline of North Burlington Boulevard to the point of beginning.

D. Burlington City Council Ward 4.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard and East Rio Vista Avenue, said intersection also being a point along the centerline of State Route 20;

Thence west along said centerline of State Route 20 to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate Highway 5;

Thence north along said centerline of Interstate Highway 5 to its intersection with the centerline of South Norris Street;

Thence west along said centerline of South Norris Street to its intersection with the centerline of Peterson Road;

Thence northerly and westerly along said centerline of Peterson Road to its intersection with the centerline of Quinnat Drive;

Thence south along said centerline of Quinnat Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Keta Avenue;

Thence west along said centerline of Keta Avenue to its intersection with the west city limit boundary of the city of Burlington;

Thence south and east along said boundary line of the city of Burlington to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate Highway 5;

Thence east along said boundary line of the city of Burlington to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence north along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of East Whitmarsh Road;

Thence east along said centerline of East Whitmarsh Road to its intersection with the centerline of Whitmarsh Road;

Thence north along said centerline of Whitmarsh Road to its intersection with the centerline of Pease Road;

Thence west along said centerline of Pease Road to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence north along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of Gilkey Road, if extended easterly;

Thence west along said centerline of Gilkey Road, if extended, to its intersection with the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence north along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Andis Road;

Thence west along said centerline of Andis Road to its intersection with the centerline of Fenton Lane;

Thence north along said centerline of Fenton Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Lila Lane;

Thence east along said centerline of Lila Lane to its intersection with the centerline of South Burlington Boulevard;

Thence north along said centerline of South Burlington Boulevard to the point of beginning.

E. Burlington City Council Ward 5.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of South Anacortes Street and Sharon Avenue;

Thence east along said centerline of Sharon Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of South Skagit Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue;

Thence east along said centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue to its intersection with the east city limit boundary of the City of Burlington;

Thence south along said city limit boundary line of the city of Burlington to its intersection with the centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad;

Thence north along said centerline of the Burlington Northern Railroad to its intersection with the centerline of East Whitmarsh Road;

Thence east along said centerline of East Whitmarsh Road to its intersection with the centerline of Whitmarsh Road;

Thence north along said centerline of Whitmarsh Road to its intersection with the centerline of South Anacortes Street;

Thence north along said centerline of South Anacortes Street to the point of beginning.

F. Burlington City Council Ward 6.

Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue and Filbert Lane;

Thence east along said centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue to its intersection with the east city limit boundary of the city of Burlington;

Thence north following said city limit boundary of the city of Burlington to its intersection with the centerline of North Skagit Street, said intersection also being a point along the city limit boundary of the city of Burlington;

Thence south along said centerline of North Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of Avon Avenue;

Thence west along the centerline of Avon Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Regent Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Regent Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Victoria Avenue;

Thence east along said centerline of East Victoria Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of North Skagit Street;

Thence south along said centerline of North Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Skagit Street;

Thence continuing south along said centerline of South Skagit Street to its intersection with the centerline of Greenleaf Avenue;

Thence continuing south along the centerline of South Skagit Street a distance of approximately 15.8 feet;

Thence east to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of South Skagit Street and the southerly right-of-way line of Tiger Lane;

Thence approximately S 88d 40'38" E a distance of approximately 397 feet;

Thence approximately S 01d 53'07" W a distance of approximately 98 feet;

Thence approximately S 73d 00'58" E a distance of approximately 126 feet;

Thence approximately S 46d 58'10" E a distance of approximately 43 feet to a point along the centerline of Filbert Lane;

Thence south along said centerline of Filbert Lane to its intersection with the centerline of East Rio Vista Avenue, said intersection being the point of beginning. (Ord. 1753 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1499 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1472 § 1, 2001; Ord. 570 § 1, 1959).


1.12.020 City council – Election.

One member of the city council shall be elected from each of wards Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, and a seventh member of the city council shall be elected at large. (Ord. 570 § 2, 1959).


1.12.030 City council – Voting.

Each council member shall be voted upon by all voters in the city as a council member for that district in the general election, but nominating votes in the primary election shall be by voters in the ward in which the candidate resides. (Ord. 1753 § 2, 2011; Ord. 570 § 3, 1959).


1.12.040 City council – Term of office.

Council members for the fourth, fifth and sixth wards and the council member elected at large shall be elected in 2009 for a four-year term commencing on January 1, 2010, and shall be elected every four years after the 2009 election. Council members for the first, second and third wards shall be elected in 2011 for a four-year term commencing on January 1, 2012, and shall be elected every four years after the 2011 election. A council member shall serve until his or her successor is elected, qualified, and assumes office in accordance with RCW 29A.20.040. (Ord. 1653 § 1, 2008*; Ord. 570 § 6, 1959).


1.12.050 City council – Oath of office.

Council member electees shall subscribe an oath or affirmation in accordance with RCW 29A.04.133 prior to assuming office. Such oath of office shall be taken at such time as is set forth in RCW 29A.20.040. (Ord. 1653 § 2, 2008*).

*Code reviser’s note: Section 4 of Ord. 1653 provides: “This ordinance shall take effect and be in full force on the latter of January 1, 2010, or five (5) days after publication of a summary of this ordinance, it being the intent of the Council that this ordinance shall not extend the term of any council member currently serving on the City Council, but shall establish a four-year term of office for the at-large council position subsequent to the election to be held in November, 2009.”


Chapter 1.16 RIGHT OF ENTRY

Sections:

1.16.010    Right of entry and inspection.

1.16.020    Limitation of authority.


1.16.010 Right of entry and inspection.

An application for a permit pursuant to BMC Titles 14, 15, and/or 16 shall constitute consent to the entry upon the premises by authorized city of Burlington personnel at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purposes of inspection of the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, use, or occupancy of the premises to ascertain compliance with applicable construction and/or maintenance codes and other pertinent laws over which the city has enforcement jurisdiction and under which authority the relevant permit application is made. Whenever entry or inspection is refused, the city of Burlington may suspend or revoke any permit approvals already granted, cause proceedings to be had for the issuance of a warrant or other appropriate judicial process, or take such other action as may be necessary or convenient to protect the health or safety of persons or property. (Ord. 1564 § 1, 2004).


1.16.020 Limitation of authority.

This chapter does not purport to enlarge the city’s duty to inspect any premises or to create an obligation to any person to assure at any given time the lawfulness or safety of any activity or condition requiring approval by the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1564 § 1, 2004).


Chapter 1.20 WORKING PRISONERS

Sections:

1.20.010    Purpose – Statutory authority.

1.20.020    Labor by prisoners – Authorized when.

1.20.030    Labor by prisoners – Chief of police authority.


1.20.010 Purpose – Statutory authority.

The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the police court to require persons found guilty of a violation of a city ordinance wherein a jail penalty may be imposed to work on the city streets, public property and works of the city in lieu of being imprisoned in jail. This chapter is pursuant to RCW 35.24.290(13). (Ord. 915 § 1, 1978).


1.20.020 Labor by prisoners – Authorized when.

Upon the conviction of any person by the police court of the city for a violation of any municipal ordinance which provides for imprisonment in the city jail as a penalty, the court may, at the time it passes sentence, provide that the prisoner be required to labor on the city streets or other public property or works within the city. Such person may be compelled to perform eight hours labor on each day of his imprisonment, except Saturdays and Sundays. (Ord. 915 § 2, 1978).


1.20.030 Labor by prisoners – Chief of police authority.

Whenever any person imprisoned in the city jail has been required by the court to labor on the city streets, or other public property or works within the city, the chief of police shall put the person to work on any such municipal activity available and shall furnish the proper supervisory personnel for such prisoner at the municipal activity. (Ord. 915 § 3, 1978).


Chapter 1.24 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES1

Sections:

1.24.010    Purpose and application.

1.24.020    Criminal violations.

1.24.030    Civil infractions pursuant to chapter 7.80 RCW.

1.24.040    Nuisance and civil violations.

1.24.050    Joint and several liability.

1.24.060    Filing notice or order.

1.24.070    Change of ownership.

1.24.080    Specific provisions concerning a violation of chapters 13.04, 14.01 and 14.05 BMC.


1.24.010 Purpose and application.

The purpose of this chapter is to identify and provide for the enforcement alternatives available to the city of Burlington when a city ordinance is violated. These alternatives are (A) a criminal violation; (B) a civil infraction pursuant to the provisions of chapter 7.80 RCW, RCW 35A.11.020, 35A.12.140, and chapter 1.34 BMC; (C) a civil violation and nuisance pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.11.020, 35A.12.140 and chapter 8.12 BMC, including, where necessary, the abatement of a nuisance. The city attorney shall have the discretion to prosecute any violation of the code under any of these alternatives. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.020 Criminal violations.

A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any ordinance of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $l,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in jail, or both. In the event a Washington State statute provides a penalty for conduct prescribed by a Burlington city ordinance, then, in that event, the penalty for such conduct shall not exceed the maximum penalty provided for by Washington State statute.

B. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he is punishable accordingly.

C. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Burlington Municipal Code, every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor as defined in RCW Title 9A and adopted by reference by the city shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than 364 days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than $5,000, or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018). 


1.24.030 Civil infractions pursuant to chapter 7.80 RCW.

Any violation of a city ordinance shall be considered a civil infraction pursuant to chapter 7.80 RCW and RCW 35A.11.020 and 35A.12.140. The procedure and system for adjudicating civil infractions and the penalties for such infractions shall be as set forth in chapter 7.80 RCW and chapter 1.34 BMC. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.040 Nuisance and civil violations.

Any violation of a city ordinance shall be considered a public nuisance and civil violation. The procedure and system for adjudicating civil violations and the penalties for such violations and abatement as deemed necessary shall be as is set forth in chapter 8.12 BMC. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.050 Joint and several liability.

Each responsible party is jointly and severally liable for a violation of a city ordinance. The designated official may take enforcement action, in whole or in part, against any responsible party. All applicable penalties may be imposed against each responsible party. In the event enforcement action is taken against more than one responsible party, recoverable damages, costs, and expenses may be allocated among the responsible parties based upon the extent to which each responsible party’s acts or omissions caused the violation, unless this factor cannot be determined, or the party receiving the allocation under this factor is unable to correct the violation, or is unable to pay the damages, costs, expenses, and any penalty imposed under chapter 1.34 BMC. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.060 Filing notice or order.

A notice of violation, voluntary compliance agreement or an order issued by a director, or municipal judge, may be filed with the Skagit County auditor. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.070 Change of ownership.

When a notice of violation, voluntary compliance agreement or an order issued by a director or municipal judge has been filed with the Skagit County auditor, a notice of violation or an order regarding the same violations need not be served upon a new owner of the property where the violation occurred. If no notice of violation or order is served upon the new owner, the director may grant the new owner the same number of days to comply as was given the previous owner. The compliance period for the new owner shall begin on the date that the conveyance of title to the new owner is completed. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


1.24.080 Specific provisions concerning a violation of chapters 13.04, 14.01 and 14.05 BMC.

A. Additional Relief. In lieu of or in addition to any enforcement procedure provided in this title, the director may seek any other available legal or equitable relief, including to enjoin any acts or practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this title or a public nuisance. When the public works director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the public works director may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:

1. Immediately comply with all applicable requirements; and

2. Take such appropriate preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

B. Suspension or Revocation. Approvals or permits granted in error, or on the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information, or in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation may be suspended or revoked. Other permits or approvals interrelated with an approval suspended or revoked under this subsection, including certificates of occupancy or approvals for occupancy, may also be suspended or revoked. When an approval or permit is suspended or revoked, the director may require the applicant to take corrective action to bring the project into compliance with this title by a deadline set by the director, or may take other enforcement action.

C. Date of Initial Enforcement. The public works director shall not enforce provisions of this code which require existing discharges and land uses to adopt operational and nonstructural best management practices until six months after adoption of rules identifying the best management practices to be required. The director shall not enforce the provisions of this code which require existing discharges and land uses to install structural best management practices until one year after adoption of rules identifying the best management practices to be required.

D. Specific Violations.

1. General. It is a violation of this title to not comply with any requirement of, or to act in a manner prohibited by, this title, or a permit, approval, rule, manual or order issued pursuant to this title.

2. Aiding and Abetting. It is a violation of this title to aid, abet, counsel, encourage, commend, incite, induce, hire or otherwise procure another person to violate this title.

3. Alteration of Existing Drainage. It is a violation of this title to alter existing drainage patterns which serve a tributary area of more than five acres without authorization or approval by the director.

4. Obstruction of Watercourse. It is a violation of this title to obstruct a watercourse without authorization or approval by the director.

5. Dangerous Condition. It is a violation of this title to allow to exist, or cause or contribute to, a condition of a drainage control facility, or condition related to grading, storm water, drainage or erosion that is likely to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, the environment, or public or private property.

6. Interference. It is a violation of this title for any person to interfere with or impede the correction of any violation, or compliance with any notice of violation, emergency order, stop work order, or the abatement of any nuisance.

E. Criminal Violation.

1. Failing to Comply with Orders. Failing to comply with an order properly issued pursuant to this title by the director or a judge is a criminal violation, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $5,000 per day of each violation or imprisonment for each violation for not more than 360 days or both such fine and imprisonment.

2. Tampering and Vandalism. Tampering with or vandalizing a drainage control facility or other best management practice, a public or private drainage control system, monitoring or sampling equipment or records, or notices posted pursuant to this title is a criminal violation, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment for not more than 360 days or both such fine and imprisonment.

3. Repeat Violations. Anyone violating this title who has had a judgment or hearing examiner’s order against them pursuant to this title in the preceding five years shall be subject to criminal penalties for the present violation, and, upon conviction thereof, be fined in a sum not to exceed $5,000, or imprisonment for not more than 360 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1851 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).1

Prior legislation: Ords. 913 and 1740. 


Chapter 1.30 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

1.30.010    Purpose.

1.30.020    Definitions.

1.30.030    Records subject to disclosure.

1.30.040    Index of public records not maintained.

1.30.050    Form and manner of request for public records.

1.30.060    Submittal of a request for public records – Designation of public records officer.

1.30.070    Initial response to request.

1.30.080    Supplemental response to request – Additional time – Clarification.

1.30.090    Disclosure of records – Process.

1.30.100    Final response to request.

1.30.110    Copying and delivering – Costs.

1.30.120    Deposit for copying.

1.30.130    Payment of required fees.

1.30.140    Failure to pay required costs.

1.30.150    Denial of request – Appeal.


1.30.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to establish the process for requesting public records and responding to requests for public records as required by Washington’s Public Records Act, codified in chapter 42.56 RCW. Failure of the city to fully comply with any provision of this chapter shall not result in any liability imposed upon the city other than as provided in the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.020 Definitions.

A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1. “Public Records Act” shall mean chapter 42.56 RCW as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

2. “Copies” shall mean any duplicated version of any record regardless of the original form of the record.

B. Except as provided in subsection A of this section, all terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.030 Records subject to disclosure.

The city need only disclose records or portions of records to the extent required by the Public Records Act, and nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring the disclosure of any record that is not subject to disclosure by the Public Records Act or other applicable law. Records or portions of records may be withheld or redacted to the extent necessary or permissible by law. The city shall not be required to create records or documents in response to a request for public records that do not exist at the time the request is made. A public records request is not continuing in nature, and will not be treated as such even if requested. In the event additional records are created after the date of the requester’s original public records request, the requester will be required to submit a new request for the later created records. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.040 Index of public records not maintained.

A. In General. The Public Records Act requires all cities and public agencies to maintain and make available a current index of certain public records. However, the Public Records Act also provides that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, or would interfere with agency operation, a city need not maintain such an index but it must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome.

B. Findings. The city of Burlington is comprised of 11 departments, and each department consists of several subdivisions. Each individual subdivision of the city performs a unique public service. Each subdivision may also utilize and produce various forms of “writings” as that term is defined in the Public Records Act, and thousands of writings are produced or utilized each day by these subdivisions. These writings may be maintained in several formats, including but not limited to: paper records, computer files, photographs, audio recordings, video recordings, and others. Filing systems vary from division to division due to different paper filing systems and the various computer programs used by each subdivision. Also, subdivisions of the city are physically located at various places within the city. As such, it is unduly burdensome, if not impossible, and would detract from the purpose of providing essential services to the citizens of Burlington, to provide a current index of public records.

C. Order. The Burlington city council orders that the city shall not maintain a current index of public records based upon the findings set forth in subsection B of this section; provided, that the city shall make available for review or copying any indexes that are maintained for city use to the extent not exempt from review or copying. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.050 Form and manner of request for public records.

A. All requests for public records shall be made in writing and delivered in person, by mail, or through the city’s online public records request form that may be made available on the city’s Internet website. Requests delivered by facsimile; electronically, other than those requests submitted through the city’s online public records request form; by telephone; or orally will not be accepted as valid requests for public records.

B. The city will provide a public records request form that may be used by those requesting public records. The public records request may be submitted on the form provided by the city, or in another written format that contains the following information:

1. The date of the request;

2. The name of the requester;

3. The full address of the requester;

4. The telephone number of the requester;

5. A complete description of the requested record;

6. The title and date of the requested record, if known;

7. The location of the requested record, if known; and

8. Whether the requester intends to review the records or to obtain a copy of the records. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.060 Submittal of a request for public records – Designation of public records officer.

A. The Burlington city administrator shall be the city’s public records officer to whom members of the public may direct requests for disclosure of public records and who will oversee the city’s compliance with public records disclosure requirements.

B. Except as set forth in subsection (C) of this section, all requests for public records shall be submitted to the city administrator at 833 South Spruce Street, Burlington, Washington 98233, (360) 755-0531, or his/her designee, or online through the city’s Internet website located at http://burlingtonwa.gov.

C. In order to provide for a more efficient response to requests for public records, the city has designated various records coordinators throughout the city as described in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section who may receive and respond to public records requests directly. If the record requested is not identified in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section, or the requester is unsure of where to file the request, the request shall be filed by the city administrator.

1. The records coordinator of the police department may receive and respond to a request to inspect and/or photocopy police reports. The request shall be delivered to the police department, 311 Cedar Street, Burlington, Washington 98233.

2. The records coordinator of the fire department may receive and respond to a request to inspect and/or photocopy fire reports. The request shall be delivered to Burlington Fire Station, 350 Sharon Street, Burlington, Washington 98233.

3. The records coordinator of the planning/building department may receive and respond to a request to inspect and/or photocopy planning files which the records coordinator, in his or her discretion, determines are readily available and easily accessible to the requester without the expenditure of significant staff time. In the event the records coordinator believes the request cannot be fulfilled without staff impacts, then he/she shall refer the requester to the city administrator located in the city administrator’s office, 833 South Spruce Street, Burlington, WA 98233.

4. The records coordinator of the public works department may receive and respond to a request to inspect and/or photocopy public works files which the records coordinator, in his/her own discretion, determines are readily available and accessible to the requester without the expenditure of significant staff time. In the event the records coordinator believes the request cannot be fulfilled without staff impacts, then he or she shall refer the requester to the city administrator located in the city administrator’s office.

5. The records coordinator of the Burlington municipal court may receive and respond to a request to inspect and/or photocopy court records. The request shall be delivered to the municipal court, 311 Cedar Street, Burlington, Washington 98233.

D. If the requester submits the request on the form provided by the city, the city administrator, or his/her designee, should indicate on the form the estimation of time necessary to provide a final response to the request. In the event the estimation of time necessary for providing records is not indicated on the form, the estimated time for providing disclosable records shall be 21 calendar days. Records provided in response to a public records request shall be those documents of record available for disclosure as of the date of the request.

E. Each city department may designate within its own department certain “over the counter” records available to the public for immediate inspection without the requirement of a formal public records request as set forth in this section. As an alternative to obtaining over the counter records through the process provided in the remainder of this chapter, a requester may obtain over the counter records pursuant to this subsection. Fees shall be adopted by city council resolution in compliance with RCW 42.17.300 as may be amended. A requester who obtains over the counter records through this subsection shall not be entitled to the remedies provided pursuant to the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1799 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1673 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.070 Initial response to request.

A. The city shall make an initial response to the request for public records within five business days of receipt of the request. In the event a request for public records is received after 5:00 p.m., the request shall be deemed to have been received on the next business day. Depending upon the nature of the request, the city may respond initially by:

1. Providing the record, or the disclosable portions of the record, for review, or a copy thereof if requested after payment of applicable fees;

2. Acknowledging the city’s receipt of the request accompanied by a reasonable estimate of the time necessary for further response; or

3. Denying the request.

B. In the event the requester completes the city’s standard public records request form, the returned copy provided to the requester shall constitute the initial response by the city with the estimation of time necessary for further response. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.080 Supplemental response to request – Additional time – Clarification.

A. From time to time, the city will need additional time to respond to a request for records in order to locate and assemble records, notify third persons or agencies affected by the request, determine whether any records or portions of records are exempt from disclosure, or determine whether denial should be made to the disclosure of all or a part of the requested records. In the event additional time is needed, the city will take reasonable steps to advise the requester of the additional time necessary.

B. At the time of the city’s initial response, or subsequent to the city’s initial response, the city may require the requester to clarify his/her request in order to provide the city with information sufficient to allow the city to determine which records are being requested and whether such records relating to the request exist. In the event the requester fails to clarify the request within 21 calendar days of the date the request for clarification is delivered to the requester, the request may be denied. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.090 Disclosure of records – Process.

A. Copies of Records. In the event a requester requests copies of records, the records shall be copied pursuant to the terms of this chapter.

B. Review of Records. In the event a requester chooses to review records, the city shall notify the requester once the records which respond to the request are available for review. The records will be available for review at reasonable dates and times as determined by the city administrator after consultation with the requester. Appointments to review records may be broken into intervals so as to not excessively interfere with the city’s provision of other essential services. Records that have been retrieved for review shall be made available to the requester for an initial period of 21 calendar days. This period may be extended upon agreement of the city administrator and the requester in order to provide a reasonable amount of time to inspect the records. In the event a requester fails to contact the city administrator to arrange to review the records within 21 calendar days of being notified that the records are available for review, the records request shall be deemed satisfied, the records shall be returned to the originating department, and if the requester wishes to review the records, he/she will be required to submit a new request for the records and the process will begin anew.

C. Partial or Installment Basis. If the city determines that records responsive to a public records request are voluminous, the city may make the records available for review or copying on a partial or installment basis as the records are assembled and become available for review or duplication. An installment of records that has been copied shall be made available for retrieval for a period of 21 calendar days. An installment of records that has been retrieved for review shall be made available to the requester for an initial period of 21 calendar days. This period may be extended upon agreement of the city administrator and the requester in order to provide a reasonable amount of time to inspect the records. In the event a requester fails to retrieve an installment of copied records, or to contact the city administrator to arrange to review an installment of records within 21 calendar days of being notified that the records are available for review, the records request shall be deemed satisfied, the records shall be returned to the originating department, and if the requester wishes to obtain the records, he/she will be required to submit a new request for the records and the process will begin anew.

D. Format of Records. Any records or portions of records disclosed by the city will be provided to the requester in the same format as they are retained; provided, that any disclosable records contained on a computer or other electronic or mechanical device shall, at the discretion of the city, be provided in printed form, on disk, or in another format. If the requester specifies a format in which the records should be disclosed, the city will disclose the records in the requested format if: (1) it is determined that disclosable records exist, (2) the city is capable of providing the records in the format requested, (3) the format requested is reasonable, and (4) the requester pays all costs associated with providing the records in the format requested. The costs associated with providing records in the format requested by the requester shall not be constrained by costs allowed by state law for providing photocopies, as requesting records in a special format shall be deemed an additional service provided by the city that is not constrained by the limitations set forth in state law. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.100 Final response to request. 

The city’s response to a request for records shall be deemed complete and final upon: 

A. Requester’s inspection of the records; or

B. In the event copies were requested, upon notification to the requester that the copies requested are available for payment and pick-up; or

C. In the event no records exist which are responsive to the request, upon such notification to the requester. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.110 Copying and delivering – Costs.

A. In the event a requester requests copies of records, prior to the disclosure of any public record, copying costs shall be collected. The city administrator shall establish, update, and post applicable copying costs as appropriate. The city finance director shall have the department’s cost schedule available for inspection upon request. If copied records are provided on an installment basis as set forth in BMC 1.30.090, the city may charge the requester for those copying costs as they accrue in making each installment available.

B. The requester shall pay all costs associated with the cost of delivering records.

C. Payment of copying and delivery fees shall be made prior to the disclosure of public records. When required pursuant to BMC 1.30.120, the payment of a deposit shall be made prior to the copying of any records. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.120 Deposit for copying. 

The city may, in its discretion, require the requester to deposit a sum equal to 10 percent of the estimated copying cost prior to duplication of the records. In the event a deposit is required, the city will notify the requester of the necessity of the deposit. Any deposit shall be made in accordance with BMC 1.30.130. In the event the actual copying costs are less than the amount deposited by the requester, the city will return the sum in excess of the actual amount to the requester. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.130 Payment of required fees. 

The payment of all costs associated with this chapter shall be made by cash, money order, or check payable to the city of Burlington. Payment shall be made in person at the customer service desk located at the finance department, 900 East Fairhaven Avenue, Burlington, Washington, or by mail to the city administrator, 900 East Fairhaven Avenue, Burlington, Washington, 98233. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.140 Failure to pay required costs. 

In the event a requester fails to pay for costs incurred within 30 calendar days of notification of those costs, the city shall require the requester to pay in full the past due amount owed, together with any accrued interest, before it will begin processing a new request, a pending request, or a subsequent installment of a request from the delinquent requester. In addition, for any future requests, the city may require advance payment of the full amount of the estimated costs before the city begins to process a new request or a pending request from that requester. Any copied records associated with a request for copies for which payment of copying costs has not been received within 30 calendar days of receiving notice may be destroyed in order to avoid storage costs. The requester shall be responsible for any costs associated with this chapter, and the city may take any steps available by law to collect the outstanding costs. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


1.30.150 Denial of request – Appeal. 

In the event the city administrator denies a request, or any portion of a request for public records, the requester shall appeal the denial to the city finance director. In the event no response to the appeal is delivered to the requester within seven calendar days of the city’s receipt of the appeal, the denial may be deemed final. (Ord. 1615 § 1, 2006).


Chapter 1.34 ENFORCEMENT OF CIVIL INFRACTIONS PURSUANT TO CHAPTER 7.80 RCW1

Sections:

1.34.010    Purpose.

1.34.020    Definitions.

1.34.030    Voluntary compliance.

1.34.040    Notice of civil infraction.

1.34.050    Monetary penalty.

1.34.060    Additional enforcement procedures.

1.34.070    Conflicts.

1.34.080    Severabilty.


1.34.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an alternative system to enforce the laws and regulations of the city of Burlington; to define the violations of such regulations as civil infractions; to establish monetary penalties for civil infractions as authorized by RCW 35A.11.020 and chapter 7.80 RCW; and to establish a standard procedure to be used by the city to abate such infractions. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

A. “Abate” means to take whatever steps are deemed necessary by an enforcement officer to rectify and correct a code violation. Abatement may include, but is not limited to, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, replacement or repair.

B. “Act” means doing or performing something.

C. “Day(s)” means a business day when five days or fewer are allowed to complete an act requirement by this chapter or a court of competent jurisdiction; when more than five days are allowed, “day(s)” shall mean calendar day.

D. “Civil violation” means a violation for which a monetary penalty may be imposed as specified in this chapter. Each day or portion of a day during which a violation occurs is a separate violation.

E. Enforcement Officer. As used in this chapter, “enforcement officer” means a peace officer holding a full or a limited law enforcement commission and who is authorized to enforce the provisions of the title or ordinance in which the civil infraction is established.

F. “Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction” means those rules that govern the procedure in courts of limited jurisdiction for cases involving infractions, as adopted by the Washington Supreme Court, as may now exist or hereafter be amended.

G. “Notice of infraction” means a form prescribed by the Administrative Office of the Courts pursuant to Rule 2.1 of the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction.

H. “Omission” means the failure to act.

I. “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any entity, public or private.

J. “Person responsible for the violation” means any person who is required by the applicable regulation to comply therewith, or who commits any act or omission that is a civil violation, or causes or permits a civil violation to occur or remain upon property in the city; and includes but is not limited to the owner(s), lessor(s), tenant(s), contractor performing work on behalf of the owner(s) or other person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupancy of the property where a civil violation may occur. More than one person may be responsible for a violation.

K. “Prosecuting attorney” means the Burlington city attorney, or the city attorney’s delegate.

L. “Regulation” means and includes the following as now or hereafter amended:

1. BMC Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations; Title 6, Animals; Title 8, Health and Safety; Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Title 13, Public Services; Title 14, Environmental Regulations; Title 14A, Land Use Decisions; Title 15, Buildings and Construction; Title 16, Subdivisions; and Title 17, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance;

2. All standards, regulations and procedures adopted pursuant to the above;

3. The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the city, or any concomitant agreement with the city; and

4. Any state or federal statute, administrative rule, or order explicitly adopted by the Burlington city council pursuant to the foregoing.

M. “Violation” means an act or omission contrary to a city of Burlington regulation, including an act or omission at the same or different location by the same person, and including a condition resulting from such act or omission. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.030 Voluntary compliance.

A. Applicability. This section applies whenever the enforcement officer has probable cause to believe, and does believe, that a violation of a regulation has occurred or is occurring.

B. General. An enforcement officer may pursue voluntary correction of a violation when, in the enforcement officer’s judgment, such efforts are likely to be successful.

C. Issuance of Voluntary Compliance Agreement. A voluntary compliance agreement may be entered into between the person responsible for the violation and the city, acting through the mayor. For the purposes of this chapter, the mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such voluntary compliance agreements on behalf of the city. The voluntary compliance agreement is a contract between the city and the person responsible for the violation in which such person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. All voluntary compliance agreements shall be approved by the city attorney or the city attorney’s delegate before becoming effective.

1. Content. The voluntary compliance agreement shall include the following:

a. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation;

b. The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon which or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring;

c. A description of the violation and a reference to the provision(s) of the regulation that has been violated;

d. The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date and time by which the corrective action must be completed; and

e. An agreement by the person responsible for the violation that the city of Burlington may abate the violation and recover its costs and expenses and a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter from the person responsible for the violation if all terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met.

2. Extension/Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the enforcement officer if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances render correction under the original conditions unattainable.

3. Abatement by the City. The city may abate the violation in accordance with BMC 1.34.050 and 1.34.060 if the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met.

4. Collection of Costs. If the terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation shall be assessed a monetary penalty commencing on the date set for correction and thereafter in accordance with BMC 1.34.050, plus any costs and expenses of abatement, as set forth in BMC 1.34.050 or 1.34.060. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.040 Notice of civil infraction.

A. Generally. An infraction proceeding is initiated by the issuance, service, and filing of a notice of infraction as set forth in this section, RCW 7.80.050, and in accordance with the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and RCW 7.80.050 or the infraction rules, the infraction rules or RCW 7.80.050 shall prevail. An infraction is issued on the date the infraction is signed by the enforcement officer or prosecuting authority.

B. Who May Issue. A notice of infraction may be issued upon certification that the issuer has probable cause to believe, and does believe, that a person has committed an infraction contrary to law:

1. By an enforcement officer. The infraction need not have been in the officer’s presence, except as provided by statute; or

2. By the prosecuting authority.

C. Content. The notice of infraction shall include the following information:

1. The name, address, and phone number of the court where the notice of infraction is to be filed;

2. The name, address, date of birth, sex, and physical characteristics of the defendant;

3. The infraction which the defendant is alleged to have committed and the accompanying statutory citation or ordinance number, the date, time, and place the infraction occurred, the date the notice of infraction was issued, and the name and, if applicable, the number of the enforcement officer;

4. A statement that the defendant must respond to the notice of infraction within 15 days of issuance;

5. The monetary penalty which respondent may pay in lieu of appearing in court;

6. A statement that a mailed response must be mailed not later than midnight on the day the response is due;

7. The statements required by RCW 46.63.060 or other applicable statute; and

8. Any additional information determined necessary by the administrator for the courts.

D. Service and Filing of Notice. A notice of infraction may be served either by:

1. The enforcement officer serving the notice of infraction on the person named in the notice of infraction at the time of issuance;

2. The enforcement officer or the prosecuting authority filing the notice of infraction with the court, in which case the court shall have the notice served either personally or by mail, postage prepaid, on the person named in the notice of infraction at his or her address. If a notice of infraction served by mail is returned to the court as undeliverable, the court shall issue a summons.

3. Filing of Notice. When a notice of infraction has been issued, the notice shall be filed with a court having jurisdiction over the infraction or with a violations bureau subject to such court’s supervision. The notice must be filed within five days after issuance of the notice, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. In the absence of good cause shown, a notice of infraction not filed within the time limits of this section shall, upon motion, be dismissed without prejudice.

E. Final Determination. A notice of civil infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed. The determination is final unless contested as provided in the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.050 Monetary penalty.

A. Penalty Schedule. A person found to have committed a civil infraction shall be assessed a monetary penalty. The maximum monetary penalty for each separate violation per day or portion thereof shall be as follows:

1. First day of each violation (the first day is the date of issuance): $100.00;

2. Second day of each violation: $200.00;

3. Third day of each violation: $300.00;

4. Fourth day of each violation: $400.00;

5. Each additional day of each violation beyond four days: $500.00 per day.

B. Joint and Several Liability. More than one person, firm, corporation, association or agent may be found responsible for a single violation. The court may impose a monetary penalty for each violation as a joint and several penalty, or individually.

C. Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of the monetary penalty does not relieve the person to whom the notice of infraction was issued of the duty to correct the violation. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.060 Additional enforcement procedures.

The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to other enforcement provisions authorized by this code, except as precluded by law. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.070 Conflicts.

The provisions of the penal code, BMC Title 9, do not apply to this title. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).


1.34.080 Severabilty.

If any one or more sections, subsections or sentences of this chapter are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter and the same shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1851 § 3 (Exh. C), 2018).1

Prior legislation: Ord. 1760. 


Chapter 1.44 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT, NUISANCES AND CIVIL VIOLATIONS

Sections:

1.44.010    Title.

1.44.020    Application.

1.44.030    Purpose.

1.44.040    Authority.

1.44.050    Liability and defenses of responsible parties.

1.44.060    Investigation and notice of violation.

1.44.070    Time to comply.

1.44.080    Extension of compliance date.

1.44.090    Stop work order.

1.44.100    Emergency order.

1.44.110    Voluntary compliance agreement.

1.44.120    Suspension or revocation.

1.44.130    Abatement.

1.44.140    Abatement by owner or other responsible person.

1.44.150    Civil penalty.

1.44.160    Additional relief.

1.44.170    Administrative appeal.


1.44.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “compliance and enforcement, nuisances and civil violations.” (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.020 Application.

This chapter sets forth the enforcement procedures for violations of the following:

A. Chapter 8.12 BMC, Nuisances; and

B. Violations of any provisions of BMC Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations; Title 6, Animals; Title 8, Health and Safety; Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Title 13, Public Services; Title 14, Environmental Regulations; Title 14A, Land Use Decisions; Title 15, Buildings and Construction; Title 16, Subdivisions; Title 17, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance; and Title 18, Shoreline Master Program. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedures and penalties for enforcement of violations of code sections identified in BMC 1.44.020. This chapter is intended to establish one of several methods of enforcement available to the city attorney as more specifically listed in chapter 1.24 BMC, Violations and Penalties. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.040 Authority.

Enforcement of civil violations and nuisances including the abatement of nuisances under this chapter is authorized pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35A.11.020, 35A.12.140 and chapter 8.12 BMC. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.050 Liability and defenses of responsible parties.

A. Who Must Comply. It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the responsible parties as defined in BMC 14.01.060. The city of Burlington and its agencies are intended to have the same obligation for compliance when the city is a responsible party. No provision of this title is intended to impose any other duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees.

B. Joint and Several Liability. Each responsible party is jointly and severally liable for a violation of this title. The director may take enforcement action, in whole or in part, against any responsible party. All applicable civil penalties may be imposed against each responsible party. In the event enforcement action is taken against more than one responsible party, recoverable damages, costs, and expenses may be allocated among the responsible parties by the court based upon the extent to which each responsible party’s acts or omissions caused the violation, unless this factor cannot be determined, or the party receiving the allocation under this factor is unable to correct the violation, or is unable to pay the damages, costs, expenses, and any penalty imposed, in which case the trier of fact shall consider:

1. Awareness of the violation;

2. Ability to correct the violation;

3. Ability to pay the damages, costs, and expenses;

4. Cooperation with government agencies;

5. Degree to which any impact or threatened impact on water or sediment quality, human health, or the environment is related to acts or omissions by each responsible party;

6. Degree to which the responsible parties made good faith efforts to avoid a violation or to mitigate its consequences; and

7. Other equitable factors.

C. Defenses. A responsible party shall not be liable under this title when the responsible party carries the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, one of the following defenses:

1. The violation was caused solely by an act of God;

2. The violation was caused solely by another responsible party over whom the defending responsible party had no authority or control and the defending responsible party could not have reasonably prevented the violation;

3. The violation was caused solely by a prior owner or occupant when the defending responsible party took possession of the property without knowledge of the violation, after using reasonable efforts to identify violations. However, the defending responsible party shall be liable for all continuing, recurrent, or new violations after becoming the owner or occupant;

4. For violations of chapter 14.05 BMC, Surface Water Management, the responsible party implemented and maintained all appropriate best management practices identified in rules promulgated by the director, or in manuals published by the State Department of Ecology until superseded by rules of the director. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.060 Investigation and notice of violation.

A. The person charged with the enforcement of the code at issue, or the designated enforcement officer, shall investigate any violation of any code provision identified above as well as any premises, structure or use which may not comply with the standards and requirements of the applicable code provisions.

B. If after investigation it is determined that the standards or requirements have been violated, a notice of violation shall be served upon the owner or responsible person for the violation. The notice of violation shall state separately each standard or requirement violated, shall state what corrective action is necessary to comply with the standards or requirements, and shall set a reasonable time for compliance.

C. The notice shall be served upon the owner, tenant or other person responsible for the condition by personal service, registered mail, or certified mail with return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of such person. If, after a reasonable search and reasonable efforts are made to obtain service, the whereabouts of the person or persons is unknown or service cannot be accomplished and the enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then service of the notice upon such person or persons may be made by:

1. Publishing the notice once each week for two consecutive weeks in the city official newspaper; and

2. Mailing a copy of the notice to each person named on the notice of violation by first class mail to the last known address if known, or if unknown, to the address of the property involved in the proceedings.

D. A copy of the notice shall be posted at a conspicuous place on the property, unless posting the notice is not physically possible.

E. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preclude any action or proceeding pursuant to BMC 1.44.090 or 1.44.100. The notice may be mailed, or cause to be delivered to all residential and/or nonresidential rental units in the structure or posted at a conspicuous place on the property; a notice shall inform each recipient or resident about the notice of violation, stop work order or emergency order and the applicable requirements and procedures.

F. A notice or an order may be amended at any time in order to:

1. Correct clerical errors; or

2. Cite additional authority for a stated violation.

G. The notice of violation shall not be amended by the enforcement officer to include additional violations as a result of any reinspection for compliance or other purpose except upon a clear showing that the amendment is necessary for the protection of public safety, health and general welfare and that the additional violation did not exist or could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of original inspection. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.070 Time to comply.

A. When calculating a reasonable time for compliance, the following criteria shall be considered:

1. The type and degree of violation cited in the notice;

2. The stated intent, if any, of a responsible person or owner to take steps to comply;

3. The procedural requirements for obtaining a permit to carry out corrective action;

4. The complexity of the corrective action, including seasonal considerations, construction requirements and the legal prerogatives of landlords and tenants; and

5. Any other circumstances beyond the control of the responsible person or owner.

B. Unless a request for extension of compliance date is made in accordance with BMC 1.44.080 the notice of violation shall become the final order. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the Skagit County auditor. The person charged with the enforcement of the applicable code provision or the enforcement officer may choose not to file a copy of the notice or order if the notice or order is directed only to a responsible person other than the owner of the property. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.080 Extension of compliance date.

An extension of time for compliance with a notice of violation may be granted in writing by the person charged with the enforcement of the applicable code or the enforcement officer upon receipt of a written request therefor. A written request to grant an extension of time may be approved after finding that required actions have been started and that the work is progressing at a satisfactory rate. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.090 Stop work order.

Whenever a continuing violation of this code will materially impair the person responsible for enforcement of the applicable code or the enforcement officer’s ability to secure compliance with this code, or when the continuing violation threatens the health or safety of the public, a stop work order may be issued specifying the violation and prohibiting any work or other activity at the site. A failure to comply with a stop work order shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.100 Emergency order.

A. Whenever any use or activity in violation of this code threatens the health and safety of the occupants of the premises or any member of the public, the person responsible for the enforcement of the code or the enforcement officer may issue an emergency order directing that the use or activity be discontinued and the condition causing the threat to the public health and safety be corrected. The emergency order shall specify the time for compliance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, if posting is physically possible. A failure to comply with an emergency order shall constitute a separate violation.

B. Any condition described in the emergency order which is not corrected within the time specified is declared to be a public nuisance and the person responsible for the enforcement of the code or the enforcement officer is authorized to summarily abate such nuisance by such means as may be available and necessary to protect the public health and safety, or pursuant to the provisions set forth in BMC 1.44.130 and 1.44.140. The cost of such abatement shall be recovered from the owner or responsible person or both in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.110 Voluntary compliance agreement.

A. Initiation. Either a responsible party or the director may initiate negotiations for a voluntary compliance agreement at any time. The director has no obligation to enter into any voluntary compliance agreement.

B. Contents. A voluntary compliance agreement shall set forth actions to be taken by the responsible party that will correct past or existing violations of this title. It may also set forth actions to mitigate the impacts of violations. The voluntary compliance agreement shall set forth a schedule for completion of the corrective and mitigating actions. It shall contain a provision allowing the director to inspect the premises to determine compliance with the agreement.

C. Effect of Agreement. A voluntary compliance agreement is a binding contract between the party executing it and the city. It is not enforceable by any other party. All voluntary compliance agreements shall provide that the responsible party agrees the city may perform the actions set forth in the agreement if the responsible party fails to do so according to the terms and schedule of the agreement, and the responsible party will pay the costs, expenses and damages the city incurs in performing the actions. By entering into a voluntary compliance agreement, a responsible party waives the right to an administrative appeal of the violation.

D. Penalties may be reduced or waived if violations are corrected or mitigated according to the terms and schedule of a voluntary compliance agreement. If the responsible party fails to perform according to the terms and schedule of the voluntary compliance agreement, penalties for each violation addressed in the agreement may be assessed starting from the date the violation occurred.

E. Modification. The terms and schedule of the voluntary compliance agreement may be modified by mutual agreement of the responsible party and the director if circumstances or conditions outside the responsible party’s control, or unknown at the time the agreement was made, or other just cause necessitate such modifications. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.120 Suspension or revocation.

Approvals or permits granted in error, or on the basis of incomplete, inaccurate or misleading information, or in violation of any law, ordinance or regulation may be suspended or revoked. Other permits or approvals interrelated with an approval suspended or revoked under this section, including certificates of occupancy or approvals for occupancy, may also be suspended or revoked. When an approval or permit is suspended or revoked, the director may require the applicant to take corrective action to bring the project into compliance with this title by a deadline set by the director, or may take other enforcement action. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.130 Abatement.

The enforcement officer may also seek relief in superior court to enjoin any acts or practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of this chapter when the civil or criminal remedies provided in this chapter are inadequate to effect compliance. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.140 Abatement by owner or other responsible person.

If and when an owner or other responsible person shall undertake to abate any condition described in this chapter, whether by order of the enforcement officer or otherwise, all needful and legal conditions pertinent to the abatement may be imposed by the person responsible for enforcement of the applicable code or the enforcement officer. It is unlawful for the owner or other responsible person to fail to comply with such conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or other responsible person of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to do any work incidental to the abatement. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.150 Civil penalty.

A. In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure which may be available, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of code provisions identified by this chapter shall be subject to a cumulative penalty in the amount of $75.00 per day for each violation from the date set for compliance until the order is complied with.

B. The penalty imposed by this section shall be collected by civil action brought in the name of the city. The city attorney shall be notified in writing of the name of any person subject to the penalty, and the city attorney shall take appropriate action to collect the penalty.

C. The violator may show as full or partial mitigation of liability:

1. That the violation giving rise to the action was caused by the willful act, or neglect, or abuse of another; or

2. That correction of the violation was commenced promptly upon receipt of the notice thereof, but that full compliance within the time specified was prevented by inability to gain access to the subject structure, or other condition or circumstance beyond the control of the defendant. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.160 Additional relief.

Other and additional relief or equitable relief may be sought to enjoin any acts or practices and abate any condition which constitutes or will constitute a violation of code provisions identified in this chapter when penalties set forth in this chapter or as identified in chapter 1.24 BMC are inadequate to effect compliance. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


1.44.170 Administrative appeal.

Any person aggrieved by the issuance of a notice and order of violation, stop work order or emergency order or the imposition of a penalty issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal the same to the hearing examiner within 14 days of issuance of the notice, order or penalty. (Ord. 1851 § 4 (Exh. D), 2018).


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.04    Council Meetings

2.08    City Administrator

2.10    Legal Department – City Attorney

2.12    Clerk-Treasurer

2.14    Municipal Judge

2.16    Repealed

2.20    Auditing Officer

2.22    Audit and Finance Committee

2.24    Investment Committee

2.26    Special and Standing Committees

2.28    Civil Service Commission for Police and Fire

2.30    Burlington Farmers Market Department

2.32    Repealed

2.34    Building Department

2.36    Fire Department

2.38    Police Department

2.40    Police Reserve

2.42    Planning and Community Development Department

2.44    City Employees

2.48    Collective Bargaining

2.52    Officials’ Bonds

2.56    Compensation

2.60    Official Depositories

2.62    Hazardous Materials Incident Command Agency

2.64    Emergency Services

2.68    Cemetery

2.70    Parks and Recreation Department

2.72    City Park

2.74    Lodging Tax Advisory Committee

2.76    Public Library

2.78    Museum and Museum Board

2.84    Procurement

2.88    Public Works Director

2.92    City Office Hours

2.96    Historical Preservation Ordinance

2.100    Credit Cards


Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS

Sections:

2.04.010    Regular meetings held when, where.

2.04.020    Repealed.

2.04.030    Parliamentary procedure.


2.04.010 Regular meetings held when, where.

A. The regular meetings of the Burlington city council shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month, except when such meeting day falls on a holiday, in which case the meeting will be held on the Tuesday immediately preceding.

B. Regular meetings of the Burlington city council shall begin at 7:00 p.m. and shall be held in the council chambers in the Burlington City Hall, at 833 South Spruce Street, Burlington, or at such other location as shall be designated by the finance director and published in the meeting agenda.

C. At all meetings of the Burlington city council, a majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn the meeting, in accordance with RCW 35A.12.120. (Ord. 1737 § 1, 2011; Ord. 932 § 1, 1979).


2.04.020 Oath of office.

Repealed by Ord. 1737. (Ord. 932 § 3, 1979).


2.04.030 Parliamentary procedure.

Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised, is adopted by the city council as the rules to control all questions of parliamentary procedure not otherwise provided for by the statutes of the state or ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1737 § 3, 2011; Ord. 932 § 2, 1979).


Chapter 2.08 CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sections:

2.08.010    Position created.

2.08.020    Appointment.

2.08.030    Responsibilities and duties.

2.08.040    Jurisdiction of office.

2.08.050    Interpretation of official title.


2.08.010 Position created.

The position of administrator for the city of Burlington, Washington, is hereby created. (Ord. 1186 § 2, 1991).


2.08.020 Appointment.

The city administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval by majority vote of the city council. The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1643 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1186 § 3, 1991).


2.08.030 Responsibilities and duties.

It shall be the responsibility and duty of the administrator to:

A. Oversee the daily operations of the city and work closely with other agencies to protect the city’s interests and facilitate positive intergovernmental relations.

B. Monitor the city-wide work program, coordinating the target times and staffing commitments for projects.

C. Assist the mayor in day-to-day operations which shall include the handling of complaints and talking with the public.

D. Investigate and report on all activities of city intergovernmental relations.

E. Oversee the city’s risk management program.

F. Annually review the city’s personnel policies and recommend changes.

G. Oversee most personnel issues and keep the mayor regularly briefed on all personnel matters. This responsibility shall include making recommendations to the mayor on new hires and terminations, with the mayor retaining final authority thereon.

H. Assist the mayor with performance evaluations.

I. Assist the mayor with the responsibilities of the affirmative action and equal employment opportunity laws.

J. Obtain grants and other effective funding sources to assist in keeping the capital facilities program funded. This duty includes keeping in personal contact with funding sources and agencies to insure timely and complete submittals for funding and appropriate follow-up upon such submittals.

K. Maintain quality control on the delivery of public services.

L. Oversee and facilitate preparation of the annual budget.

M. Investigate and make recommendations to the city council and mayor on all complaints referred to him/her and or received by him/her concerning city business.

N. Review the city codes on a regular basis and assure that the codes, rules, and procedures are up to date and that the city’s on-going procedures are in compliance with the laws of the state of Washington. This duty requires the administrator to maintain a working knowledge of the Revised Code of the State of Washington and the Washington Administrative Code.

O. Attend all meetings of the city council, except where excused. Attend other meetings when the mayor is unavailable, representing the city’s position with portfolio.

P. Approve the city council agendas.

Q. Lead the city’s management team, providing direction to the department directors as needed.

R. Brief the mayor and city council on policy issues, consulting with experts and governmental officials as appropriate and providing the mayor and city council with in-depth policy analysis.

S. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the mayor. (Ord. 1186 § 4, 1991).


2.08.040 Jurisdiction of office.

The administrator of the city of Burlington shall be a full-time supervisory employee having jurisdiction over all city employees, except members of the city council and the mayor. The city administrator shall make recommendations to the city council and the mayor from time to time concerning working conditions, duties, and compensation of all other city employees. The administrator shall keep both the members of the city council and the mayor informed on all city business. (Ord. 1186 § 5, 1991).


2.08.050 Interpretation of official title.

The administrator position created herein replaces the former general supervisor position. Insofar as other ordinances of the city of Burlington may refer to the general supervisor, such references shall be interpreted as referring to the administrator. (Ord. 1186 § 6, 1991).


Chapter 2.10 LEGAL DEPARTMENT –  CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.10.010    Purpose.

2.10.020    Legal department created.

2.10.030    Duties and responsibilities of department.

2.10.040    City attorney designated.

2.10.050    Duties of city attorney.

2.10.060    Acting city attorney – Office created – Duties.


2.10.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a legal department, designate the city attorney, and establish the duties and responsibilities of the department. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


2.10.020 Legal department created.

There is established in the city a department known as the legal department which shall be under the direction of the city attorney, subject to the supervision of the mayor and/or city administrator. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


2.10.030 Duties and responsibilities of department.

The legal department shall perform the following duties and responsibilities for the city:

A. The department provides legal counsel to city officials, other departments, commissions and boards;

B. The department represents the city, city officials, and employees acting in their official capacity, in district, superior and appeals courts and other legal proceedings in which the city is involved;

C. The department provides prosecution responsibilities in municipal court;

D. The department prepares legal documents, ordinances and resolutions pertaining to city business and legal advice or assistance on issues related to labor law;

E. The department shall be responsible for the oversight of the risk management program for the city. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


2.10.040 City attorney designated.

The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval by majority vote of the city council. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1643 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


2.10.050 Duties of city attorney.

The city attorney shall advise authorities and officers on all legal matters pertaining to the business of the city and shall approve all ordinances as to form. The city attorney shall represent the city in all actions brought by or against the city, or against city officials in their official capacity. The city attorney shall serve as the city’s representative to the Cities Insurance Association of Washington. The city attorney shall perform such other duties as the mayor, city administrator or city council, by ordinance, shall direct. Included in the foregoing and in addition thereto, the city attorney shall:

A. Attend all meetings of the city council, including regular, special, and interim meetings;

B. Answer inquiries from citizens for information concerning city matters;

C. Consult interested officials and officers concerning, and prepare, all resolutions, ordinances, petitions, contracts, leases, easements, deeds, notices, and other legal documents, and suggested legislation, where the responsibility for preparation is upon the city, or requested by city officials; examine and approve or suggest changes in all such instruments when the duty of preparation rests upon others than the city;

D. Advise the council, boards, commissions, department heads and other city officials and officers, rendering formal legal opinions when requested, or when it appears to the attorney necessary or advisable;

E. Prosecute in the court of criminal jurisdiction, and on appeal in appellate courts, all alleged violations of city ordinances, and actions to recover licenses, penalties and forfeitures; advise the proper officials and officers on the filing of complaints therefor;

F. Prosecute and/or defend, in courts of original jurisdiction, and on appeal, all civil actions brought by or against the city, or against officials, officers and employees in their official capacity, including condemnation proceedings; participate in consultations concerning settlement of claims against the city, or its officials, officers and employees in their official capacities; provided that where insurance counsel also defends the city, the main burden of such actions may be left to such counsel; see to the ultimate enforcement of all judgments and decrees rendered in favor of the city in any action or suit;

G. Participate in the expedition of bond issues, providing this shall not require an opinion of the validity of the bonds in any case where special bond counsel is retained by the city or any prospective bond buyer;

H. On request, participate in and consult concerning intergovernmental relations in which the city is concerned;

I. Perform such other duties as may be required by the laws of the state; provided, however, the duties of the city attorney as prescribed in this section shall not prohibit the employment of special counsel to assist the city attorney in unusual cases of a specialized nature, when such employment is authorized by the city council;

J. Be responsible for the management and supervision of department staff, budgets, and operations. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


2.10.060 Acting city attorney – Office created – Duties.

There is created the office of acting city attorney, which office shall be filled by the appointment of the mayor. The acting city attorney shall assist and when necessary substitute for the city attorney in the performance of the duties of the city attorney set forth in BMC 2.10.050, and shall assist the city attorney in his presence at such times as he may desire. The acting city attorney may engage in the private practice of law and perform duties outside the scope of duties of acting city attorney and shall be paid for such time expended while acting in the capacity as acting city attorney at that rate that is contractually agreed to by the city. (Ord. 1486 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 2.12 CLERK-TREASURER

Sections:

2.12.010    Offices of clerk and treasurer combined.

2.12.020    Title of office designated.

2.12.030    Compensation.

2.12.040    Powers and duties.

2.12.050    Effective date.


2.12.010 Offices of clerk and treasurer combined.

The office of the city treasurer shall be combined with the office of the city clerk, and the clerk-treasurer shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval by majority vote of the city council. The clerk-treasurer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Such appointment must be in writing, signed by the mayor, filed with the clerk-treasurer, and subject to filing bond in such an amount as may be required by law. (Ord. 1644 § 1, 2007; Ord. 790 § 1, 1973).


2.12.020 Title of office designated.

The combined office of clerk-treasurer shall be referred to as the office of the finance director. The city finance director is hereby designated as the city treasurer, pursuant to RCW 35A.42.010. The finance director shall exercise all the powers vested in and perform all the duties required to be performed by the treasurer together with those of the clerk and also perform such other duties as the city may prescribe. The duties and responsibilities of the office remain the same and are not affected by this title change. (Ord. 1644 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1185 § 1, 1991; Ord. 790 § 2, 1973).


2.12.030 Compensation.

The compensation for the office of clerk-treasurer shall be set by ordinance. (Ord. 790 § 5, 1973).


2.12.040 Powers and duties.

The duties of the clerk-treasurer (finance director) shall be such as are prescribed by the laws of the state of Washington and the ordinances of the city for city clerks and city treasurers. The duties include, but are not limited to, financial planning, investing public funds, preparation of the annual budget, data processing, having responsibility for all city revenue and funds, providing the accounting for all utilities, cemetery, firemen’s pension fund, special assessments, providing statistical data accumulation, purchasing and services necessary for the merged clerk-treasurer department, and shall perform the duties of clerk and secretary required in chapter 41.16 RCW. The clerk-treasurer (finance director) shall assist the mayor and council in the preparation of the annual budget, provide information to the mayor and council, supervise accountants and clerical personnel of the finance director department, and have such other duties, responsibilities and functions as set forth in the job classification description of finance director now on file with the city. (Ord. 1185 § 2, 1991; Ord. 790 § 3, 1973).


2.12.050 Effective date.

The combining of the office of city treasurer with that of city clerk shall become effective on June 1, 1973, and on and after said date the office of city treasurer shall be abolished; provided, that if upon the aforesaid effective date there is an elected city treasurer holding that office, said treasurer shall continue in that office until the end of his elected term, or until the office is vacated for other reasons, whichever occurs earlier, after which the provisions of this chapter shall become effective. (Ord. 790 § 4, 1973).


Chapter 2.14 MUNICIPAL JUDGE

Sections:

2.14.010    Appointment.


2.14.010 Appointment.

The mayor of the city of Burlington is hereby authorized and directed to appoint part-time municipal judges. Said appointment shall be made from a pool consisting of Skagit County District Court judges and court commissioners. Said appointment shall be for a term not longer than said district court judge or judge’s term of office. (Ord. 1178 § 1, 1991).


Chapter 2.16 ATTORNEY

(Repealed by Ord. 1643)


Chapter 2.20 AUDITING OFFICER

Sections:

2.20.010    Appointment.

2.20.020    Deputy auditing officer – Appointment.

2.20.030    Powers and duties.


2.20.010 Appointment.

The city supervisor of the city is appointed as the auditing officer for the city. (Ord. 793 § 1, 1973).


2.20.020 Deputy auditing officer – Appointment.

The city clerk-treasurer of the city is appointed deputy auditing officer for the city. (Ord. 793 § 2, 1973).


2.20.030 Powers and duties.

The auditing officer, or in his absence the deputy auditing officer, shall audit, authenticate, and certify claims against the city for services rendered, materials supplied and labor performed, prior to payment of such claims, in accordance with chapter 42.24 RCW. (Ord. 793 § 3, 1973).


Chapter 2.22 AUDIT AND FINANCE COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.22.010    Creation.

2.22.020    Composition.

2.22.030    Terms of councilmember appointments.

2.22.040    Powers and duties.

2.22.050    Meetings.


2.22.010 Creation.

The city council shall create an audit and finance committee, consisting of five members, of which three members shall be city councilmembers appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the city council. (Ord. 1461 § 1, 2001).


2.22.020 Composition.

The audit and finance committee shall consist of the auditing officer and deputy auditing officer as stated in chapter 2.20 BMC and three councilmembers who are appointed by the mayor without confirmation of the council. (Ord. 1488 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1461 § 1, 2001).


2.22.030 Terms of councilmember appointments.

The initial term of office of the three councilmembers first appointed shall be designated as one to two years in such a manner as to provide the opportunity for all councilmembers to serve on this committee during their term in office as an elected official. The mayor shall appoint one councilmember for a two-year term and two councilmembers for a one-year term. The councilmember appointed to the two-year term shall automatically become the chairperson of the committee during his/her first and second year of this appointment. After the initial appointment to this committee the mayor shall annually appoint one councilmember to a two-year term and one councilmember to a one-year term. The council member serving a two-year term shall automatically serve as the committee chair during the second year of his/her term. (Ord. 1461 § 1, 2001).


2.22.040 Powers and duties.

The audit and finance committee shall have the powers and duties to perform the following:

A. Audit all bills of the city and certify that all claims against the city are in accordance with state and municipal law.

B. Present certified claims to city council requesting approval for payment by motion of the council.

C. Assist finance director in formulating and recommending financial policies of the city. Review and advise on policies prior to submittal to council for adoption and approval.

D. Review all requests, advise and make recommendations for capital items, projects or programs not included in the current annual budget of the city as approved by the council.

E. Advise on procedural issues, recommendations and questions presented by the finance officer or city administrator. (Ord. 1461 § 1, 2001).


2.22.050 Meetings.

The audit and finance committee shall meet regularly at 4:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Thursday of the month, except when such meeting day falls on a holiday, in which case the meeting will be held on the Tuesday immediately preceding. The audit and finance committee meetings shall be held at City Hall, located at 833 South Spruce Street, Burlington, to perform duties as stated in BMC 2.22.040. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson of the committee, the finance director or the city administrator for the purpose of fulfilling the powers and duties of the committee. The audit and finance committee shall meet in a regular open public meeting of the city council pursuant to the Open Public Meetings Act. (Ord. 1813 § 1, 2015).


Chapter 2.24 INVESTMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.24.010    Appointment.

2.24.020    Powers and duties.

2.24.030    Government of actions – Quarterly report.


2.24.010 Appointment.

Pursuant to RCW 35.39.032, the city council appoints an investment committee to be composed of the city finance director, city administrator and a city councilmember, the latter being appropriately elected by a majority vote of the city council to serve at their pleasure. (Ord. 1462 § 1, 2001; Ord. 792 § 1, 1973).


2.24.020 Powers and duties.

The investment committee is authorized to determine the amount of money available in each fund for investment purposes and to make investments of city funds as indicated in RCW 35.39.030, as now or hereafter amended, and RCW 35.39.034 without required action of the legislative authority for each investment in accordance with the “City of Burlington Investment Policy” adopted on July 10, 1997, by Resolution 9-97 of the Burlington city council. (Ord. 1462 § 1, 2001; Ord. 792 § 2, 1973).


2.24.030 Government of actions – Quarterly report.

The investment committee shall be governed in its action by chapter 35.39 RCW, as now or hereafter amended, and shall make a quarterly report of all investment transactions to the city council at the first council meeting following the month for which the quarterly report is made in accordance with the “City of Burlington Investment Policy” adopted on July 10, 1997, by Resolution 9-97 of the Burlington city council. (Ord. 1462 § 1, 2001; Ord. 792 § 3, 1973).


Chapter 2.26 SPECIAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES

Sections:

2.26.010    Special committees.

2.26.020    Standing committees.


2.26.010 Special committees.

The mayor, at his or her discretion, may establish and organize any special committee to address a particular topic, function or activity of interest to the city. (Ord. 1463 § 1, 2001).


2.26.020 Standing committees.

A. There shall be created and established the following standing committees of the city council:

1. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);

2. Downtown Burlington Association;

3. Historical preservation advisory council;

4. Land use;

5. Public safety;

6. Public works;

7. Traffic safety.

B. Appointments to these committees shall be made by the mayor at the first council meeting of each new year.

C. Each committee shall meet and act on all matters referred to their respective committee. Minutes of the committee meetings shall be kept, printed and distributed to the mayor, councilmembers, city administrator and appropriate staff. All recommendations to the city council from each committee shall be presented in writing.

D. Membership of each committee shall be as follows:

1. Americans with Disabilities: two city councilmembers, two citizens from the disabled community, two citizens who are business operators within the city limits of Burlington, the city engineer and the city administrator, who shall be the ADA compliance officer. The chair of the committee shall be one of the selected councilmembers.

2. Downtown Burlington Association representatives: select three councilmembers.

3. Historical preservation advisory council: shall consist of seven members, including a representative of Burlington parks board, Burlington parks foundation citizen, city councilmember, Genealogical Society member, parks and recreation director (non-voting member), Pioneer, and Skagit Valley Historical Society member.

4. Land use committee: three members of the city council, the mayor, the city planning director, and the chairman of the planning commission.

5. Public safety committee: three members of the city council, the mayor, city administrator, municipal court administrator, fire chief, police chief. One member of the city council shall serve as committee chair.

6. Public works committee: three members of the city council, the mayor, the city administrator, the director of public works/engineering, the street supervisor, the sanitation/parks maintenance supervisor and the sewer supervisor. The director of public works/engineering shall act as the chair of this committee.

7. Traffic safety: one member of the city council who shall act as chair, the mayor, the city administrator, police chief, the city engineer and one member of the public appointed by the city council.

E. Committee Purposes.

1. ADA. Assist in the coordination and monitoring of city efforts to comply with ADA regulations.

2. Downtown Burlington Association. A committee headed by the Burlington Chamber of Commerce to organize, plan and administer a revitalization program for downtown Burlington.

3. Historical Preservation Advisory Council. An advisory council is formed entitled the historical preservation advisory council. The council shall be advisory to the parks and recreation advisory board, mayor and city council. The purpose of the board shall be to preserve and share our local history so our neighbors and visitors can connect to our past, understand our present, and appreciate our regional heritage in planning for the future by making recommendations through our parks and recreation advisory board to the mayor and city council.

4. Land Use. To provide a review of specific issues related to zoning codes, permit policies and land use issues presented to the city.

5. Public Safety Committee. Provide monthly updates regarding activities of the municipal court, fire department and police department. Provide comments and recommendations regarding projects, proposed policies and procedures and issues presented to the committee by the respective departments of this committee.

6. Public Works Committee. Provide monthly updates regarding activities of the public works and engineering department. Provide comments and recommendations regarding public works projects and issues presented to the committee.

7. Traffic Safety Committee. Recommend modifications of the parking ordinance, traffic hazards, traffic safety issues, placement of handicap stalls, crosswalks, signs, and issues related to traffic flow within the city of Burlington.

F. Meetings. All standing committees shall meet in a regular open public meeting of the city council pursuant to the Open Public Meetings Act.

1. ADA. The ADA committee shall meet as needed or convenient.

2. Downtown Burlington Association. The Downtown Burlington Association shall meet as needed or convenient.

3. Historical preservation advisory council shall meet the second Tuesday of January, April, July and October at 5:00 p.m. in the parks and recreation office, 900 E. Fairhaven Avenue, Burlington.

4. Land Use. The land use committee shall meet as needed or convenient.

5. Public Safety Committee. The public safety committee shall meet at 4:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month, at the Police Training Room, 311 Cedar Street, Burlington.

6. Public Works Committee. The public works committee shall meet at 4:00 p.m. on the third Tuesday of each month, at the Public Works Conference Room, 833 South Spruce Street, Burlington.

7. Traffic Safety Committee. The traffic safety committee shall meet as needed or convenient. (Ord. 1737 § 5, 2011; Ord. 1463 § 1, 2001).


Chapter 2.28 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION FOR POLICE AND FIRE

Sections:

2.28.010    Purpose.

2.28.020    Created – Membership – Appointment.

2.28.030    Organization.

2.28.040    Powers and duties.

2.28.050    Existing police force.

2.28.060    Police force – Applicants.

2.28.070    Police force – Removal of officers – Procedures.


2.28.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a civil service commission for the city police and fire departments, provide for the appointment of the commission members, and set forth the powers and duties of said commission, all pursuant to chapters 41.08 and 41.12 RCW. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2001; Ord. 816 § 1, 1974).


2.28.020 Created – Membership – Appointment.

Pursuant to chapters 41.08 and 41.12 RCW, there is created a civil service commission to exercise the powers and to perform the duties established by such state law in connection with the selection, appointment and employment of police and fire department personnel in the city. The commission shall be composed of three members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and who shall serve without compensation. Such commissioners shall be appointed and shall have the qualifications as prescribed in RCW 41.08.030 and 41.12.030. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2001; Ord. 816 § 2, 1974).


2.28.030 Organization.

The commission shall organize, hold meetings and conduct themselves as prescribed by chapters 41.08 and 41.12 RCW. The civil service commission shall meet in a regular open public meeting pursuant to the Open Public Meetings Act, at 6:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday of each month at the Police Training Room, 311 Cedar Street, Burlington. (Ord. 1737 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1464 § 1, 2001; Ord. 816 § 3, 1974).


2.28.040 Powers and duties.

The commission shall have all powers and perform all duties as prescribed in chapters 41.08 and 41.12 RCW, including but not limited to the adoption of rules and regulations, provide for tests, make investigations, conduct hearings and investigations, hear appeals, provide for, formulate and hold competitive tests, and certify to the appointing authority names of persons and eligible lists for police and fire department personnel, all in accordance with RCW 41.08.040 and 41.12.040. (Ord. 1464 § 1, 2001; Ord. 816 § 4, 1974).


2.28.050 Existing police force.

All policemen holding a position in the police department of the city, excluding the chief thereof, who shall have served in such position for a period of at least six months prior to August 22, 1974, and not on probation, are declared eligible for permanent appointment under civil service to the offices, places, positions or employment they now hold, without examination or other acts on their part, all in accordance with RCW 41.12.060. The position of chief of the police department of the city is specifically excluded from inclusion within the civil service. This exclusion shall apply to individuals appointed as police chief after July 1, 1987. (Ord. 1266 § 3, 1994; Ord. 816 § 6, 1974).


2.28.060 Police force – Applicants.

All applicants for employment with the police force of the city shall be required to have the qualifications, be subject to competitive examination, have a tenure of office and be subject to removal as provided by regulations adopted by the commission, the regulations, to be consistent with chapter 41.12 RCW. (Ord. 816 § 5, 1974).


2.28.070 Police force – Removal of officers – Procedures.

Removal, suspension, demotion or discharge of a person classified in the civil service under this chapter, and all investigations, hearings, appeals and procedures shall be in accordance with chapter 41.12 RCW, and the commission shall adopt rules and regulations implementing this chapter which shall substantially accomplish the purposes of chapter 41.12 RCW. (Ord. 816 § 7, 1974).


Chapter 2.30 BURLINGTON FARMERS MARKET DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.30.010    Purpose.

2.30.020    Created.

2.30.030    Market manager designated.

2.30.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.30.050    Farmers Market vendor fees.

2.30.060    Staff for Farmers Market Association.


2.30.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a Farmers Market department in the city of Burlington, designate the market manager, establish the duties and responsibilities of the department, provide for a means of establishing market vendor fees, and provide staff support for the Farmers Market Association. (Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


2.30.020 Created.

There is established in the city a department known as the Farmers Market department which shall be under the direction of the market manager. (Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


2.30.030 Market manager designated.

There shall be a market manager. The mayor of the city shall appoint and designate the person chosen through normal hiring procedures to serve as the market manager for the city. (Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


2.30.040 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The department is responsible for the management and operation of the Burlington Farmers Market.

B. The department is responsible for the administration of the Farmers Market and the annual update of the fee schedule, policy manual, and vendor’s handbook.

C. The department is responsible for the maintenance and update of the Farmers Market facility.

D. The department is responsible for maintaining the Farmers Market records.

E. The department is responsible for administering the Farmers Market Association. (Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


2.30.050 Farmers Market vendor fees.

Farmers Market fees shall be charged in accordance with the Farmers Market fee schedule adopted by city council resolution for a Farmers Market that is operated under this code. (Ord. 1799 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


2.30.060 Staff for Farmers Market Association.

The market manager shall provide staff support to the Farmers Market Association. (Ord. 1430 § 1, 2000).


Chapter 2.32 PLANNING COMMISSION1

(Repealed by Ord. 1221)1

Code reviser’s note: See chapter 17.115 BMC for provisions on the planning commission. 


Chapter 2.34 BUILDING DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.34.010    Purpose.

2.34.020    Building department established.

2.34.030    Building official designated.

2.34.040    Powers and duties of building official.

2.34.050    Inspectors and assistants.

2.34.060    Building permit fees.

2.34.070    Superseded.

2.34.080    Repealed.

2.34.090    Repealed.

2.34.100    Repealed.

2.34.110    Repealed.

2.34.120    Repealed.

2.34.130    Repealed.


2.34.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a building department, designate the building official and provide for a board of appeals. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 2009; Ord. 955 § 1, 1980).


2.34.020 Building department established.

There is established in the city a department known as the building department which shall be under the jurisdiction of the building official. (Ord. 955 § 2, 1980).


2.34.030 Building official designated.

The mayor of the city shall appoint and designate the person chosen through normal hiring procedures to serve as the building official for the city. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1992; Ord. 955 § 3, 1980).


2.34.040 Powers and duties of building official.

The building official shall have all of the powers and duties as provided for in the International Building Code as adopted by the city, as well as those powers and duties explicitly defined by the city. (Ord. 1669 § 2, 2009; Ord. 955 § 4, 1980).


2.34.050 Inspectors and assistants.

The mayor shall appoint through the city’s usual hiring procedures such inspectors and assistants to the building official as may be authorized by the city council. The city council may, as need requires, by resolution appoint such additional inspectors and assistants as are necessary and authorize the mayor to enter into a contract with individuals, firms or other agencies, to assist and provide services for the building department. (Ord. 1669 § 3, 2009; Ord. 955 § 5, 1980).


2.34.060 Building permit fees.

Application fees, building permit fees and building inspection fees shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15.04 BMC. All fees collected shall be deposited by the finance director in the general fund for the city. (Ord. 1669 § 4, 2009; Ord. 955 § 6, 1980).


2.34.070 Board of appeals – Designated.

Superseded by Ord. 1854. (Ord. 1669 § 5, 2009; Ord. 1210 § 2, 1992; Ord. 955 § 7, 1980).


2.34.080 Qualifications of members.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 8, 1980).


2.34.090 Secretary.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 9, 1980).


2.34.100 Terms of office.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 10, 1980).


2.34.110 Rules.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 11, 1980).


2.34.120 Organization.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 12, 1980).


2.34.130 Quorum – Meetings.

Repealed by Ord. 1210. (Ord. 955 § 13, 1980).


Chapter 2.36 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.36.010    Purpose.

2.36.020    Establishment.

2.36.030    Fire chief.

2.36.040    Powers and duties.

2.36.050    Burlington volunteer firefighters.

2.36.060    Civil service commission – Created.

2.36.070    Board of trustees of the volunteer firefighters and reserve officers relief and pension fund.


2.36.010 Purpose.

The city of Burlington has heretofore been served by the volunteer fire department. More recently, the city of Burlington has hired full-time fire department personnel. It is accordingly necessary to update the provisions of the Burlington Municipal Code dealing with the relationship of full-time and part-time personnel and to, further, delineate responsibilities. It is also necessary to create a civil service commission as required by the Revised Code of Washington. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1224 § 1, 1993).


2.36.020 Establishment.

There is created a Burlington city fire department consisting of a fire chief and full-time firefighters acting as regular employees of the city. In addition there shall be a force of “volunteer” firefighters. The full-time and volunteer firefighters shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the fire chief, who is subject to the supervision of the mayor or the mayor’s designee. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1224 § 2, 1993).


2.36.030 Fire chief.

The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor upon the basis of qualifications and experience for such office and may be removed by the mayor. The chief’s position is specifically excluded from inclusion within the civil service as allowed by RCW 41.08.050. This exclusion shall apply to individuals appointed as fire chief after July 1, 1987. The fire chief is directly responsible to the mayor or the city administrator as the mayor’s designee. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1266 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1224 § 3, 1993).


2.36.040 Powers and duties.

The fire chief shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code and shall have all the powers granted, together with the duties imposed by the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city relating to fire departments of cities of the class to which the city now or hereafter belongs. The fire chief shall develop and administrate the Burlington fire department policies and procedures manual. These policies and standard operating procedures (SOP’s) shall be reviewed by the city attorney and city administrator prior to implementation.

A. Employee Appointment. The mayor of the city is the appointing authority. The mayor may authorize the fire chief to hire or promote such firefighting personnel as may be appropriate and necessary as budgeted for by the city council, or terminate fire department employees subject to the city personnel policy and procedures manual, personnel rules, union contract, and civil service regulations. 

B. Organization. The fire department of the city shall consist of the following full-time paid personnel: 

1. Fire chief; 

2. Assistant chief/fire marshal; and 

3. Such firefighters, both career and volunteers, and office staff as may be necessary to complete the mission of the fire department. 

C. Discipline. The fire chief shall have the power to exercise disciplinary measures as stated in the city personnel policy and procedures manual, civil service rules, department regulations, and union contract. Discipline may be based on failure to meet standards set forth in personnel rules adopted by the city or in violation of such reasonable departmental rules, policies or procedures as shall be promulgated by the fire chief. The fire chief shall have the power to exercise, for cause, the following disciplinary measures:

1. Oral or written reprimand;

2. Suspension from duty, without pay, for periods up to but not exceeding 30 days;

3. Deferment of advancement in grade for periods up to, but not to exceed, three months;

4. Dismissal with the concurrence of the mayor.

D. Chain of Command. The fire chief shall be the officer in command in regards to the fighting of any fires or emergency situations within the city, or within the fire district. In the absence of the chief, this duty shall be delegated to the career fire marshal/assistant chief. In the absence of the career fire marshal/assistant chief, the chain of command shall be: 

1. Assistant chief – volunteers; 

2. Battalion chief – volunteers; 

3. Captain – volunteers; 

4. Senior career firefighter (senior in years as full-time employee of the Burlington fire department)/lieutenant – volunteers;

5. Senior volunteer firefighter, (senior in years as volunteer of the fire department). 

E. Duties. The duties of the fire department shall be to care for all fire equipment and facilities and use their best effort to attend and extinguish all fires and respond to emergency situations to protect life and property and such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the mayor or council. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1293 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1224 § 4, 1993).


2.36.050 Burlington volunteer firefighters.

A. Appointment. There shall be established an organization of citizens known as the “Burlington volunteer firefighters.” The fire chief may appoint such volunteer firefighters as may be appropriate and necessary for the proper performance of the duties of the fire department. Such an applicant for a position with the volunteer firefighters shall qualify for such an appointment under the rules established by the volunteer organization, those rules known as the “Bylaws of the Burlington Volunteer Firefighters.”

B. Response to Fire and Emergency Medical (First Responder) Calls. The Burlington volunteer firefighters organization of the city is authorized, as a governmental function of the city, to respond, while under the command of the fire chief or designee, with fire equipment of the city and fire equipment of any fire district in the possession of the Burlington fire department for such purposes, to all fire and emergency medical (first responder) calls within the city and also outside of the city within any fire district with which the city shall then have a written contract for fire protection and medical emergency response with said district. The Burlington volunteer firefighters are also authorized to respond to all fire calls rendering assistance in the form of “mutual aid” with another fire district or municipality, and subject to any terms of any said mutual aid contract.

C. Bylaws. The Burlington volunteer firefighters organization shall have authority to make such rules and regulations as may be consistent with the laws of the state and the ordinances and resolutions of the city, but the same shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief, mayor and Burlington city council. The volunteer firefighters shall receive such compensation for their services as may, from time to time, be provided for in the annual budgets of the city. Such compensation shall be paid quarterly, or as agreed by the finance director and fire chief.

D. Membership. The volunteer membership of the Burlington fire department shall not exceed 50 firefighters. (Ord. 1526 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1465 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1364 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1224 § 5, 1993).


2.36.060 Civil service commission – Created.

Pursuant to chapter 41.08 RCW there is created a civil service commission to exercise the powers and perform the duties established by such state law in connection with the selection, appointment and employment of police and firefighters for the city. Powers and terms of the civil service commission shall be as stated in chapter 2.28 BMC. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1224 § 6, 1993).


2.36.070 Board of trustees of the volunteer firefighters and reserve officers relief and pension fund.

There is created and established, pursuant to law, a board of trustees of the volunteer firefighters and reserve officers relief and pension fund to be known as “the board of trustees of the volunteer firefighters relief and pension fund.” The board shall consist of the mayor or his/her designee, the city administrator, the city finance director, one city councilmember appointed by the mayor, the chief of the fire department, and one member of the volunteer firefighters organization as elected through the bylaws of the volunteer organization. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1465 § 1, 2001).


Chapter 2.38 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.38.010    Establishment – Supervision.

2.38.020    Chief – Appointment.

2.38.030    Members – Appointment and commissioning.

2.38.040    Police powers.

2.38.050    Swearing in – Oath of office.

2.38.060    Personnel authorized.

2.38.070    Disciplinary powers.

2.38.080    Commission abuse.


2.38.010 Establishment – Supervision.

There is established and created a department of police to be operated under the direction and control of a chief of police, subject to the supervision of the mayor. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.020 Chief – Appointment.

The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor on the basis of his/her qualifications and experience for such office, and may be removed by the mayor. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.030 Members – Appointment and commissioning.

A. All persons hired as law enforcement officers for the Burlington police department shall be commissioned as police officers for the city of Burlington prior to being assigned to law enforcement duties. All personnel below the rank of chief shall be appointed and commissioned by the mayor in accordance with any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to civil service and may be removed by the mayor or chief subject to any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to civil service then in force and effect.

B. A Burlington police commission may be issued to any employee of the city of Burlington, who, by virtue of training and/or experience, has proven competence in the field of law enforcement and whose duties are police related. No police commission, regular, temporary, or honorary, shall be issued to any person until such person has been certified for a regular or provisional appointment to fill an authorized personnel vacancy by the civil service commission in accordance with such rules and regulations relating to civil service then in force and effect. However, a limited commission or deputation may be issued upon approval of the mayor and police chief to persons outside the department who have a need to have limited enforcement capabilities such as parking, parks, animal control, and arson. These limited commissions will specifically state the authority of the holder to enforce specific identified ordinances. These limited commissions shall be valid for a period of one year and shall automatically expire on December 31st of that year.

C. Police commissions from other law enforcement agencies may be issued to Burlington police officers from time to time when necessary or desirable. No officer may accept a commission from another agency without prior notice and permission from the chief of police unless otherwise specified in a mutual law enforcement assistance agreement as permitted by chapter 10.93 RCW. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.040 Police powers.

The chief of police and all commissioned police personnel shall have the powers granted, with the duties imposed, by the laws of the state relating to the chief of police and law enforcement personnel of second class cities and, in addition thereto, the chief and all other commissioned police personnel of the police department shall have the power and duty to enforce the ordinances of the city and to perform such other services as the laws of the state or ordinances of the city may now or hereafter require. This police power is enhanced by the Mutual Aid Peace Officer Powers Act of 1985. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.050 Swearing in – Oath of office.

A. All commissioned personnel shall be sworn to enforce the ordinances of the city of Burlington, state, and federal law, to protect the public peace and safety within the city of Burlington, and to abide by the code of professional conduct and responsibility for peace officers.

B. Prior to assuming a police commission, persons hired for a position that requires a commission will take an oath of office to enforce the law, uphold the Constitution of the United States and the state of Washington, and shall make such oath before the mayor or designee. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.060 Personnel authorized.

A. The police department shall consist of such regular personnel in such numbers as shall be determined by the city council by inclusion in an adoption of the annual budget of the city.

B. The department may be augmented by such clerical personnel as the city council may from time to time provide. Such clerical personnel shall not be commissioned police officers and shall be subject to civil service regulations unless otherwise specified in a collective bargaining agreement. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.070 Disciplinary powers.

The chief of police shall have the power to exercise, for cause, the following disciplinary measures:

A. Oral or written reprimand;

B. Suspension from duty, without pay, for periods up to but not exceeding 30 days;

C. Deferment of advancement in grade for periods up to, but not to exceed, three months;

D. Dismissal with the concurrence of the mayor. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


2.38.080 Commission abuse.

Any abuse or unjustified use of any police commission or mutual aid peace officers’ powers may result in the commission being withdrawn and/or subject the offending officer to departmental disciplinary procedures. (Ord. 1336, 1997).


Chapter 2.40 POLICE RESERVE

Sections:

2.40.010    Created – Membership.

2.40.020    Swearing in.

2.40.030    Compensation – Source of funds.

2.40.040    Rules and regulations – Police chief authority – Posting.

2.40.050    Supervision and control.

2.40.060    Removal.

2.40.070    Pension plan.


2.40.010 Created – Membership.

A police department reserve is created and established, and shall consist of such members as possess the requisite qualifications and are accepted by the chief of police. (Ord. 534 § 1, 1955).


2.40.020 Swearing in.

Any applicant for reserve policeman who has satisfactorily met the qualifications and standards as referred to in this chapter, and having been accepted by the chief of police, shall thereafter be sworn in by the mayor in the manner and according to the rules and ordinances governing the swearing in of regular city policemen, and the reserve policeman shall thereafter be provided with the credentials of his office and be empowered with the authority granted regular city policemen. (Ord. 534 § 3, 1955).


2.40.030 Compensation – Source of funds.

Any sums paid to reserve policemen shall be determined by resolution of the city council and shall be paid from the current expense fund; and the city shall thereafter pay to the Department of Labor and Industries such sums as are necessary for the premiums on industrial insurance to the end that the reserve policemen shall be covered by industrial insurance. (Ord. 534 § 5, 1955).


2.40.040 Rules and regulations – Police chief authority – Posting.

The chief of police is given the authority to promulgate rules and regulations, qualifications and standards for the police department reserve and pursuant to said authority shall file with the city supervisor a copy of said rules, regulations, standards and qualifications, and shall in addition thereto post the same in a conspicuous place in the city police department. (Ord. 534 § 2, 1955).


2.40.050 Supervision and control.

The police department reserve and any member thereof shall at all times be under the direct supervision and control of the chief of police and shall abide by all rules and regulations and standards as adopted under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 534 § 6, 1955).


2.40.060 Removal.

Any reserve policeman who has shown himself to be unfit for police work as contemplated in this chapter may be dismissed by the chief of police. (Ord. 534 § 4, 1955).


2.40.070 Pension plan.

A. Any reserve police officer may elect to participate in the Washington State Pension Plan in effect for volunteer firefighters created pursuant to the Volunteer Firefighters Relief and Pension Act. This is a state-administered program and, accordingly, the rules and regulations concerning the administration of said program and the vesting of benefits are necessarily set by the appropriate state agency. In order to qualify for participation in said pension program and to maintain participation in said program, the reserve officer shall, in addition to making an election to participate in the program, meet the following requirements: 

1. Successfully complete a State Certified Basic Reserve Academy; 

2. Maintain training standards set by the Burlington police department for officers in the areas of firearms, motor vehicle operations, first aid and CPR; 

3. Participate in 16 hours of “ride along” time per month with the Burlington police department; and 

4. Meet such other standards of performance as may be set by the Burlington police chief.

B. If at the time the ordinance codified in this section is adopted there are any reserve officers in existence, and if said officers elect to participate in the program, then in such event said reserve officers shall be allowed to “buy back” credit for the years of service said reserve officer has performed. In such event, the city shall participate in the “buy back” with the reserve officer being responsible for 30 percent of the costs and the city of Burlington being responsible for 70 percent of the costs of said “buy back” of credit for years of service performed by said reserve officer. (Ord. 1299 § 1, 1995).


Chapter 2.42 PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.42.010    Purpose.

2.42.020    Created.

2.42.030    Planning director designated.

2.42.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.42.050    Land use permit fees.

2.42.060    Staff for planning commission and board of adjustment.


2.42.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a planning and community development department, designate the planning director, establish the duties and responsibilities of the department, provide for a means of establishing land use permit fees, and provide staff support for the planning commission and board of adjustment. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


2.42.020 Created.

There is established in the city a department known as the planning and community development department which shall be under the direction of the planning director. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


2.42.030 Planning director designated.

There shall be a planning director. The mayor of the city shall appoint and designate the person chosen through normal hiring procedures to serve as the planning director for the city. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


2.42.040 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The department is responsible for the management and operation of the permit center, to provide a consolidated location for the issuance of all land use and construction-related permits.

B. The department is responsible for the administration of the land use permit process, as codified in BMC Title 14A.

C. The department is responsible for the maintenance and update of the city’s comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan map, zoning ordinance, zoning map, critical areas ordinance, environmental ordinance, and related land use regulations.

D. The department is responsible for maintaining the city’s land use permit records.

E. The department is responsible for managing an ongoing citizen involvement process including publication of a land use information bulletin, conducting public meetings, setting up citizen advisory committees on land use issues and providing public notification of land use actions. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


2.42.050 Land use permit fees.

Application fees and land use permit fees shall be charged in accordance with the city’s fee schedule adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1799 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


2.42.060 Staff for planning commission and board of adjustment.

The planning director shall provide staff support to the planning commission and board of adjustment. (Ord. 1373 § 1, 1998).


Chapter 2.44 CITY EMPLOYEES

Sections:

2.44.010    Repealed.

2.44.020    Non-union employees.

2.44.030    Paid holidays.

2.44.040    Travel expenses.

2.44.050    Employee recognition program.

2.44.060    Employees Retirement System – Participation.

2.44.070    Repealed.

2.44.080    Employees Retirement System – Prior service credit.

2.44.090    Employees Retirement System – Social Security.

2.44.100    Employees Retirement System – Contribution.

2.44.110    Employees Retirement System – Copy transmission.


2.44.010 Union employees.

Repealed by Ord. 1674. (Ord. 1179 § 1, 1991; Ord. 928 § 1, 1979).


2.44.020 Non-union employees.

A. Benefits. The city shall endeavor to furnish non-union employees with benefits comparable to the benefits received by union or guild employees. “Benefits” include, but are not limited to, health benefits, holidays, vacation, sick leave, and the like.

B. Additional Compensation. The city shall endeavor to furnish additional compensation to non-union employees comparable to the additional compensation received by union or guild employees. “Additional compensation” includes, but is not limited to, shift differential, pager pay, educational incentives, clothing allowance, holiday pay, or cost of living pay increases provided for in the city’s written contract(s) with the union or guild collective bargaining units.

C. Implementation. The mayor shall establish guidelines for implementing these provisions relative to non-union employees. (Ord. 1674 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1235 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1179 § 2, 1991; Ord. 928 § 2, 1979).


2.44.030 Paid holidays.

Legal holidays as established by RCW 1.16.050 of the state and amended by union contract shall be paid holidays. Only essential work shall be authorized and performed on a paid holiday, and compensation shall be for overtime only when such work is required and authorized. (Ord. 928 § 3, 1979).


2.44.040 Travel expenses.

Reimbursement for travel expense shall be as follows: Mileage when operating a privately owned vehicle in performance of official duties and reimbursement for costs of meals and lodging when on official business away from the city are authorized. Mileage shall be the same rate per mile established by Federal Internal Revenue Service regulations. Payment shall be made on properly executed vouchers as a claim against the city. (Ord. 1605 § 1, 2006; Ord. 928 § 5, 1979).


2.44.050 Employee recognition program.

The city administrator or his/her designee are authorized to develop and administer an employee recognition program. The program will monitor employee service and performance and may recognize and reward such service with plaques, pins, certificates or other items of a like nature. The cost of awards shall be nominal and shall not exceed $50.00 without consent of the city council. In addition, the program may honor an employee of the month and an employee of the year. (Ord. 1307, 1995; Ord. 928 § 4, 1979).


2.44.060 Employees Retirement System – Participation.

The city elects to participate as a member of Statewide Employees Retirement System for pension, relief, disability and retirement for the employees of the city as provided by chapter 41.44 RCW. All employees and officials of the city serving in retirement-eligible positions shall be included in said system; provided, that no elective official shall be included unless said official so elects and files a written notice of such election with the board of trustees of said pension system and with the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 1605 § 1, 2006; Ord. 647 § 1, 1964).


2.44.070 Employees Retirement System – Membership.

Repealed by Ord. 1605. (Ord. 647 § 2, 1964).


2.44.080 Employees Retirement System – Prior service credit.

The basis for prior service credit shall be determined by rules of the Washington State Department of Retirement Systems. (Ord. 1605 § 1, 2006; Ord. 647 § 4, 1964).


2.44.090 Employees Retirement System – Social Security.

The basis for Social Security coverage is coordination. (Ord. 647 § 5, 1964).


2.44.100 Employees Retirement System – Contribution.

The basis for contribution shall be as established by the Washington State Department of Retirement Systems. (Ord. 1605 § 1, 2006; Ord. 647 § 6, 1964).


2.44.110 Employees Retirement System – Copy transmission.

A certified copy of the ordinance codified in BMC 2.44.060 through 2.44.110 shall be transmitted to the board of trustees of said statewide system as evidence of an election of the city to join such pension system. (Ord. 647 § 3, 1964).


Chapter 2.48 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

Sections:

2.48.010    Negotiating team – Membership.

2.48.020    Negotiating team – Spokesman.

2.48.030    Bargaining unit for police department.

2.48.040    Bargaining representative for police bargaining unit.


2.48.010 Negotiating team – Membership.

A. The city supervisor of the city is designated a permanent member of the collective bargaining negotiating team.

B. The city attorney and department heads not included in any bargaining units are designated members of the negotiating team when called upon by the supervisor to sit with the negotiating team. (Ord. 720 §§ 1, 2, 1969).


2.48.020 Negotiating team – Spokesman.

The city supervisor is designated the sole spokesman for the negotiating team during the progress of any collective bargaining session or series of sessions. (Ord. 720 § 3, 1969).


2.48.030 Bargaining unit for police department.

The police department personnel of the city, other than management personnel, namely, the chief of police, is declared to be a bargaining unit for the purpose of collective bargaining with the city. (Ord. 719 § 1, 1969).


2.48.040 Bargaining representative for police bargaining unit.

Pursuant to agreements signed by a majority of personnel within the police bargaining unit, naming the Service Employees International Union as their bargaining representative, Local 120, Service Employees International Union is recognized as the exclusive bargaining representative of the police bargaining unit of the city. (Ord. 1366 § 1, 1998; Ord. 719 § 2, 1969).


Chapter 2.52 OFFICIALS’ BONDS

Sections:

2.52.010    Purpose.

2.52.020    Amounts designated.


2.52.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish bond requirements and the amount thereof for the clerk-treasurer and other employees. (Ord. 1128 § 1, 1988; Ord. 901 § 1, 1978).


2.52.020 Amounts designated.

A. The clerk-treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of office, execute and file with the clerk an official bond conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties. In addition, there shall be a blanket bond covering the other employees. The amount of the bonds shall be as listed below:

1. Clerk-treasurer, $100,000;

2. Blanket bond, $100,000.

B. The premium for said bonds shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 1128 § 2, 1988; Ord. 901 § 2, 1978).


Chapter 2.56 COMPENSATION1

Sections:

2.56.010    Payment.

2.56.020    Repealed.

2.56.030    Compensation for mayor.

2.56.040    Compensation for city councilmembers.

2.56.050    Councilmember and mayor waiver and election not to receive compensation.


2.56.010 Payment.

On and after the first day of January, 2011, compensation for city employees shall be paid as established by further act of the city council. Also, where additional charges are incurred for extraordinary legal services, such charges become claims against the city in addition to such compensation. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1727 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1219 § 4, 1992; Ord. 1174 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1133 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1123 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1106 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1073 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1054 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1031 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1011 § 1, 1982).


2.56.020 Designated.

Repealed by Ord. 1752. (Ord. 1731 §§ 2, 3, 2011; Ord. 1727 §§ 3, 4, 2010).


2.56.030 Compensation for mayor.

Effective January 1, 2014, the mayor of the city of Burlington shall receive a salary of $4,241.53 per month. Effective January 1, 2015, and each year thereafter the mayor shall receive a cost of living adjustment commensurate with the COLA received by nonrepresented staff, which cost of living adjustment shall become effective as of the same date that the cost of living adjustment paid to nonrepresented staff becomes effective. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2013).


2.56.040 Compensation for city councilmembers.

A. Members of the Burlington city council shall receive compensation in the amount of $800.00 per month. 

B. Effective date compensation adjustments will be made to city councilmembers:

	Ward No. 1 Councilmember	January 1, 2016

	Ward No. 2 Councilmember	January 1, 2016

	Ward No. 3 Councilmember	January 1, 2016

	Ward No. 4 Councilmember	January 1, 2018

	Ward No. 5 Councilmember	January 1, 2018

	Ward No. 6 Councilmember	January 1, 2018

	At Large Councilmember	January 1, 2018

(Ord. 1812 §§ 1, 2, 2015).


2.56.050 Councilmember and mayor waiver and election not to receive compensation.

Any councilmember or the mayor may voluntarily waive all or any portion of the salaries set forth in BMC 2.56.030 or 2.56.040, as applicable, during their term of office. A notice of waiver and election not to receive salary must be in writing and delivered to the finance director prior to the effective date of the waiver. The waiver shall be effective for all salary earned following the effective date and continue in effect until a written withdrawal of the waiver, signed by the councilmember, is delivered to the finance director. Salaries or portions of salaries that are waived pursuant to this section shall be placed in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1728 § 1, 2010).1

Prior legislation: Ords. 898, 923, 947, 987 and 994. 


Chapter 2.60 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES

Sections:

2.60.010    Designated.


2.60.010 Designated.

The city finance director is instructed to designate the following banks and savings and loans in the city as depositories of monies required to be kept by the finance director:

Bank of America

Banner Bank

Business Bank of Skagit County

Cascade Bank

Horizon Bank

Key Bank

People’s Bank

Skagit State Bank

Summit Bank

Washington Federal Savings

Wells Fargo

Whidbey Island Bank

and said banks and savings and loans are designated as depositories, which designation shall continue in force until revoked by a majority vote of the governing body of the city. (Ord. 1656 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1204 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1089 § 1, 1986; Ord. 560 § 1, 1958).


Chapter 2.62 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT COMMAND AGENCY

Sections:

2.62.010    Designated.


2.62.010 Designated.

The Skagit County department of emergency management is designated as the hazardous materials incident command agency to operate within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 1116, 1988).


Chapter 2.64 EMERGENCY SERVICES

Sections:

2.64.010    Purpose.

2.64.020    Definitions.

2.64.030    Emergency services council – Created – Membership.

2.64.040    Emergency services council – Powers and duties.

2.64.050    Director – Office created – Powers and duties.

2.64.060    Organization – Divisions, services and staff – Council authority.

2.64.070    Organization – Duty of city officers.

2.64.080    Unlawful acts designated – Penalty.


2.64.010 Purpose.

The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans, including mock or practice drills, for the civil defense of persons and property within this city in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the coordination of the emergency services and disaster functions of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such emergency services and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, and mock or practice drills, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 546 § 1, 1956).


2.64.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. “Disaster” means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity.

B. “Emergency services” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy. (Ord. 546 § 2, 1956).


2.64.030 Emergency services council – Created – Membership.

Pursuant to the authority conferred by RCW 38.52.070, there is created an emergency services council. The council shall consist of the following:

A. The mayor, who shall be chairman;

B. The chief of police, who shall be a co-director of emergency services;

C. The fire chief, who shall be a co-director of emergency services;

D. The city administrator;

E. One city councilmember;

F. Such city officials and other citizens of this city as may be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2001; Ord. 546 § 3, 1956).


2.64.040 Emergency services council – Powers and duties.

It shall be the duty of the emergency services council, and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption, civil defense and mutual aid plans and agreements and such resolutions, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The emergency services council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 546 § 4, 1956).


2.64.050 Director – Office created – Powers and duties.

A. There is created the office of director of emergency services. Such officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the emergency services council.

B. The director is empowered and directed:

1. To prepare an emergency services operating plan for the city conforming to the county and state emergency services plan and program;

2. To control and direct the effort of the emergency services organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

3. To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the emergency services organization of this city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

4. To represent the emergency services organization of this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergency services and disaster.

C. In the event of disaster as provided in this chapter, the director is empowered:

1. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the emergency services council;

2. To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

3. To require emergency services of any city officer or employee, and in the event of a proclamation by the Governor of the existence of a disaster, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he considers necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency services workers;

4. To execute all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by statute, agreement approved by the emergency services council, or by any other lawful authority;

5. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency. (Ord. 546 §§ 5, 6, 1956).


2.64.060 Organization – Divisions, services and staff – Council authority.

A. The functions and duties of the Burlington emergency services organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the emergency services council shall prescribe.

B. The emergency services council shall, concurrently with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, prescribe the form of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the assignment of functions, duties and powers, and the designation of officers and employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the Department of Emergency Services of the state. (Ord. 546 § 8, 1956).


2.64.070 Organization – Duty of city officers.

All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of BMC 2.64.050, charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during disaster, shall constitute the emergency services organization of the city. (Ord. 546 § 7, 1956).


2.64.080 Unlawful acts designated – Penalty.

It is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in chapter 1.24 BMC, for any person during a disaster:

A. To wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency services organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

B. To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C. To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the State Department of Emergency Services. (Ord. 546 § 9, 1956).


Chapter 2.68 CEMETERY1

Sections:

2.68.010    Definitions.

2.68.020    Admission to cemetery.

2.68.030    Liability.

2.68.040    Vehicles.

2.68.050    Conduct.

2.68.060    Peddling or soliciting.

2.68.070    Signs.

2.68.080    Authority of cemetery staff.

2.68.090    Errors may be corrected.

2.68.100    Delays.

2.68.110    Nonlimitation.

2.68.120    Amendments.

2.68.130    Arrangements for funerals and interments.

2.68.140    Interment procedure.

2.68.150    Outer burial container.

2.68.160    Interments by employees.

2.68.170    Permit and identity.

2.68.180    Opening the casket.

2.68.190    Delay of interment.

2.68.200    Endowed care.

2.68.210    Endowed care of plot.

2.68.220    Endowment care of mausoleum or columbarium.

2.68.230    Endowment care exclusions.

2.68.240    Endowment limited to income.

2.68.250    Removals and disinterments.

2.68.260    Ownership rights.

2.68.270    Disposition of unused or abandoned lots.

2.68.280    Death certificate.

2.68.290    Individual decorations.

2.68.300    Monuments, headstones, markers.

2.68.310    Cemetery fees and charges.

2.68.320    Welfare burials.

2.68.330    Cemetery board.

2.68.340    Miscellaneous provisions.

2.68.350    Miscellaneous regulations.


2.68.010 Definitions.

“Cemetery” means the burial ground commonly known as Burlington Greenhills Cemetery, including, without limitations:

1. All land dedicated, reserved or used for interment of the remains of human dead;

2. All vegetation therein;

3. All graves, mausoleums, crypts, columbaria, niches or other interment spaces therein;

4. All works of art therein;

5. All roads, walkways and other structures of every kind therein;

6. All equipment and facilities incidental to the operation of Burlington Greenhills Cemetery.

“City” means the city of Burlington.

“Columbarium” means a structure or other space containing niches for permanent inurnment of cremated remains.

“Committal” means the part of a funeral service which commits the remains of the deceased to their final resting place.

“Companion graves” means two single graves side by side or of one double depth grave.

“Cremated remains” means a human body after cremation in a crematory.

“Crypt” means a space in a mausoleum of sufficient size, used or intended to be used, to entomb uncremated human remains.

“Endowment care” means cutting of the lawns on the graves and other lawn areas within the cemetery at reasonable intervals, and the general maintenance of the cemetery including building roads, fences, etc., in so far as the net income derived from the endowment care fund will permit.

“Funeral” means a memorial service for a deceased person.

“Grave” means a space of land in a cemetery used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains.

“Grave owner” or “owner” means any person in whose name an interment plot stands of record as owner, in the records of the cemetery at Burlington City Hall.

“Human remains” or “remains” means the body of a deceased person, and includes the body in any stage of decomposition except cremated remains.

“Interment” means the (a) burial, (b) entombment or (c) inurnment of human remains.

1. “Burial” means the disposition of human remains by earthen burial in a grave.

2. “Entombment” means the placement of human remains in a crypt either above or below ground.

3. “Inurnment” means placing of cremated remains in an urn in a grave, crypt, or niche.

“Mausoleum” means a structure or building for the entombment of human remains in crypts in a place used, or intended to be used, for cemetery purposes.

“Memorial” means (a) a monument, tombstone, grave marker, tablet or headstone identifying a grave or graves or (b) a name plate or inscription identifying a crypt or niche to preserve remembrance.

“Niche” means a space in a columbarium used or intended to be used for the inurnment of cremated human remains.

“Plot” means a grave, niche or crypt. (Ord. 1193 § 1, 1991).


2.68.020 Admission to cemetery.

Visitors and the public are invited to utilize this cemetery in a manner consistent with its purpose as a place of interment and as a memorial, subject to the following:

A. Children are not permitted on the premises unless in the company of a responsible adult and they shall be supervised at all times.

B. The headstones and monuments on the premises shall not be handled, climbed upon or otherwise mistreated.

C. No one shall move, repair, or otherwise alter any monument or headstone without written consent of the city.

D. No one shall deface or otherwise damage any monument or headstone. (Ord. 1193 § 2(a), 1991).


2.68.030 Liability.

The following warning shall be posted near the cemetery entrance:

WARNING: THE MONUMENTS AND HEADSTONES ON THESE PREMISES MAY FALL RESULTING IN SERIOUS PERSONAL INJURY IF MOVED OR CLIMBED UPON. ALL ENTRANTS ON THESE PREMISES DO SO SUBJECT TO THE FOREGOING RULES AND AT THEIR OWN RISK. THE CITY OF BURLINGTON SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR INJURIES SUSTAINED WHILE WITHIN ANY PORTION OF THE CEMETERY.

(Ord. 1193 § 2(b), 1991).


2.68.040 Vehicles.

All vehicles must be kept under control at all times. No vehicle shall be driven in any part of the cemetery except on the driveways laid out for that purpose. Vehicles shall not be driven in the cemetery at a speed exceeding 10 miles per hour. (Ord. 1193 § 2(c), 1991).


2.68.050 Conduct.

It is of utmost importance that there be strict observance of all rules at all times and the city employees are authorized and directed to prevent improper assemblies or activities. 

A. Loud talking and distracting activities will be avoided within hearing distance of a funeral service. 

B. Littering including wilted or dead flowers and any other refuse on drives, paths, or any grounds or in any building is prohibited.

C. It is forbidden to pluck any flower, break any branch or remove any tree or plant, nor shall anyone write upon, deface, or damage any memorial, fence or other structures within the cemetery. (Ord. 1193 § 2(d), 1991).


2.68.060 Peddling or soliciting.

No person will be permitted to peddle flowers or plants or to solicit the sale of any commodity within the cemetery. (Ord. 1193 § 2(e), 1991).


2.68.070 Signs.

No signs, notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery, unless placed by the city. (Ord. 1193 § 2(f), 1991).


2.68.080 Authority of cemetery staff.

The cemetery staff is/are empowered to enforce all rules and regulations and to exclude from the cemetery any person violating the same. He or she is responsible for the grounds and buildings. All persons in the cemetery, including the conduct of funerals, traffic, employees, plot owners and visitors shall comply with this code. (Ord. 1193 § 2(g), 1991).


2.68.090 Errors may be corrected.

The city reserves, and shall correct any errors that may be made by it either in making interments, disinterments or removals, or in the description, transfer or conveyance of any interment property, either by canceling such conveyance and substituting and conveying in lieu thereof other interment property of equal value and similar location as far as possible, or as may be selected by the cemetery staff, by refunding the amount of money paid on account of said purchase. In the event the error involves the interment of the remains of any person in such property, the staff reserves, and shall have, the right to remove and reinter the remains to such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. The city shall correct any errors made by placing an improper description, including an incorrect name or date on the memorial. (Ord. 1193 § 2(h), 1991).


2.68.100 Delays.

The city shall not be liable for any delay in the fulfillment of any of its contracts or legal obligations, including, but not limited to, maintenance, care, memorial work or construction which may arise from causes beyond its reasonable control and, especially, from delays caused by the elements, thieves, vandals, strikes, malicious mischief matters, unavoidable accidents, or other circumstances beyond the control of the city. (Ord. 1193 § 2(i), 1991).


2.68.110 Nonlimitation.

In all matters not specifically covered by these general rules and restrictions, the city reserves the right to do anything which in its judgement is deemed reasonable in the cemetery, and such determination shall be binding upon lot holders and all parties concerned. (Ord. 1193 § 2(j), 1991).


2.68.120 Amendments.

The city may, and hereby expressly reserves the right, at any time or times, to adopt new rules and regulations, or to amend, alter, or repeal any rule, regulation or article, section, paragraph or sentence in these rules and regulations. Any such change in the rules and regulations shall be binding upon all parties without notice. (Ord. 1193 § 2(k), 1991).


2.68.130 Arrangements for funerals and interments.

A. Office Appearance. Family of the deceased, or friends, in the absence of family, taking responsibility for the funeral arrangements, shall come to the Burlington City Hall in order to authorize the interment, make necessary arrangement and payment thereof.

B. No Telephone Calls. The city shall not be responsible for any order given by telephone or for any error arising from the want of precise and proper instructions as to the particular grave, crypt or niche location where interment is desired.

C. Liability of Signer. Any person signing the authorization for interment of remains warrants any fact set forth in the authorization, the identity of the person whose remains are sought to be interred and his/her authority to order the interment. He or she is personally liable for all damage occasioned by or resulting from breach of such warranty.

D. 24-Hour Notice. The city has the right to insist upon 24 hours’ notice prior to any interment. (Ord. 1193 § 3, 1991).


2.68.140 Interment procedure.

A. Graves, crypts, niches may be purchased at Burlington City Hall. Interments will not be permitted in grave, crypts or niches without being paid for in full.

B. Graves, crypts or niches are sold for the purpose of human remains only. Disposition of any remains by interment or otherwise on Sunday is prohibited, except in case of contagious disease as required by law.

C. No interments, disinterments or removals shall be permitted on Sunday or any holiday observed by the city.

D. No burial will be permitted in the cemetery without a properly completed burial permit or transit permit. (Ord. 1193 § 4(a – d), 1991).


2.68.150 Outer burial container.

A. Every earth interment shall be enclosed in a concrete two-piece grave box, concrete vault or other unit of suitable material approved by the cemetery staff.

B. The installation of these outer containers shall be performed by cemetery staff or an approved supplier with suitable equipment and ability to perform. All supplier installations will be under the direction of cemetery staff. (Ord. 1193 § 4(e), 1991).


2.68.160 Interments by employees.

Interments including opening and closing will be done by cemetery staff using equipment owned by the city for this purpose. (Ord. 1193 § 4(f), 1991).


2.68.170 Permit and identity.

The city will not be liable for the interment permit nor the identity of the person sought to be interred. (Ord. 1193 § 4(g), 1991).


2.68.180 Opening the casket.

Once a casket containing remains is within the boundaries of the cemetery, the city reserves the right to refuse permission to all persons to open the casket or to touch the remains without the consent of the legal representative of the deceased or a court order. (Ord. 1193 § 4(h), 1991).


2.68.190 Delay of interment.

The city will in no way be liable for any delay in the interment of the remains when:

A. A written protest to the interment has been filed in Burlington City Hall.

B. Rules and regulations have not been complied with.

C. Instructions regarding the location of a lot or plot cannot be obtained or are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened where specified. (Ord. 1193 § 4(i), 1991).


2.68.200 Endowed care.

No grave, niches, crypts will be sold in the Burlington Cemetery without endowed care. (Ord. 1193 § 5(a), 1991).


2.68.210 Endowed care of plot.

The city has created an endowment care fund in accordance with the statutes of the state of Washington to be operated by the city for the mutual benefit of the lot owners contributing to the fund. The term “endowment care” used in reference to a plot, means the cutting of grass upon said plot at reasonable intervals, the pruning of shrubs and trees planted by the city for general embellishment and the general preservation of the plot, to the end that said grounds shall be reasonably cared for as grounds forever. (Ord. 1193 § 5(b), 1991).


2.68.220 Endowment care of mausoleum or columbarium.

The term “endowment care” used in reference to a mausoleum or columbarium means the cleaning and sweeping of the building at reasonable intervals, making repairs caused by normal wear. (Ord. 1193 § 5(c), 1991).


2.68.230 Endowment care exclusions.

The term “endowment care” shall not include any of the following: Cleaning, maintenance, repair or replacement of any memorial placed or erected upon plots; hand trimming around memorials; planting of flowers or ornamental plants; maintenance or doing of any special or unusual work in the cemetery; reconstruction of any marble, granite, bronze or concrete work in the cemetery, or of any buildings or structures, to restore or repair damage. The city may use income received from an endowment care fund for the above purposes if in its judgement it is advisable to do so. (Ord. 1193 § 5(d), 1991).


2.68.240 Endowment limited to income.

Endowment care, whether applied to lots, crypts, niches, graves, or to any space within the confines of the cemetery shall be limited to the net income received from the investment of endowment care fund. (Ord. 1193 § 5(e), 1991).


2.68.250 Removals and disinterments.

A. Cemetery Policy. Remains once interred in Burlington Cemetery are considered permanently disposed of and removal from one grave to another within the cemetery, or removal from Burlington Cemetery to any other cemetery is strongly discouraged.

B. Procedure for Disinterments.

1. Signed affidavit(s) of the nearest of kin approving the disinterment or removal.

2. Signed approval of the lot holder or their lawful representative.

3. Disinterment permit from civil authorities for removal from Burlington Cemetery.

4. The desired lot must be selected, all charges for disinterment and reinterment, together with all other charges due, must be paid.

C. Removal Permit. Remains removed from other cemeteries and brought to Burlington Cemetery for reinterment must be accompanied by the proper papers as prescribed by law.

D. Liability. The city will exercise utmost care in making a disinterment, but assumes no liability for damage to any casket, vault, liner, grave box, or any other burial case in making the removal or disinterment.

E. Outer Case Replacement. When, in the opinion of the city, a new outside box is needed, at the time of reinterment following a disinterment, it must be provided by the person arranging for the removal, through the cemetery.

F. Prior Notice. At least one week’s prior notice is required for any disinterment or removal, after the rules and regulations have been complied with.

G. Removal for Profit Prohibited. Removal, by the heirs, of any remains so that the lot may be sold for profit, is absolutely forbidden. (Ord. 1193 § 6, 1991).


2.68.260 Ownership rights.

A. Right of Interment. The purchaser of a lot or lots is granted or conveyed only the right of interment of human remains and the right of installation of a memorial on each lot. The owner of the right of interment does not possess a fee interest or any other interest in the land itself.

B. Titles and Rights to Cemetery Plots. Title and rights to cemetery plots shall be governed by chapter 68.32 RCW, now and hereafter amended.

C. Purchasing. Lots can be purchased for cash or on time payment plan at City Hall. In the event that any lot is purchased immediately prior to the time of interment, arrangement must be made for full payment of such lot before the interment will be made. A purchaser has no right, interest, estate, or title whatsoever to any lot until the purchase price is paid in full.

D. Document of Ownership. Upon receipt of full payment for a lot, the city will issue an appropriate document evidencing the ownership thereof. (Ord. 1193 § 7, 1991).


2.68.270 Disposition of unused or abandoned lots.

A. Abandoned Lots. To preserve the active nature of the cemetery, any interment space will be deemed abandoned if there is no recorded activity on the lot for a period of 60 years. Any lot deemed abandoned may be reclaimed by the cemetery and disposed of as the cemetery sees fit.

B. Disposition of Unused Lots. Should a lot holder of unused interment space no longer need the lot in the cemetery they may sell the lot back to the cemetery at the original purchase price. (Ord. 1193 § 8, 1991).


2.68.280 Death certificate.

No interment will be permitted without the proper death certificate or burial permit as required by the health authorities. Cremated remains must be accompanied by a copy of the burial or transit permit or other document acceptable to the cemetery to certify identity of the cremated remains. (Ord. 1193 § 9, 1991).


2.68.290 Individual decorations.

A. Floral Regulation. No planting is permitted on any plot. No flower receptacles or planter boxes may be placed on any plot or in any mausoleum or columbarium unless material, size and design are approved by the cemetery board. Receptacles may be purchased from and placed by the city. The city shall have authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind, from the cemetery when in its judgement of the cemetery staff they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, diseased or when they do not conform to the standards maintained by the city. The city shall not be liable for lost, misplaced or broken flower vases. The city reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating plots so that a uniform beauty may be maintained. Artificial flowers are not permitted in the mausoleums or columbariums. Artificial flowers are not allowed on graves during the mowing season of March 1st to November 30th.

B. Care of Trees and Shrubs. No person shall remove any part of any tree or shrub in the cemetery, whether on his lot or not. On request, the city staff will arrange for necessary pruning of trees and shrubs on property owned by the cemetery.

C. Prohibited Ornaments. The placing upon plots of boxes, tubs, shells, toys, metal designs, ornaments, chairs, settees, vases, glass jars, tin or iron or earthenware jars or jugs and similar articles, is not permitted and if so placed, the city may remove the same.

D. Ornaments Prohibited in Mausoleum and Columbarium. Artificial, dyed or preserved flowers, photographs, souvenirs, wreaths, or flags or other emblems, are prohibited in the mausoleums and columbariums. If so placed therein, they may be removed by the city.

E. New Burials. All flowers, plants, easels, and decorations will be allowed to remain for 48 hours following a new burial. Persons wishing to retain any of the items must remove them within 48 hours after interment.

F. Christmas Decorations. Christmas decorations shall be removed within two weeks after Christmas Day. (Ord. 1193 § 10, 1991).


2.68.300 Monuments, headstones, markers.

A. Monuments, Headstones, Markers. All monuments, headstones, markers shall be delivered to the cemetery and they will be installed by the city staff of Burlington and all installation charges shall be made in accordance with the size of the monument, headstone, or marker installed.

B. Flower Receptacle. One flower receptacle for cut flowers will be furnished by the city for each grave.

C. Marker, Monument, Headstone Regulation. All markers, monuments, and headstones must be of a uniform size and be set flush with the contour of the ground.

D. Grave Owner Responsibility for Markers, Monument, Headstone. Grave owners must keep in good repair all stones or monumental work upon the grave. The city does not bind itself to maintain, repair or replace any grave marker or monumental structures erected upon the grave.

E. Number of Markers per Grave. A maximum of four markers per grave or companion grave will be allowed, and a maximum of two markers per grave or companion grave will be allowed in the urn garden.

F. The Rights to Remove Monuments, Headstones, Markers. The city reserves the right to exclude or remove from any grave and headstone, monument, marker or other structure which may conflict with these regulations or which the city may consider injurious to the general appearance of the grounds. (Ord. 1766 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1193 § 11, 1991).


2.68.310 Cemetery fees and charges.

A. Prices. The schedule of prices of all lots, blocks, crypts, niches or parcels of land in the platted portion of said cemetery property and, also prices for opening and closing graves, grave liners, perpetual care, setting of markers and all other services, shall be fixed and adopted by resolution of the city council and filed in the office of City Hall. Said schedule of prices may be changed or altered by like resolution of the city council from time to time as in its judgement may be necessary or proper. No lots, tracts, or grave spaces, niches or crypts shall be sold or disposed of, for less than the price named in such schedule which may be in force at the time of such sale or disposal. (Ord. 1193 § 12, 1991).


2.68.320 Welfare burials.

Welfare burials will be accepted if the deceased’s residence was within the city limits at the time of death or if the state payment covers all cemetery fees and charges established by the city council. If the deceased’s residence was not within the city limits at the time of death and the state payment does not cover all cemetery fees and charges, the grave must be preowned. (Ord. 1193 § 13, 1991).


2.68.330 Cemetery board.

The cemetery board shall be comprised of the same city councilmembers and private citizens that serve on the parks committee as appointed by the mayor of the city. The board shall advise the mayor and city council on policy matters relating to the long-range planning, capital improvements, fee structure, cemetery expansion, rules and regulation, and budget of all cemeteries belonging to the city. The board shall not have authority to enter into any contract, incur any indebtedness, or take any personal action unless specifically authorized by the mayor and city council. The board may also solicit or receive, on behalf of the city council, any gifts or bequest of money for cemetery purposes; however, gifts of real or personal property will not be accepted without prior approval of the city council. A meeting of the board shall be held quarterly, on the first Monday in February, May, August, and November in conjunction with a regularly scheduled parks committee meeting. Meetings shall begin at 5:00 p.m., at the Burlington Parks and Recreation Office, 900 East Fairhaven Ave., Burlington. The city parks and recreation director shall be responsible for providing adequate and appropriate staff support to the board. (Ord. 1737 § 7, 2011; Ord. 1467 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1193 § 14, 1991).


2.68.340 Miscellaneous provisions.

The city and its assigns shall have full power and authority to adopt such additional rules and regulations as it may deem advisable for the management, preservation, care and use of the city cemetery, including the interment and exhuming of the dead, and shall have full power and authority from time to time to enlarge, restrict, amend, abrogate or change any rules and regulations, and all such rules and regulations shall be binding upon grave owners and upon all other persons, firms and corporations concerned. (Ord. 1193 § 15(a), 1991).


2.68.350 Miscellaneous regulations.

Picking flowers, breaking or injuring trees or shrubs or in any way injuring any monument or headstone is prohibited and subject to penalty according to state law. If anything is placed on a grave which is deemed improper, it will be removed. Bills due the city for labor and materials and supplies are a lien on the grave until paid. The city council shall have the right to make exceptions from the foregoing rules when deemed advisable. Such exceptions shall not be considered as rescinding or waiving any of these rules. Any waiver that may be made by the city council shall not be or considered to be continuing waiver and shall not bar the city or city council from enforcing the usual rules and regulations at any later time if it may be desired so to do. (Ord. 1193 § 15(b), 1991).1

Prior legislation: Ords. 526 and 837. 


Chapter 2.70 PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.70.010    Purpose.

2.70.020    Created.

2.70.030    Parks and recreation director designated.

2.70.040    Duties and responsibilities.

2.70.050    User fees.

2.70.060    Staff for parks and recreation advisory board.


2.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a parks and recreation department, designate the parks and recreation director, establish the duties and responsibilities of the department, provide for a means of establishing user fees, and provide staff support for the parks and recreation advisory board. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


2.70.020 Created.

There is established in the city a department known as the parks and recreation department which shall be under the direction of the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


2.70.030 Parks and recreation director designated.

There shall be a parks and recreation director. The mayor of the city shall appoint and designate the person chosen through normal hiring procedures to serve as the parks and recreation director for the city. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


2.70.040 Duties and responsibilities.

A. The department is responsible for the management and operation of the city recreation program.

B. The department is responsible for coordination with the parks and recreation advisory board, as codified in chapter 2.72 BMC. 

C. The department is responsible for managing the capital improvement plan for recreation and park development and overseeing development and construction in the parks. 

D. The department is responsible for the administration of park facilities including management, scheduling and supervision. 

E. The department is responsible for supervision of recreation and park staff excluding maintenance. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


2.70.050 User fees.

Facility user fees and recreation program fees shall be charged in accordance with the city’s fee schedule adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


2.70.060 Staff for parks and recreation advisory board.

The parks and recreation director shall provide staff support to the parks and recreation advisory board. (Ord. 1379 § 1, 1998).


Chapter 2.72 CITY PARK

Sections:

2.72.010    Area designated.

2.72.020    Name.

2.72.030    Park and recreation advisory board – Created.

2.72.031    Park and recreation advisory board – Terms – Vacancies – Removal.

2.72.032    Park and recreation advisory board – Functions, powers and duties.

2.72.033    Park and recreation advisory board – Officers – Quorum.

2.72.034    Park and recreation advisory board – Meetings.

2.72.035    Park and recreation advisory board – Cooperation with individual citizens, groups and organizations.

2.72.036    Park and recreation advisory board – Annual reports of progress.

2.72.040    Unlawful acts.

2.72.050    Violation – Penalty.


2.72.010 Area designated.

Blocks 49, 50, 63 and 64 of the amended plat of the city, as recorded in the office of the Skagit County auditor in Volume 3 of Plats on Page 17, are designated as a city park. (Ord. 375 § 1, 1939).


2.72.020 Name.

The name of the park is “Maiben Park.” (Ord. 375 § 2, 1939).


2.72.030 Park and recreation advisory board – Created.

A. There is created and established a park and recreation advisory board, consisting of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.

B. Membership. The selection of the park and recreation advisory board members shall be made from individuals who have an interest in parks and recreation as evidenced by training, experience or actions. A minimum of four members shall be residents of the city of Burlington, two nonresidents shall either be employed within the city of Burlington or live within the city of Burlington service area, and one member shall be a high school student living within the Burlington-Edison School District. The membership shall include at least one senior citizen representative, one representative of a business within the city limits regardless of where the representative resides, one representative who lives outside the city of Burlington but within the city’s service area, and one youth representative who shall be a student from Burlington-Edison High School.

C. The mayor shall appoint one to three members of the city council to act as liaisons to the board in accordance with city council bylaws. These members shall be ex-officio nonvoting members of the board. The city parks and recreation director shall be responsible for providing adequate and appropriate staff support to the board. No member shall receive any compensation for services performed. (Ord. 1468 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1444 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1272 § 1, 1994; Ord. 375 § 5, 1939).


2.72.031 Park and recreation advisory board – Terms – Vacancies – Removal.

A. Terms of Members. The appointment of the members, by the mayor, shall be for the following terms: appointees shall serve three-year terms (except the youth representative who shall serve a one-year term). The appointments of succeeding youth representatives shall be made in May of each year. Term limits will not exceed three consecutive terms.

B. Vacancies. The mayor shall, each year, appoint members to fill the vacancies caused by expiring terms. The mayor shall appoint members each year from a list to be presented to him by the board and shall also have authority to fill vacancies created by death or resignation in the board by appointing a member to fill the place consistent with the procedures of BMC 2.72.030.

C. Removal. Members of the board may be removed by the mayor, with concurrence of the city council, for neglect of duty, conflict of interest, malfeasance in office, or other just cause, or for unexcused absence from more than three consecutive regular meetings. The decision of the city council shall be final and there shall be no appeal therefrom. Members finding themselves unable to attend regular meetings are expected to tender their resignations. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1272 § 2, 1994).


2.72.032 Park and recreation advisory board – Functions, powers and duties.

The park and recreation advisory board shall be a board functioning in an advisory capacity to the mayor, city council, department of parks and recreation and other city departments in respect to the following parks and recreation matters:

A. The acquisition of park and recreation facilities;

B. Development, design and operation of park and recreation programming and facilities;

C. Facility use fees and procedures;

D. Park, playfield and facility design;

E. Capital improvement planning;

F. Concession;

G. Contracts, interlocal agreements and lease agreements regarding park and recreational activities;

H. A recommended annual budget for the acquisition, development and operation of park and recreational facilities and programs; and

I. All matters as from time to time may be referred to the board by city council, the city administrator or administrative staff. (Ord. 1272 § 3, 1994).


2.72.033 Park and recreation advisory board – Officers – Quorum.

Immediately after their appointment, members of the board shall meet and organize by electing from the members a chairman, vice chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all meetings of the board. At the first meeting of the park and recreation advisory board following January 1st of each year the board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its members. The park and recreation director, or his/her designee, shall serve as the board’s secretary. The park and recreation director shall prepare and record all proceedings of the board which shall be public record. A majority of the membership of the park and recreation advisory board shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business and a majority vote of those present shall be necessary to carry any recommended action. If a quorum is not reached, as many councilmembers as appointed by the mayor to the parks and recreation advisory board as it takes to reach a quorum may be substituted as temporary voting members of the board. The ranking in which councilmembers vote shall be determined at the time of appointment by the mayor. (Ord. 1552 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1272 § 4, 1994).


2.72.034 Park and recreation advisory board – Meetings.

The park and recreation advisory board shall meet on the first Monday of each month, at 5:30 p.m., at the Burlington Parks and Recreation Office, 900 East Fairhaven Ave., Burlington. Special meetings may be held as often as the board deems necessary. Notice of special meetings must be provided in accordance with the Washington State Open Public Meetings Act. All meetings shall be open to the public. (Ord. 1737 § 8, 2011; Ord. 1445 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1272 § 5, 1994).


2.72.035 Park and recreation advisory board – Cooperation with individual citizens, groups and organizations.

The board will work with individual citizens, groups and organizations. At the discretion of the board, a study may be conducted by a task force composed of individual citizens and representatives of groups, schools or other organizations on an ad hoc basis to provide citizen views or special expertise relating to a specific topic or problem. (Ord. 1272 § 6, 1994).


2.72.036 Park and recreation advisory board – Annual reports of progress.

The park and recreation advisory board shall annually provide to the city council a report on progress made in carrying out the board’s duties and responsibilities. Reports may be submitted when deemed appropriate by the board or when requested by the city council. (Ord. 1272 § 7, 1994).


2.72.040 Unlawful acts.

Without prior written consent of the parks and recreation director, designee or city council, within the limits of any of the city’s parks it is unlawful for any person or persons:

A. To carry or discharge firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, air gun or slingshot;

B. To injure, deface, write upon or mark any monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property;

C. To distribute any handbills or circulars, or to post, place or erect any bills, notice, paper or advertising device or matter of any kind;

D. To camp or lodge therein;

E. To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or thing whatsoever;

F. To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession;

G. To remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless posted otherwise;

H. To throw, drop, deposit, discard, or otherwise dispose of litter or rubbish of any kind, except that such material and matter may be deposited and left in receptacles provided for such purposes. (Ord. 1827 § 1, 2015; Ord. 375 § 6, 1939).


2.72.050 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 375 § 7, 1939).


Chapter 2.74 LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.74.010    Committee established.

2.74.020    Composition.

2.74.030    Terms of office.

2.74.040    Rules and officers.

2.74.050    Meetings.


2.74.010 Committee established.

Pursuant to RCW 67.28.1817 there is hereby established a city of Burlington lodging tax advisory committee, to serve the functions prescribed in SSB 5867, enacted as Chapter 452, Laws of 1997. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 2001).


2.74.020 Composition.

The lodging tax advisory committee shall consist of seven regular voting members, plus three nonvoting alternate members for a total of 10 members, appointed by the Burlington city council. Membership shall be as follows:

A. Regular Voting Members (Seven Total).

1. One regular voting member of the Burlington city council who shall serve as the committee chairperson.

2. Three regular voting members shall be representatives of businesses required to collect the lodging tax, with consideration given to, but not limited to, the following categories of businesses: bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels, and camping facilities.

3. Three regular voting members shall be persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received from the lodging tax, with consideration given to, but not limited to, the following categories of organizations: business and visitor information services, cultural and heritage organizations, recreational and environmental organizations.

B. Nonvoting Alternate Members. There shall be three nonvoting alternate members to the LTAC as follows:

1. One nonvoting alternate member of the city council who shall serve as an alternate to the LTAC chairperson, and who shall serve as a voting member only in the absence of the chair.

2. One nonvoting alternate member representing businesses required to collect the lodging tax, who shall serve as a voting member only in the absence of one of the regular voting members appointed to represent a business required to collect lodging taxes.

3. One nonvoting alternate member representing persons/entities involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received from the lodging tax, who shall only serve as a voting member when a regular voting member appointed to represent a person or entity involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received from lodging taxes is either (a) absent from a regular or special meeting of the LTAC, or (b) recuses him/herself from voting on a particular action item during a regular or special meeting of the LTAC.

C. LTAC Residency Requirement and Nomination Process. Members of the LTAC are not required to be city of Burlington residents. All members of the LTAC must have a demonstrated interest in and knowledge of the recreational, economic development, and cultural needs of the city of Burlington and the role of tourism in shaping the city’s future. The mayor shall nominate members for the committee for appointment by the city council. In making the nomination, the mayor shall consider names submitted by the LTAC and any other source, including, but not limited to, civic groups and organizations involved in tourism promotion and economic development, organizations representing businesses required to collect the lodging tax, and organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by lodging tax revenues. (Ord. 1831 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1743 § 1, 2011).


2.74.030 Terms of office.

Appointments to the lodging tax advisory committee shall be reviewed annually and the city council shall make changes as the council deems appropriate. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council, upon nomination from the mayor, for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 2001).


2.74.040 Rules and officers.

The lodging tax advisory committee shall establish and adopt its own rules of procedure. A city of Burlington elected representative shall serve as chair of the committee as appointed by the council. The committee shall appoint such other officers as may be necessary to conduct the committee’s business. (Ord. 1492 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1469 § 1, 2001).


2.74.050 Meetings.

The lodging tax advisory committee shall hold meetings throughout the year as required to fulfill the duties of the committee. (Ord. 1524 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1469 § 1, 2001).


Chapter 2.76 PUBLIC LIBRARY

Sections:

2.76.010    Established – Funding.

2.76.020    Declared free.

2.76.030    Board of trustees – Appointment – Term – Vacancy filling.

2.76.040    Board of trustees – Organization – Powers and duties.

2.76.050    Chief librarian – Appointment and qualifications.

2.76.060    Employees.

2.76.070    Annual report.

2.76.080    Nonresident usage – Book exchange.

2.76.090    State aid – Application.

2.76.100    State Library Board requirements.

2.76.110    Gifts.

2.76.120    Fund adopted.

2.76.130    Detaining or injuring property prohibited – Penalty.


2.76.010 Established – Funding.

There is established in the city a free and public library, which library shall be maintained by taxes voted annually as provided by law in the city, and by gifts, bequests and devises as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 236 § 1, 1915).


2.76.020 Declared free.

The library established in BMC 2.76.010 is declared to be forever free for the use of the inhabitants of the city, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the trustees may find necessary, in order that the library may be of the greatest benefit to the greatest number. The trustees may exclude any person or persons who wilfully violate such rules and regulations. (Ord. 236 § 2, 1915).


2.76.030 Board of trustees – Appointment – Term – Vacancy filling.

The management and control of the library shall be vested in a board of five trustees, who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city with the consent of the city council, from citizens of recognized fitness for such position. No person shall be ineligible as a trustee by reason of sex, and no trustee, as such, shall receive any compensation. The first trustees shall determine by lot whose term of office shall expire each year, and a new trustee shall be appointed annually to serve five years. All vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible in like manner as the members of the board are chosen, and in an unexpired term for the residue of the term only. (Ord. 236 § 3, 1915).


2.76.040 Board of trustees – Organization – Powers and duties.

The trustees shall immediately after taking office meet and organize by electing one of their number president, and by the election of such other officers as they may deem necessary. They shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their guidance and for the government of the library as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the laws and ordinances of the city. The trustees shall meet on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at the library, 820 East Washington Avenue, Burlington, and all such meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act. They shall have the supervision and the custody of the rooms and buildings constructed, leased or set apart for the library, and the exclusive control of the expenditures of all moneys collected for the library fund created and established in BMC 2.76.120. Such money shall be paid out from the treasury by the proper officers and upon properly authenticated vouchers of the board of trustees. The trustees may receive gifts of money, real estate, books and other property for library purposes. The finance director of the city is designated as treasurer of the board, shall perform all the duties thereof and shall be custodian of all gifts, other than real estate, books or other property regularly used by the library for library purposes. The bond of the finance director established pursuant to chapter 2.52 BMC shall be so drawn or deposited as to include and cover any and all such library funds or property, while in the hands of the finance director; provided, that such custody shall be subject to all legal rights of the board therein. (Ord. 1737 § 9, 2011; Ord. 334 § 1, 1929; Ord. 236 § 4, 1915).


2.76.050 Chief librarian – Appointment and qualifications.

The board of trustees shall have the power to appoint a chief librarian, who shall possess such qualities with respect to experience, ability, citizenship, control capacity and residence as the board may require, and who shall be subject to removal by the board. (Ord. 236 § 5, 1915).


2.76.060 Employees.

The board of trustees shall adopt a system of competition or examination under which all appointments except that of chief librarian shall be made. Under such system the chief librarian shall have the power, by and with the consent of the board of trustees, to appoint all subordinate employees of the library, prescribe rules for their conduct and remove them from office. So far as possible, all appointments shall be made to ascertain fitness for work, removals shall be made for demonstrated unfitness, and neither appointments or removals shall be made because of the candidate’s race, color, political influence or religious belief. The trustees shall have the power to do all other acts and things necessary to the management, custody and control of the library. (Ord. 236 § 6, 1915).


2.76.070 Annual report.

The trustees shall make an annual report at the close of each year to the city council stating the condition of their trust, the various sums of money received from the library fund and all other sources, how much money has been expended, the number of books and periodicals on hand, the number added during the year, the number missing or retired, the number loaned out, the general character of such loans, and such other statistics, information and suggestions as they may deem of general interest, with their estimate of the income necessary for the proper maintenance of the library fund the ensuing year; provided, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as empowering the board of trustees to incur any indebtedness except as there is sufficient money in the library fund applicable to the payment thereof. (Ord. 236 § 7, 1915).


2.76.080 Nonresident usage – Book exchange.

The board of trustees, under such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary and upon such conditions as may be agreed upon, may allow any nonresident of the city to use the books therein, and may make exchange of books with any other public library, either temporarily or permanently. The board may contract with the board of county commissioners of Skagit County, and the board of county commissioners, village trustees, town or city council of any neighboring county, village, town or city, to loan books of said library to the residents of such county, village, town or city upon the terms agreed. (Ord. 236 § 9, 1915).


2.76.090 State aid – Application.

It shall be the duty of the board of trustees to at once apply to the State Library Commission to have the library registered by the Commission as a library under their visitation and supervision. It shall be the duty of the trustees, if the library receives such aid, to make to the Commission the annual, verified reports as provided and required by law. (Ord. 236 § 8, 1915).


2.76.100 State Library Board requirements.

It shall be the duty of the board of trustees to as far as possible meet at all times the requirements of the State Library Board, in order that aid shall not be suspended or withheld from said library. (Ord. 236 § 10, 1915).


2.76.110 Gifts.

All persons who desire to make gifts of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of the public library shall have the right to pass the title thereto to the board of trustees to be held and controlled according to the term devised and bequeathed. (Ord. 236 § 11, 1915).


2.76.120 Fund adopted.

There is created and adopted in the city treasury a fund to be known and to be called the “library fund,” into which fund shall be paid all moneys derived by reason of taxes or other sources. Library fees shall be adopted by city council resolution following a recommendation by the library board. (Ord. 1799 § 4, 2014; Ord. 236 § 14, 1915).


2.76.130 Detaining or injuring property prohibited – Penalty.

A. Any person or persons who intentionally injures or destroys any property belonging to or deposited in said public library is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC.

B. Any person who wilfully detains any book, newspaper, magazine or manuscript, or any other property belonging in or to the library for 30 days after notice in writing to return same given, after expiration of the time, which by the rules of such institutions, such article or other property may be kept, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 236 §§ 12, 13, 1915).


Chapter 2.78 MUSEUM AND MUSEUM BOARD

Sections:

2.78.010    Establishment of a museum and purpose.

2.78.020    Museum board establishment and purpose.

2.78.030    Composition, powers and terms.

2.78.040    Duties and responsibilities.


2.78.010 Establishment of a museum and purpose.

The museum will be called the Grafton House Museum, as established in Resolution No. 01-2000. The museum may be expanded to include additional features, collections or structures located on this site or at other locations in the city limits. The museum exists to promote and inspire an understanding and appreciation of the heritage of Burlington. (Ord. 1484 § 1, 2001).


2.78.020 Museum board establishment and purpose.

An advisory board is formed, entitled the museum board. The board shall be advisory to the museum, mayor and city council. The purpose of the board shall be to make recommendations and create policies concerning the general operations of the museum including collections, interpretation, exhibitions, programs, and building usage. (Ord. 1484 § 1, 2001).


2.78.030 Composition, powers and terms.

A. The museum board shall consist of seven members and one nonvoting member, including a representative of each of the following:

1. Burlington parks board;

2. Burlington parks foundation;

3. Citizen;

4. City council;

5. Genealogical society;

6. Parks and recreation director, nonvoting member;

7. Pioneer;

8. Skagit Valley Historical Society.

B. The members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council for a term of three years. The initial appointments to the museum board shall be staggered. One member shall be appointed for one year, three members shall be appointed for two years and three members shall be appointed for a three-year term. Thereafter, the terms shall be for three years.

C. Museum board members must be residents of the Burlington recreation service area as defined in the parks and recreation comprehensive plan. Each member shall be appointed in accordance with museum bylaws. The chair shall be appointed by the mayor. Upon vacancy, the mayor shall appoint a board member to fill the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1484 § 1, 2001).


2.78.040 Duties and responsibilities.

The responsibilities of the museum board shall include all responsibilities necessary to carry out the purpose of the board as set forth in BMC 2.78.020, which duties shall include, but not be limited to:

A. Review and recommend short-range and long-range planning for the museum;

B. Review and recommend development of programs and services for the museum;

C. Make regulations concerning the use, management and supervision of all property under the care of the museum including policies and procedures;

D. Establish policies and coordinate the screening and management of exhibits and collections;

E. Take the lead on implementing projects and programs;

F. Perform additional duties as identified by the mayor or city council. (Ord. 1484 § 1, 2001).


Chapter 2.84 PROCUREMENT

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

2.84.010    Purpose.

2.84.020    Definitions.

2.84.030    Application.

2.84.040    Designees.

2.84.050    Procedures.

2.84.060    Bids and proposals to comply with regulations.

2.84.070    Rosters.

2.84.080    Annual list of anticipated purchases.

2.84.090    Federal funds.

2.84.100    Grant application and agreement execution.

2.84.110    Related regulations.

Article II. Goods, Supplies, Materials and Equipment

2.84.120    Definitions.

2.84.130    Purchases with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

2.84.140    Purchases with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

2.84.150    Purchases with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

2.84.160    Purchases with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

Article III. Services

2.84.170    Definitions.

2.84.180    Professional services with an estimated gross cost less than $300,000.

2.84.190    Professional services with an estimated gross cost more than $300,000.

2.84.200    Consultant services with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

2.84.210    Consultant services with a gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

2.84.220    Consultant services with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

2.84.230    Consultant services with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

2.84.240    Purchased services with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

2.84.250    Purchased services with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

2.84.260    Purchased services with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

2.84.270    Purchases with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

Article IV. Public Works

2.84.280    Definitions.

2.84.290    Contracts with community service organizations for public improvements.

2.84.300    Estimating costs of public works contracts.

2.84.310    Determining lowest responsible bidder.

2.84.320    Public works projects constructed through city labor force.

2.84.330    Public works projects less than the bid limit.

2.84.340    Limited public works – Projects with an estimated gross cost less than $35,000.

2.84.350    Small works roster – Projects with an estimated gross cost less than $300,000.

2.84.360    Public works with an estimated gross cost more than $300,000.

2.84.370    Retainage.

2.84.380    Payment and performance bonds.

2.84.390    Prevailing wages on public works and maintenance contracts.

2.84.400    Public works change orders and contract amendments.

2.84.410    Final acceptance of public works contracts.

Article V. Other Procurements

2.84.420    Computers and telecommunications systems and equipment.

2.84.430    Cooperative purchasing.

2.84.440    Purchase at auctions.

2.84.450    Sole source procurement.

2.84.460    Emergency procurements.

2.84.470    Multi-term contracts.

Article I. General Provisions


2.84.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect and advance the public interest by:

A. Fairness and Objectivity. Providing a fair, objective, and equitable selection and contracting environment for all individuals and firms seeking to do business or contracting with the city.

B. Ensuring Reasonable Costs. Promoting competition, and negotiating (where applicable), to ensure that the city receives the most favorable prices and terms in its contracts.

C. Efficiency. Ensuring that supplies and services (consultant, construction, etc.) are obtained efficiently and effectively.

D. Accountability. Promoting accountability of contracting actions by city employees and encouraging employees to protect the city’s financial and other interests.

E. Value-Added Procurement. Facilitating a procurement process that provides service and value to the city in obtaining goods and services.

F. Ethical Standards. Ensuring that the city’s procurement activities are implemented with the highest regard for integrity, avoidance of conflicts of interest, and consistent with applicable ethical standards.

G. Legal Consideration. Complying with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes and regulations. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. “Contract” means an agreement between two or more parties creating obligations to do, or not to do, certain things when such obligations are enforceable or otherwise recognizable at law. A contract means purchase order, agreement, contract, etc.

B. “Gross cost” means the total cost to acquire a good or service, including but not limited to labor, equipment, materials, overhead, profit, bonding, insurance, taxes, license fees, transportation fees, and warranty fees. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.030 Application.

This chapter applies to contracts by the city of Burlington for: (A) purchases of goods, materials, supplies, and equipment, (B) professional services, (C) consultant services, (D) purchased services, (E) public works. This chapter does not apply to:

A. The acquisition of real property.

B. Utility bills (water, sewer, electricity, natural gas, and other regulated utility expenses).

C. Postage and other purchases from the U.S. Postal Service.

D. Licenses, permits, and fees from governmental or regulatory entities at the federal, state or local level.

E. Purchases from other governmental entities (federal, state, city, local, port districts, public development authorities (PDAs), housing authorities, state colleges and universities, state hospitals, etc.) where the governmental entity provides goods or services not available from the private sector.

F. Service or use fees paid to governmental cooperative purchasing organizations.

G. Fuel card charges for gasoline and diesel purchases for official city business on personal credit card while on city travel status.

H. Legal settlements of disputed matters, and judgment claims against the city (for use only with approval by the city administrator).

I. Traffic control (flagging) by off-duty police officers (only when required).

J. Travel expenses for city employees necessary to conduct city business.

K. Training registration fees and tuition for pre-established, non-city-specific, off-site classes, seminars, workshops, etc., for city employees.

L. Testing and travel expenses of employment applicants (including expenses for eligible personnel). This includes travel expenses of certain out-of-state job applicants. Travel expenses of job applicants shall be approved by the applicable department director and by the finance director.

M. Conference and convention expenses and fees for the city employees conducting city business.

N. Advertisement for employment opportunities, purchasing and contracting solicitations, sale of surplus items, public announcements and outreach, etc. (all media). This exception does not include printing, design, or graphics services.

O. Freight bills, express shipping, common carriers, and delivery services.

P. Honoraria and stipends.

Q. Entertainment such as speakers, lecturers, musicians, and performing artists. Only when such expenses are permitted by the grant funding the activity.

R. Insurance deductible and/or retained losses (requires approval of finance director).

S. Taxi, public transportation, and toll fare; mileage and incidental parking expenses.

T. Publications and subscriptions (newspapers, magazines, books, pre-printed materials, reprints, publishers’ page charges, electronic publications, online subscription services, pre-recorded audio or video cassettes, slide presentations, tapes, CDs, diskettes when purchased from the publisher or producer; etc.).

U. Mailing lists (print or electronic).

V. Professional association membership dues, fees, licenses, accreditations, and certifications.

W. Royalties, broadcast rights, and film rentals from the producer or protected distributors.

X. Petty cash purchases and reimbursements less than $50.00. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.040 Designees.

A. Any reference to the mayor, city administrator, or finance director includes their respective designees who are authorized through a memorandum of delegation of authority signed by the mayor, city administrator, or finance director. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.050 Procedures.

The city administrator is authorized to establish procedures to implement this chapter. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.060 Bids and proposals to comply with regulations.

All bids and proposals offered by persons, associations or corporations desiring to sell or supply material, equipment, supplies, or services to, or to construct a public work or improvement for, the city, shall comply with all relevant federal, state, and local laws and regulations, the terms of which shall be deemed included in such solicitations whether or not they are expressly set out therein. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.070 Rosters.

The city utilizes the Municipal Research and Services Center (MRSC) for its vendor roster, consultant roster, and small works roster. The city is authorized to maintain a roster or to utilize another agency’s roster. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.080 Annual list of anticipated purchases.

A. Using historical data of purchases from the previous year and estimated purchases by city departments of “like items” or groups of like items, the city finance director shall develop an annual estimate of the city’s cumulative requirements for such items. These purchases shall include purchases of goods, supplies, equipment, materials, and purchased services as defined in BMC 2.84.150. The city shall advertise for competitive bids for all such items on the list when the gross cost of obtaining such like items exceeds $15,000 for the year, except that for items on the list of anticipated purchases greater than $7,500 but less than $15,000, the city may solicit bids from firms on the vendor roster described in BMC 2.84.150. The list of anticipated purchases shall be compiled by the finance director and distributed to the proper officers of the city.

B. “Like items” means goods or services that are of a similar nature such that the goods or services may reasonably be grouped together in order to facilitate bulk purchasing. In determining whether or not goods and/or services are to be construed to be a “like item,” the following criteria shall be examined:

1. Whether or not a single vendor is likely to be able to supply all of the goods or services, or whether competition would be enhanced by attracting multiple vendors for different goods or services;

2. Whether the goods or services will be used for similar purposes such that different staff members from different departments will have similar concerns as to the attributes of the products;

3. Whether or not there are limitations on the available storage space for the product;

4. Whether or not there are limitations on the shelf life of a good or product that would preclude bulk purchasing;

5. Whether or not there is an expected change in a product line, and the city prefers not to commit to any more of the product than is necessary before the new product becomes available;

6. Whether or not the goods or services may all be identified at the time of bidding with sufficient clarity so as to allow the creation of clear and concise specifications;

7. Whether or not there are other business or programmatic reasons for purchasing the goods or services at a frequent interval. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.090 Federal funds.

When a procurement involves the expenditure of federal funds, procurement and contracting shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable federal law or regulation, which applicable federal law or regulation shall supersede the provisions of this chapter to the extent inconsistent. For the purposes of this section, the term “federal law or regulation” shall include those rules and regulations adopted by any state agency and made applicable to the city, or made applicable to a particular purchase to be made by the city, in order to conform either with federal law or to enable the city of Burlington or the state to remain eligible for federal grant funding. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.100 Grant application and agreement execution.

A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

1. “Grant match” shall mean money, or in-kind contributions, provided by the city to match requested funding from grant program.

B. Coordination of Grant Terms and City Requirements. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest which is otherwise consistent with law.

C. Application for City Match Grants.

1. Grant applications with a city match that have been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital improvement plan: The mayor is authorized to approve applications for grants in any amount; provided, that the finance director certifies that funds are available for any required city match.

2. Grant applications with a city match that have not been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital improvement plan: For grant applications with a city match of not more than $15,000, the mayor is authorized to approve application for said grants and shall notify the city council at the next scheduled city council meeting. Grant applications with a city match in excess of $15,000 shall be approved by city council prior to submittal.

3. If a grant opportunity arises that requires submittal of the grant prior to the next scheduled city council meeting for a project that has prior council approval or positive recommendation from the finance committee, the mayor is authorized to apply for the grant. Council shall be notified no later than the next scheduled city council meeting.

D. Execution of Grant Agreements.

1. Grants with a city match that have been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital improvement plan: The mayor is authorized to execute grant agreements in any amount; provided, that the finance director certifies that the city match funds are available.

2. Grants with a city match that have not been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital improvement plan: For grant agreements with a city match of not more than $15,000, the mayor is authorized to execute said agreements and shall notify the city council at the next scheduled city council meeting. Grant agreements with a city match in excess of $15,000 shall be approved by the city council prior to execution. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.110 Related regulations.

The following chapters of the Burlington Municipal Code and regulations are related to this procurement policy:

A. Asset management policy and procedures.

B. Administrative procedures for right-of-way and property acquisition.

C. Chapter 2.100 BMC, Credit Cards.

D. Petty cash, change and investigative funds. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).

Article II. Goods, Supplies, Materials and Equipment


2.84.120 Definitions.

As used in this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A. Goods, supplies, materials and equipment are considered tangible items which are manufactured and are movable at the time of purchase. Examples: office supplies, off-the-shelf software, hardware, vehicles, construction and industrial machinery, copy machines, auto parts, gravel, janitorial supplies, etc. This also includes equipment that is procured through lease.

B. “Minor contract” shall mean, for the purposes of this article, a contract that involves a gross cost of $7,500 or less within a 12-month period and has not been identified on the finance director’s annual list of anticipated purchases pursuant to BMC 2.84.080. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.130 Purchases with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

A. Procurement. Quotes are recommended but not required for goods, materials, supplies, and equipment with a gross cost of less than $500.00.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for goods, materials, supplies or equipment. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.140 Purchases with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

A. Procurement. Quotes are required for goods, materials, supplies, and equipment with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499. Whenever possible, a city representative shall contact at least three vendors to obtain quotes. If less than three quotes are obtained, written justification shall be required as to why the three quote minimum was not met.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for goods, materials, supplies or equipment. The finance director is authorized to attest such signatures. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.150 Purchases with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

A. Procurement. Goods, materials, supplies, and equipment shall be acquired by the city through the use of formal sealed bidding procedures if the gross cost of such goods, materials, supplies, or equipment, including tax and freight, is greater than $7,500; provided, that the purchase of goods, materials, supplies, or equipment with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000 may be accomplished utilizing the vendor roster procedures set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

1. Publication of Notice. At least twice a year notice of the existence of the roster of vendors for goods, materials, supplies, and equipment shall be published in the city’s official newspaper and shall solicit names of vendors for the vendor roster.

2. Request for Quotes Off of the Vendor Roster. The city shall use the following process to obtain quotations from vendors for the purchase of goods, materials, supplies, or equipment:

a. A written description shall be drafted of the specific goods, materials, supplies, or equipment to be purchased, including the number, quantity, quality, and type desired, the proposed delivery date, and any other significant terms of purchase;

b. A city representative shall contact at least three of the vendors on the vendor roster and obtain telephone or written quotations from the vendors on the required goods, materials, supplies, or equipment;

c. At the time such quotations are solicited, the city representative shall not inform a vendor of any other vendor’s bid on the goods, materials, supplies, or equipment;

d. For telephone quotations, a written record shall be made by the city representative of each vendor’s bid on the goods, materials, supplies, or equipment, and of any conditions imposed on the bid by such vendor;

e. Copies of bid documents for purchases equal to $7,500 and less than $15,000 shall be submitted to the finance director prior to solicitation.

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to execute any contract for goods, materials, supplies or equipment that is not subject to advertised competitive bidding requirements; provided, that the acquisition of such goods has been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital plan. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.160 Purchases with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

A. Procurement. Purchases of goods, materials, supplies or equipment more than $15,000 shall be through an advertised competitive and sealed bid process.

1. Bid Process.

a. Invitation for Bids (IFB) shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

i. Description of item(s) to be purchased.

ii. Specifications covering the item(s) needed.

iii. Terms and conditions of the contract.

iv. General and special instruction to bidders.

v. Whether the “lowest bid” will be computed by (A) line item; (B) groups of items; (C) the entire bid; (D) if the city has the discretion to make that determination independently.

vi. Price sheets for the vendors to submit prices.

vii. Offer and acceptance sheet for the bidder to sign.

b. Bid Documents. Bid documents shall be developed to promote full and unrestricted competition through setting forth a detailed description of the goods, supplies, equipment, or materials to be acquired.

c. Public Notice. A notice of the description of the purchase shall be published in the official newspaper with the following requirements:

i. Published a minimum of one time.

ii. Published at least 13 days prior to the last date upon which bids will be received.

iii. Generally state a description of the items to be purchased.

iv. Invite sealed bids for the purchase.

v. State where to submit the bids.

vi. State deadline for receipt of bids (day and hour).

d. Bid Amendments. If, after issuance of a bid, changes shall be made in quantity, specifications, delivery schedule, or closing date, or if corrections are needed because of defects or ambiguities, an amendment to the bid shall be issued. The amendment shall be in writing. Consider the time set for receipt of bids and the necessity or desirability of extending the closing date. Inform potential bidders of such extensions by telephone and then send written confirmation via an addendum by mail or electronically. All firms to whom the original bid was sent shall be notified of all changes and time extensions.

e. Bid Receipt and Opening. Bids are to be received at the time, date, and location specified in the bid documents.

f. Time and Date Stamped. Upon receipt, unopened bids are to be time and date stamped to validate the time of receipt. Late bids shall not be considered and will be returned unopened to the bidder.

g. Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be reviewed and checked for accuracy.

B. Contract Execution. Staff shall present the results of the bid evaluation to city council for consideration. Upon award by the city council, a “Notice of Award” shall be sent to the selected vendor. City council may reject all bids for good cause and readvertise or award the contract to the lowest bidder. Immediately after the award is made, the bid quotations obtained shall be recorded, open to public inspection, and shall be available by telephone inquiry. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).

Article III. Services


2.84.170 Definitions.

A. “Professional services” shall mean architectural, landscape architectural, land surveying, and engineering services (RCW 39.80).

B. “Consultant services” shall mean those services in which a consultant provides advice, recommendations, reports, analyses, evaluations, audits, surveys, or other products of cognitive processes or expert services.

C. “Purchased services” shall mean a contract in which the contractor provides services to the city in the form of physical labor, and which labor is not subject to the supervision and control of city employees, and which labor does not constitute a public work. Purchased services which constitute maintenance as defined in BMC 2.84.280(B) are subject to prevailing wages.

D. “Minor contract” shall mean for the purposes of this section a contract that involves a gross cost of $15,000 or less within a 12-month period and has not been identified as a like item pursuant to BMC 2.84.080. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.180 Professional services with an estimated gross cost less than $300,000.

A. Procurement. Professional services with an estimated gross cost of less than $300,000 will be accomplished utilizing the consultant roster procedures set forth in this section.

1. Publication of Notice. At least once a year notice will be published in the city’s official newspaper encouraging professional services firms to submit their statement of qualifications and performance data (RCW 39.80.040).

2. Request for qualifications off of the consultant roster. The city shall use the following process to obtain statements of qualifications from businesses for the acquisition of professional services:

a. A written scope of work description shall be drafted for the specific services to be acquired, including deliverables, completion date, and any other significant terms of procurement;

b. A city representative shall contact appropriate businesses on the consultant roster according to subsection (A)(1) of this section and obtain proposals from the businesses on the applicable consultant services.

B. Contract Execution.

1. Professional Services Contracts with an Estimated Gross Cost Less Than $15,000. The mayor shall have the authority to execute any contract for professional services with an estimated gross cost less than $15,000; provided, that the acquisition of such services has been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital plan. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature.

2. Professional Services Contracts with an Estimated Gross Cost of $15,000 or More. Staff shall present the results of the qualification based selection and contract negotiation to the city council for consideration and contract award. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.190 Professional services with an estimated gross cost more than $300,000.

A. Procurement. Purchases of professional services contracts with an estimated gross cost over $300,000 shall be through an advertised competitive selection process.

1. Proposal Process.

a. Requests for qualifications (RFQ) shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

i. Description of scope of work of the professional services to be provided.

ii. Terms and conditions of the contract.

b. Public Notice. A notice of the description of the professional services to be provided shall be published in the city’s official newspaper with the following requirements:

i. Published a minimum of one time.

ii. Invite statements of qualifications for the work.

iii. State where to submit the statements of qualifications.

iv. State deadline for receipt of statements of qualifications (day and hour).

c. Amendments. If, after issuance of the request of qualification, changes shall be made in request for qualifications, an amendment to the RFQ shall be issued. The amendment shall be in writing. Consider the time set for receipt of statements of qualifications and the necessity or desirability of extending the closing date. Inform potential proposers of such extensions by telephone and then send written confirmation via an addendum by mail or electronically. All firms to whom the original request for qualifications was sent shall be notified of all changes and time extensions.

d. Statement of Qualifications Receipt. Statements of qualifications are to be received at the time, date, and location specified in the request for qualifications.

e. Time and Date Stamped. Upon receipt, unopened statements of qualifications are to be time and date stamped to validate the time of receipt. Late statements of qualifications shall not be considered and will be returned unopened to the proposer.

f. Contract Negotiations. After the most qualified firm has been selected, enter into and complete price negotiations with the firm.

B. Contract Execution. Following negotiation of an acceptable price with the most qualified firm, staff shall present the results of the selection and negotiation process to city council for consideration. Upon award by the city council, a “Notice of Award” shall be sent to the selected professional services firm. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.200 Consultant services with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

A. Procurement. Quotes and review of proposals from multiple consultants are recommended but not required for consultant services with a gross cost of less than $500.00.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for consultant services. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.210 Consultant services with a gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

A. Procurement. Quotes and review of proposals are required for consultant services with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499. Whenever possible, a city representative shall contact at least three consultants to obtain quotes and review qualifications. If less than three quotes are obtained, written justification shall be required as to why the three quote minimum was not met.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for consultant services. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.220 Consultant services with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

A. Procurement. Consultant services shall only be acquired by the city through the use of advertised proposal procedures when the gross cost is greater than $7,500; provided, that consultant services estimated to cost between $7,500 and $15,000 may be accomplished utilizing the consultant roster procedures set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

1. Publication of Notice. At least twice a year notice of the existence of the consultant roster will be published in the city’s official newspaper and shall solicit businesses for the consultant roster.

2. Request for proposals off of the consultant roster. The city shall use the following process to obtain proposals from businesses for the acquisition of consultant services:

a. A written scope of work description shall be drafted for the specific services to be acquired, including deliverables, completion date, and any other significant terms of procurement. The request for proposals shall include the evaluation criteria to be used in evaluating proposals and the weighting for each criterion;

b. A city representative shall contact at least three different businesses on the consultant roster whenever possible and obtain proposals from the businesses on the required consultant services. If less than three proposals are obtained, written justification shall be required as to why the three proposal minimum was not met;

c. At the time such proposals are solicited, the city representative shall not inform a consultant of any other consultant’s proposed price;

d. Copies of requests for proposals for consultant services equal to or greater than $7,500 and less than $15,000 will be submitted to the finance director prior to solicitation.

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to execute any contract for consultant services that is not subject to advertised competitive selection requirements; provided, that the acquisition of such services has been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital plan. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.230 Consultant services with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

A. Procurement. Purchases of consultant services over $15,000 shall be through an advertised competitive selection process.

1. Proposal Process.

a. Requests for Proposals (RFP) shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

i. Description of scope of work of the consultant services to be provided.

ii. Terms and conditions of the contract.

iii. Evaluation criteria to be used in evaluating proposals and the weighting for each criterion.

b. Public Notice. A notice of the description of the consultant services to be provided shall be published in the city’s official newspaper with the following requirements:

i. Published a minimum of one time.

ii. Generally state the consultant services to be provided.

iii. Invite proposals for work.

iv. State where to submit the proposals.

v. State deadline for receipt of proposals (day and hour).

c. Amendments. If, after issuance of a request for proposals, changes shall be made in request for proposals, an amendment to the RFP shall be issued. The amendment shall be in writing. Consider the time set for receipt of proposals and the necessity or desirability of extending the closing date. Inform potential proposers of such extensions by telephone and then send written confirmation via an addendum by mail or electronically. All firms to whom the original request for proposals was sent shall be notified of all changes and time extensions.

d. Proposal Receipt. Proposals are to be received at the time, date, and location specified in the request for proposals.

e. Time and Date Stamped. Upon receipt, unopened proposals are to be time and date stamped to validate the time of receipt. Late proposals shall not be considered and will be returned unopened to the proposer.

B. Contract Award. Staff shall present the results of the proposal evaluation to city council for consideration. City council may reject all proposals for good cause and readvertise or award the contract to the highest ranked proposer. Upon award by the city council, a “Notice of Award” shall be sent to the selected consultant. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.240 Purchased services with an estimated gross cost less than $500.00.

A. Procurement. Quotes or proposals are recommended but not required for purchased services with a gross cost of less than $500.00.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for purchased services. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.250 Purchased services with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499.

A. Procurement. Quotes or proposals are required for purchased services with an estimated gross cost between $500.00 and $7,499. Whenever possible, a city representative shall contact at least three vendors to obtain quotes or proposals. If less than three quotes or proposals are obtained, written justification shall be required as to why the three quote minimum was not met.

B. Contract Execution. The city council hereby directs and authorizes the mayor to execute minor contracts for purchased services. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. The mayor may, upon his or her own volition, place any specific contract on the agenda for council authorization as he or she may see fit. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.260 Purchased services with an estimated gross cost between $7,500 and $15,000.

A. Procurement. Purchased services shall only be acquired by the city through a formal advertised competitive selection process when the gross cost is greater than $7,500; provided, that purchased services estimated to cost between $7,500 and $15,000 may be accomplished utilizing applicable vendor roster procedures set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

1. Publication of Notice. At least twice a year notice of the existence of the vendor roster will be published in the city’s official newspaper and shall solicit businesses for the vendor roster.

2. Request for quotes off of the vendor roster. The city shall use the following process to obtain quotations from businesses for the procurement of purchased services:

a. A written scope of work shall be drafted for the specific services to be purchased, including deliverables and standards;

b. A city representative shall contact at least three businesses and obtain quotations from the businesses for the required purchased services;

c. At the time such quotations are solicited, the city representative shall not inform a service provider of any other business’s bid;

d. For telephone quotations, a written record shall be made by the city representative of each vendor’s bid and of any conditions imposed on the bid by such service provider;

e. Copies of bid documents for purchases of greater than $7,500 and less than $15,000 shall be submitted to the finance director prior to solicitation.

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to execute any contract for purchased services that is not subject to advertised competitive bidding requirements; provided, that the acquisition of such services has been approved by city council through annual budget appropriation and/or capital plan. The finance director is authorized to attest such signature. Immediately after the award is made, the bid quotations obtained shall be recorded, open to public inspection, and shall be available by telephone inquiry. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.270 Purchases with an estimated gross cost more than $15,000.

A. Procurement. Purchases of purchased services over $15,000 shall be through an advertised competitive selection process.

1. Bid or Proposal Process.

a. Invitation for Bids (IFB)/Request for Proposals (RFP). IFB/RFP shall contain, if applicable, the following:

i. Description of services to be provided.

ii. Terms and conditions of the contract.

iii. Evaluation criteria to be used in evaluating proposals and the weighting for each criterion (only for RFPs).

iv. General and special instruction to bidders.

v. Whether the “lowest bid” will be computed by (A) line item; (B) groups of items; (C) the entire bid; (D) if the city has the discretion to make that determination independently.

vi. Price sheets for the vendors to submit prices.

vii. Offer and acceptance sheet for the bidder to sign.

b. Public Notice. A notice of the description of the services to be provided shall be published in the official newspaper with the following requirements:

i. Published a minimum of one time.

ii. Generally state the services to be provided.

iii. Invite sealed bids or proposals.

iv. State where to file the bids or proposals.

v. State deadline for receipt of bids or proposals (day and hour).

c. Amendments. If, after issuance of a solicitation, changes shall be made, or if corrections are needed, an amendment to the solicitation shall be issued. The amendment shall be in writing. Consider the time set for receipt of submittals and the necessity or desirability of extending the closing date. Inform potential bidders of such extensions by telephone and then send confirmation by mail or electronically. All firms to whom the original solicitation was sent shall be notified of all changes and time extensions.

d. Receipt and Opening. Bids or proposals are to be received at the time, date, and location specified in the solicitation.

e. Time and Date Stamped. Upon receipt, unopened bids proposals are to be time and date stamped to validate the time of receipt. Late bids or proposals shall not be considered and will be returned unopened.

f. Evaluation. Bids or proposals shall be reviewed and checked for accuracy.

B. Contract Execution. Staff shall present the results of the bid or proposal evaluation to city council for consideration. Upon award by the city council, a “Notice of Award” shall be sent to the selected consultant. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).

Article IV. Public Works


2.84.280 Definitions.

A. “Ordinary maintenance” shall mean maintenance work performed by city employees and that is performed on a regularly scheduled basis (e.g., daily, weekly, monthly, seasonally, semiannually, but not less frequently than once per year) to service, check, or replace items that are not broken; or maintenance work performed by city employees that is not regularly scheduled but is required to maintain the asset so that repair does not become necessary (WAC 296-127-010(7)(b)(iii)).

B. Maintenance. Maintenance performed by contract is defined as keeping existing facilities in good usable, operational condition and is subject to prevailing wages requirements.

C. “Public work” shall have the same meaning as set forth in RCW 39.04.010, and shall include all work, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement other than ordinary maintenance, executed at the cost of the city or which is by law a lien or charge on any property therein. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.290 Contracts with community service organizations for public improvements.

A. Competition Waived. Pursuant to RCW 35.21.278, the city council may contract with the Chamber of Commerce, a service organization, a community, youth, or athletic association, or similar nonprofit association which is located in and providing service to the immediate neighborhood for drawing design plans; making improvements to a park, school playground, or public square; installing equipment or public art; or providing maintenance services for a public facility as a community or neighborhood project without utilizing a competitive bid process, and the city may reimburse the contracting association its expense.

B. Value of Services or Goods Received. The goods or services received by the city shall be at least equal to three times the city’s payment to the association.

C. Annual Limitation. The city’s payments for all contracts made to all neighborhood associations pursuant to this section in any one calendar year shall not exceed $25,000. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.300 Estimating costs of public works contracts.

Consistent with RCW 39.04.020, the city shall develop a cost estimate for every public works project prior to soliciting bids. In determining the cost of a public works project, all amounts estimated to be paid for materials, supplies, equipment, sales taxes, and labor on the construction of the project shall be included in the cost estimate. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.310 Determining lowest responsible bidder.

The city shall award any contract for a public works project to the lowest responsible bidder with a responsive bid; provided, that the city council may, in its sole discretion, elect to reject all bids. Bidder responsibility is defined in RCW 39.04.350. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.320 Public works projects constructed through city labor force.

The city may utilize its own labor force to construct public works projects if the estimated gross cost is less than $40,000 employing a single craft or $65,000 employing multiple crafts. Any goods, materials, supplies, equipment or services shall be procured in accordance with the city’s procurement policy for those types of purchases.

A. For projects in excess of $25,000, a city shall publish a description of the project and its estimated cost in its official newspaper at least 15 days before beginning the work (RCW 39.04.020). (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.330 Public works projects less than the bid limit.

Contracted public works with an estimated gross cost less than $40,000 employing a single craft or $65,000 employing multiple crafts.

A. Procurement. The city may waive the bid requirement for these public works projects and select a contractor(s) to negotiate price with.

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to award such public works contracts without the city council’s approval, provided, that the city council shall ratify the mayor’s approval at the next scheduled council meeting. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.340 Limited public works – Projects with an estimated gross cost less than $35,000.

A. Procurement. Pursuant to RCW 39.04.155(3), and in lieu of awarding contracts through a formal sealed bidding procedure, the city may award a contract for a public work estimated to cost less than $35,000 including tax, using the limited public works process provided under this section. The limited public works process is part of the small works roster process.

1. Public works projects awarded under this section are exempt from the requirement that contracts be awarded after advertisement as provided under RCW 39.04.010, and are exempt from the other requirements of the small works roster process as described in BMC 2.84.350.

2. For limited public works projects, the city shall solicit written quotations from all of the contractors on the appropriate small works roster established pursuant to BMC 2.84.350, and shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder as defined under RCW 39.04.010. After an award is made, the quotations shall be open to public inspection and available by electronic request.

3. For limited public works projects the city administrator may waive the payment and performance bond requirements of chapter 39.08 RCW and the retainage requirements of chapter 60.28 RCW, thereby assuming the liability for the contractor’s nonpayment of laborers, mechanics, subcontractors, materialmen, suppliers, and taxes imposed under RCW Title 82 that may be due from the contractor for the limited public works project; however, the city shall have the right of recovery against the contractor for any payments made on the contractor’s behalf. Any waiver of the bonding and retainage requirements shall be included in the bid documents prior to solicitation of quotations from contractors.

4. The city shall maintain a list of the contractors contacted and the contracts awarded during the previous 24 months under the limited public works process, including the name of the contractor, the contractor’s registration number, the amount of the contract, a brief description of the type of work performed, and the date the contract was awarded (RCW 39.04.155(3)).

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to award any contract for a public work that is not subject to advertised public competitive bidding requirements, including projects awarded pursuant to a small works roster or limited public work; provided, that such public work project has been approved by the city council in the annual budget; and provided further, that the finance director certifies that funds are available. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.350 Small works roster – Projects with an estimated gross cost less than $300,000.

A. Procurement – Roster Authorized. Pursuant to RCW 39.04.155, the city is authorized to utilize a small works roster process to select contractors to perform work involving the construction, building, renovation, remodeling, alteration, repair, or improvement of real property. In accordance with that statute, the small works roster procedures described herein are in lieu of advertising a public works project.

1. Cost. The small works roster process described herein may be utilized for those projects involving the construction, building, renovation, remodeling, alteration, repair, or improvement of real property in which the estimated cost of the project does not exceed $300,000, which estimate shall include the costs of labor, material, equipment, and sales and/or use taxes as applicable. The breaking of any project into units or accomplishing any projects by phases is prohibited if done for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amount of a contract that may be let using the small works roster process.

2. Bid Security and Performance Bonds. No bid security, in the form of a bid bond or bid deposit, shall be required for contracts awarded pursuant to the small works roster process. Performance bonds shall be required from all such contractors performing a public work, pursuant to the provisions of RCW 39.08.030.

3. Quotations. The city shall obtain written or electronic quotations for public works contracts from contractors on the appropriate small works roster to assure that a competitive price is established and to award contracts to the lowest responsible bidder, as defined in RCW 39.04.010, as follows:

a. Invitations for quotations shall include an estimate of the scope and nature of the work to be performed as well as materials and equipment to be furnished. However, detailed plans and specifications need not be included in the invitation. This subsection does not eliminate other requirements for architectural or engineering approvals as to quality and compliance with building codes.

b. Quotations will be invited from all appropriate contractors on the appropriate small works roster.

4. A written record shall be made by the city of each contractor’s bid on the project. Immediately after an award is made, the bid quotations obtained shall be forwarded to the city administrator’s office, recorded, open to public inspection, and available by telephone inquiry. All bid documents will then be stored in the city administrator’s office. A copy of the contractor’s quotation shall be forwarded with the contractor’s first invoice to the finance director.

B. Contract Execution. The mayor shall have the authority to award any contract for a public work that is not subject to advertised public competitive bidding requirements, including projects awarded pursuant to a small works roster or limited public work; provided, that such public work project has been approved by the city council in the annual budget; and provided further, that the finance director certifies that funds are available. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.360 Public works with an estimated gross cost more than $300,000.

A. Procurement. Purchases of public works over $300,000 shall be through an advertised competitive bid process.

1. Bid Process.

a. Invitation for Bids (IFB). IFB shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

i. Description of work to be performed.

ii. Specifications covering the item(s) needed or work required.

iii. Plans and drawings describing the work to be performed.

iv. Terms and conditions of the contract.

v. General and special instruction to bidders.

vi. Mandatory and supplemental bidder responsibility criteria for evaluating whether the low bidder is a responsible bidder.

vii. Price sheets for the vendors to submit prices.

viii. Offer and acceptance sheet for the bidder to sign.

b. Bid Development, Specifications. Specifications shall be developed to promote full and unrestricted competition through setting forth actual, minimum requirements.

c. Public Notice. A notice of the description of the public work will be published in the official newspaper with the following requirements:

i. Published a minimum of one time.

ii. Published at least 13 days prior to the last date upon which bids will be received.

iii. Generally state the work to be done.

iv. Invite sealed bids for work.

v. State where to submit the bids.

vi. State deadline for receipt of bids (day and hour).

d. Bid Amendments. If, after issuance of an IFB, changes shall be made in quantity, specifications, delivery schedule, or closing date, or if corrections are needed because of defects or ambiguities, an amendment to the IFB shall be issued. The amendment shall be in writing. Consider the time set for receipt of bids and the necessity or desirability of extending the closing date. Inform potential bidders of such extensions by telephone and then send confirmation by mail or electronically. All firms to whom the original bid was sent shall be notified of all changes and time extensions through direct correspondence or posted to the city website.

e. Bids Receipt and Opening. Bids are to be received at the time, date, and location specified in the bid document.

f. Time and Date Stamped. Upon receipt, unopened bids are to be time and date stamped to validate the time of receipt. Late bids shall not be considered and will be returned unopened to the bidder.

g. Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be reviewed and checked for accuracy and for whether the bidder is a responsible bidder based on the mandatory bidder responsibility criteria and any supplemental bidder responsibility criteria included in the bid documents.

B. Contract Execution. Staff shall present the results of the bid evaluation to city council for consideration. Upon award by the city council, a “Notice of Award” shall be sent to the selected contractor. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.370 Retainage.

Except as provided under the limited public works process set forth in RCW 39.04.155(3), and pursuant to RCW 60.28.011, the city shall withhold five percent of the money due a contractor for a public work contract until at least 45 days following final acceptance of the contract by the city, provided the city has obtained releases from the State Department of Revenue, Employment Security Department, and Department of Labor and Industries. In addition, the city shall have received an affidavit of wages paid, approved by the Department of Labor and Industries, from the contractor and all subcontractors. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.380 Payment and performance bonds.

Pursuant to RCW 39.08.010, and except as allowed under the limited public works process set forth in RCW 39.04.155(3), the city shall require all contractors entering into a contract with the city for the construction of a public work to submit to the city a payment and performance bond in a form as approved by the city attorney. Such bond shall be in an amount not less than 100 percent of the contract price.

A. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and in accordance with RCW 39.08.010, at the contractor’s option and with the approval of the mayor, the city may, for public works projects less than $35,000, in lieu of a performance and payment bond, retain 50 percent of the contract amount for a period of 45 days after date of final acceptance and settlement of any liens filed under chapter 60.28 RCW. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.390 Prevailing wages on public works and maintenance contracts.

The payment of prevailing wages as required by chapter 39.12 RCW shall apply to all contracts for public works and to all maintenance work performed by contract. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.400 Public works change orders and contract amendments.

A. The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to approve and execute public works contract change orders for an increase in the compensation or price to be paid under the contract under the following conditions:

1. If the change order does not change basic nature or purpose of the scope of the project; and

2. If the total cumulative increase or decrease in the contract amount, as a result of the current and preceding change orders, does not exceed 10 percent of the bid total stated in the original approved contract; and

3. The finance director verifies that funds have been budgeted and are available; and

4. There is sufficient breakdown and documentation of how the change order amount was calculated and negotiated and such calculation is consistent with the contract documents.

B. Where the mayor approves and executes change orders or contract amendments according to the conditions set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the mayor shall forward the change order to the city council for its information within 30 days of the signing of the change order.

C. If the change order does not meet the conditions set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the mayor shall submit the change order to the city council for approval in advance of execution of the change order. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.410 Final acceptance of public works contracts.

A. The mayor is authorized to declare final acceptance of public works contracts without action by the city council.

B. No public works contracts shall be deemed to be accepted until such time as the city has obtained releases from the State Department of Revenue, Employment Security Department, and Department of Labor and Industries. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).

Article V. Other Procurements


2.84.420 Computers and telecommunications systems and equipment.

Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, electronic data processing equipment, including computers, telecommunications equipment, and/or software may be acquired by the city through a competitive negotiation process in accordance with the provisions of RCW 39.04.270. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.430 Cooperative purchasing.

To the greatest extent allowed by law, the city is hereby authorized to join in cooperative purchasing arrangements with other public agencies that are similarly authorized to join in cooperative purchasing arrangements, when the best interests of the city would be served thereby.

A. Cooperative purchasing arrangements entered into under the authority of chapter 39.34 RCW, Interlocal Agreements, shall comply with the requirements of that chapter. Any other cooperative purchasing agreement shall set forth fully the purposes, powers, rights, objectives and responsibilities of the contracting parties and shall be governed by the requirements of state law in regard to competitive bidding when applicable.

B. Cooperative purchasing arrangements entered into under the authority of chapter 39.34 RCW shall be approved by the city council and recorded with the finance director of the city. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.440 Purchase at auctions.

A. Pursuant to RCW 39.30.045, the mayor and those city of Burlington officers identified in this chapter to whom the mayor has delegated explicit authority may purchase any supplies, equipment, or materials at auctions conducted by the government of the United States or any agency thereof, any agency of the state of Washington, any municipality or other government agency, or any private party without being subject to public bidding requirements if the items can be obtained at a competitive price.

B. For the purposes of this section, a “competitive price” shall be deemed to be the amount of money or other consideration a willing buyer would be reasonably expected to pay to a willing seller for similar goods on the open market, inclusive of taxes, fees, and other expenses inherent in the acquisition of the good or goods, taking consideration of the age, expected useful life, condition, availability of the goods, and other material factors.

C. For those goods which are to be expected to be acquired at auction for a price in excess of $15,000, the approval of the city council shall be obtained prior to the auction. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.450 Sole source procurement.

A. Brand Names. The city of Burlington may procure goods by specifying a particular brand name; provided, that the responsible city officials have exercised their judgment and determined that a certain brand name is of higher quality or is better suited to the municipality’s needs.

B. Monopolies and Sole Source. Pursuant to RCW 39.04.280, competitive bidding requirements may be waived for the purchase of goods, material, equipment, or supplies when there is clearly and legitimately only one source capable of supplying the goods in a timely fashion, and when any advertisement for bids would result in a single bid. In accordance with that statute, this section shall serve as the city’s written policies governing the acquisition of goods from a sole source vendor.

1. In the event the material, equipment, supplies, or goods are available from only one supplier, written documentation demonstrating the appropriateness of sole source procurement shall be submitted to and approved by the mayor prior to the acquisition of the material, equipment, supplies, or goods. The mayor may delegate the authority to determine the propriety of sole source procurement to the city administrator. Such written documentation shall recite the factual basis for the exception from competitive procurement. The city administrator’s approval shall constitute authorization to conduct negotiations as appropriate as to price, delivery, and terms.

2. The mayor may request the city council to waive the requirements for seeking competitive bids when material, equipment, supplies, or goods are available from only one supplier by resolution.

3. Except in the event of an emergency, the contract and the basis for the exception from competitive procurement shall be recorded and open to public inspection immediately after its award.

C. Special Market Conditions. Pursuant to RCW 39.04.280, competitive bidding requirements may be waived for the purchase of goods, material, equipment, or supplies when special market conditions exist. In accordance with that statute, this section shall serve as the city’s written policies governing the acquisition of goods when special market conditions exist.

1. In the event that market conditions exist that would allow the city to either take advantage of a favorable price for material, equipment, supplies, or goods for a limited period of time, or prevent the city from incurring additional expenses when prices for material, equipment, supplies or goods are expected to rise prior to the ability of the city to complete a competitive bid process, then the mayor is hereby authorized to waive competitive bidding requirements. Written documentation demonstrating that special market conditions exist shall be submitted to and approved by the city administrator prior to the acquisition of the material, equipment, supplies, or goods. Such written documentation shall recite the factual basis for the exception from competitive procurement. The city administrator’s approval shall constitute authorization to conduct negotiations as appropriate as to price, delivery, and terms.

2. The city administrator may request the city council to waive the requirements for seeking competitive bids when a special market condition exists.

3. Except in the event of an emergency, the contract and the basis for the exception from competitive procurement shall be recorded and open to public inspection immediately after its award. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.460 Emergency procurements.

A. For the purpose of this chapter, an “emergency” shall be defined as unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the city, its officers and agents, that either: (1) present a real, immediate threat to the proper performance of essential functions; or (2) will likely result in material loss or damage to property, bodily injury, or loss of life if immediate action is not taken.

B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the mayor may make or authorize others to make procurements of public works, materials, supplies, or equipment, without complying with the requirements of this chapter when there exists an emergency; provided, that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances.

1. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file located within the city administrator’s office.

2. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor’s name, the amount and type of the contract, and a listing of the item(s) procured under the contract, which shall be reported to the city council at the next subsequent meeting. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


2.84.470 Multi-term contracts.

A. Specified Period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the city, so long as funds are available for the current budget year at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding budget years are subject to the availability and appropriation of funds.

B. Determination Prior to Use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term contract it is to be determined that estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and that such contract will serve the best interests of the city by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting the city’s interests. (Ord. 1828 § 1 (Att. A), 2016).


Chapter 2.88 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR

Sections:

2.88.010    Position established – Appointment.

2.88.020    Duties.


2.88.010 Position established – Appointment.

There is established the position of public works director for the city. The public works director shall be appointed by the mayor, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1645 § 1, 2007).


2.88.020 Duties.

The public works director shall work at the direction of the mayor and have administrative authority over the divisions of the public works department. (Ord. 1645 § 1, 2007).


Chapter 2.92 CITY OFFICE HOURS

Sections:

2.92.010    Office hours.


2.92.010 Office hours.

City offices shall be open for the transaction of business weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excepting legal holidays and excepting closure days approved by the city council; provided, that the mayor may alter the hours of operation of city offices on a temporary basis, as the mayor deems necessary for the efficient operation of the city. (Ord. 1726 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1698 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1674 § 3, 2009).


Chapter 2.96 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION ORDINANCE

Sections:

2.96.010    Historic preservation commission establishment and purpose.

2.96.015    Definitions.

2.96.020    Burlington historic preservation commission.

2.96.030    Duties and responsibilities.

2.96.040    Rules and officers.

2.96.050    Meetings.

2.96.060    Burlington register of historic places.

2.96.070    Review of changes to Burlington register of historic places and properties.

2.96.080    Review and monitoring of properties for special property tax valuation.


2.96.010 Historic preservation commission establishment and purpose.

A. There is established a Burlington historic preservation commission, which shall be advisory to the mayor and city council. The purpose of the board shall be to preserve and share Burlington’s local history, enabling residents and visitors to perceive Burlington’s past, understand the present, and appreciate Burlington’s regional heritage in planning for the future by making recommendations through the Burlington parks and recreation advisory board to the mayor and city council.

B. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the identification, evaluation, designation, and protection of designated historic and prehistoric resources within the boundaries of the city of Burlington and preserve and rehabilitate eligible historic properties within the city of Burlington for future generations through special valuation, a property tax incentive, as provided in chapter 84.26 RCW, in order to:

1. Safeguard the heritage of the city as represented by those buildings, districts, objects, sites and structures which reflect significant elements of the city’s history;

2. Foster civic and neighborhood pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past, and a sense of identity based on the city’s history;

3. Stabilize or improve the aesthetic and economic vitality and values of such sites, improvements and objects;

4. Assist, encourage and provide incentives to private owners for preservation, restoration, redevelopment and use of outstanding historic buildings, districts, objects, sites and structures;

5. Promote and facilitate the early identification and resolution of conflicts between the preservation of historic resources and alternative land uses; and

6. Conserve valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use and maintenance of the existing built environment. (Ord. 1789 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010).


2.96.015 Definitions.

The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall mean as follows, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

A. “Burlington historic inventory” or “inventory” means the comprehensive inventory of historic and prehistoric resources within the boundaries of the city of Burlington.

B. “Burlington historic preservation commission” or “commission” means the commission created by BMC 2.96.010.

C. “Burlington register of historic places,” “local register,” or “register” means the listing of locally designated properties provided for in BMC 2.96.060.

D. “Actual cost of rehabilitation” means costs incurred within 24 months prior to the date of application and directly resulting from one or more of the following: (1) improvements to an existing building located on or within the perimeters of the original structure; or (2) improvements outside of but directly attached to the original structure which are necessary to make the building fully usable but shall not include rentable/habitable floor-space attributable to new construction; or (3) architectural and engineering services attributable to the design of the improvements; or (4) all costs defined as “qualified rehabilitation expenditures” for purposes of the federal historic preservation investment tax credit.

E. A “building” is a structure constructed by human beings. This includes both residential and nonresidential buildings, main and accessory buildings.

F. “Certificate of appropriateness” means the document indicating that the commission has reviewed the proposed changes to a local register property or within a local register historic district and certified the changes as not adversely affecting the historic characteristics of the property which contribute to its designation.

G. “Certified local government” or “CLG” means the designation reflecting that the local government has been jointly certified by the State Historic Preservation Officer and the National Park Service as having established its own historic preservation commission and a program meeting federal and state standards.

H. “Class of properties eligible to apply for special valuation in Burlington” means all properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or certified as contributing to a National Register Historic District which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in chapter 84.26 RCW, until the city of Burlington becomes a certified local government (CLG). Once a CLG, the class of properties eligible to apply for special valuation in Burlington means only properties listed on the Burlington register of historic places or properties certified as contributing to a Burlington register historic district which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meet the requirements set forth in chapter 84.26 RCW.

I. “Cost” means the actual cost of rehabilitation, which cost shall be at least 25 percent of the assessed valuation of the historic property, exclusive of the assessed value attributable to the land, prior to rehabilitation.

J. A “district” is a geographically definable area – urban or rural, small or large – possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development.

K. “Emergency repair” means work necessary to prevent destruction or dilapidation to real property or structural appurtenances thereto immediately threatened or damaged by fire, flood, earthquake or other disaster.

L. “Historic property” means real property together with improvements thereon, except property listed in a register primarily for objects buried below ground, which is listed in a local register of a certified local government or the National Register of Historic Places.

M. “Incentives” are such rights or privileges or combination thereof which the city council, or other local, state, or federal public body or agency, by virtue of applicable present or future legislation, may be authorized to grant or obtain for the owner(s) of register properties. Examples of economic incentives include but are not limited to tax relief, conditional use permits, rezoning, street vacation, planned unit development, transfer of development rights, facade easements, gifts, preferential leasing policies, beneficial placement of public improvements or amenities, or the like.

N. “Local review board” or “board” used in chapter 84.26 RCW and chapter 254-20 WAC for the special valuation of historic properties means the commission created in BMC 2.96.010.

O. “National Register of Historic Places” means the national listing of properties significant to our cultural history because of their documented importance to our history, architectural history, engineering, or cultural heritage.

P. An “object” is a thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.

Q. “Ordinary repair and maintenance” means work for which a permit issued by the city is not required by law, and where the purpose and effect of such work is to correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to the real property or structure appurtenance therein and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage.

R. “Owner” of property is the fee simple owner of record as exists on the Skagit County assessor’s records.

S. “Significance” or “significant” used in the context of historic significance means the following: a property with local, state, or national significance is one which helps in the understanding of the history or prehistory of the local area, state, or nation (whichever is applicable) by illuminating the local, statewide, or nationwide impact of the events or persons associated with the property, or its architectural type or style in information potential. The local area can include Burlington, Skagit County or Northwest Washington, or a modest geographic or cultural area, such as a neighborhood. Local significance may apply to a property that illustrates a theme that is important to one or more localities; state significance to a theme important to the history of the state; and national significance to property of exceptional value in representing or illustrating an important theme in the history of the nation.

T. A “site” is a place where a significant event or pattern of events occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupation or activities that may be marked by physical remains; or it may be the symbolic focus of a significant event or pattern of events that may not have been actively occupied. A site may be the location of ruined or now non-extant buildings or structures if the location itself possesses historic cultural or archaeological significance.

U. “Special valuation for historic properties” or “special valuation” means the local option program which when implemented makes available to property owners a special tax valuation for rehabilitation of historic properties under which the assessed value of an eligible historic property is determined at a rate that excludes, for up to 10 years, the actual cost of the rehabilitation (chapter 84.26 RCW).

V. “State Register of Historic Places” means the state listing of properties significant to the community, state, or nation but which may or may not meet the criteria of the National Register.

W. A “structure” is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Generally constructed by man, it is often an engineering project.

X. “Universal Transverse Mercator” or “UTM” means the grid zone in metric measurement providing for an exact point of numerical reference.

Y. “Waiver of a certificate of appropriateness” or “waiver” means the document indicating that the commission has reviewed the proposed whole or partial demolition of a local register property or in a local register historic district and failing to find alternatives to demolition has issued a waiver of a certificate of appropriateness which allows the building or zoning official to issue a permit for demolition.

Z. “Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties” or “State Advisory Council’s Standards” means the rehabilitation and maintenance standards used by the Burlington historic preservation commission as minimum requirements for determining whether or not an historic property is eligible for special valuation and whether or not the property continues to be eligible for special valuation once it has been so classified. (Ord. 1789 § 2, 2013).


2.96.020 Burlington historic preservation commission.

A. Creation and Size. There is hereby established the Burlington historic preservation commission, consisting of nine members. Members of the Burlington historic preservation commission shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council and shall be residents of Burlington and Skagit County, except as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

The historic preservation commission shall consist of nine members, including a representative of the Burlington parks board, a representative of the Burlington Parks Foundation, a member of the Burlington city council, a member of the Skagit Valley Genealogical Society, a member representing the Skagit County Historical Society, two historic resource professionals as defined in subsection (B) of this section, and two at-large citizens of Burlington. All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council for a term of three years, with the exception of the Burlington city council representative, which will change annually. The initial terms of the board members shall be staggered, to wit: the Burlington city council member shall be initially appointed to a term of one year, the representatives of the Burlington parks board, Burlington Parks Foundation, and genealogical society shall be initially appointed to a term of two years, and the member of the Skagit Valley Historical Society, two historic resource professionals and two at-large members shall initially be appointed to terms of three years. The two at-large positions, the city council representative and the Burlington parks advisory board representative must be residents of the Burlington recreation service area as defined in the parks and recreation comprehensive plan. Upon vacancy, the mayor shall appoint a board member to fill the unexpired portion of the term. The Burlington parks director shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member.

B. Composition of the Commission.

1. All members of the commission must have a demonstrated interest and competence in historic preservation and possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgment.

2. The commission shall always include at least two professionals who have experience in identifying, evaluating, and protecting historic resources and are selected from among the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation, and landscape architecture, or related disciplines. The commission action that would otherwise be valid shall not be rendered invalid by the temporary vacancy of one or all of the professional positions, unless the commission action is related to meeting certified local government (CLG) responsibilities cited in the certification agreement between the mayor and the State Historic Preservation Officer on behalf of the state. Furthermore, exception to the residency requirement of commission members may be granted by the mayor and city council in order to obtain representatives from these disciplines.

3. In making appointments, the mayor may consider names submitted from any source, but the mayor shall notify history and city development related organizations of vacancies so that names of interested and qualified individuals may be submitted by such organizations for consideration along with names from any other source. (Ord. 1789 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1755 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1721 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010).


2.96.030 Duties and responsibilities.

The responsibilities of the historic preservation commission shall include all responsibilities necessary to carry out the purpose of the commission as set forth in BMC 2.96.010, Historic preservation commission establishment and purpose, which duties shall include, but not be limited to:

A. The major responsibility of the historic preservation commission is to identify and actively encourage the conservation of the city’s historic resources by initiating and maintaining a register of historic places and reviewing proposed changes to register properties; to raise community awareness of the city’s history and historic resources; and to serve as the city’s primary resource in matters of history, historic planning, and preservation.

In carrying out these responsibilities, the historic preservation commission shall engage in the following:

1. Conduct and maintain a comprehensive inventory of historic resources within the boundaries of the city of Burlington and known as the Burlington historic inventory, and publicize and periodically update inventory results. Properties listed on the inventory shall be recorded on official zoning records with an “HI” (for historic inventory designation). This designation shall not change or modify the underlying zone classification.

2. Initiate and maintain the Burlington register of historic places. This official register shall be compiled of buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts identified by the commission as having historic significance worthy of recognition and protection by the city of Burlington and encouragement of efforts by owners to maintain, rehabilitate, and preserve properties.

3. Review nominations to the Burlington register of historic places according to criteria in BMC 2.96.060 and adopt standards in its rules to be used to guide this review.

4. Review proposals to construct, change, alter, modify, remodel, move, demolish, or significantly affect properties or districts on the register as provided in BMC 2.96.070; and adopt standards in its rules to be used to guide this review and the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or waiver.

5. Provide for the review either by the commission or its staff of all applications for approvals, permits, environmental assessments or impact statements, and other similar documents pertaining to identified historic resources or adjacent properties.

6. Conduct all commission meetings in compliance with chapter 42.30 RCW, Open Public Meetings Act, to provide for adequate public participation and adopt standards in its rules to guide this action.

7. Participate in, promote and conduct public information, educational and interpretive programs pertaining to historic and prehistoric resources.

8. Establish liaison support, communication and cooperation with federal, state, and other local government entities which will further historic preservation objectives, including public education, within the Burlington area.

9. Review and comment to the city council on land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement and other types of planning and programs undertaken by any agency of the city, other neighboring communities, Skagit County, the state or federal governments, as they relate to historic resources of the city of Burlington.

10. Advise the city council and the mayor generally on matters of Burlington history and historic preservation.

11. Perform other related functions assigned to the commission by the city council or the mayor.

12. Provide information to the public on methods of maintaining and rehabilitating historic properties. This may take the form of pamphlets, newsletters, workshops, or similar activities.

13. Officially recognize excellence in the rehabilitation of historic buildings, structures, sites and districts, and new construction in historic areas; and encourage appropriate measures for such recognition.

14. Be informed about and provide information to the public and city departments on incentives for preservation of historic resources including legislation, regulations and codes which encourage the use and adaptive reuse of historic properties.

15. Review nominations to the State and National Registers of Historic Places.

16. Investigate and report to the city council on the use of various federal, state, local or private funding sources available to promote historic resource preservation in the city of Burlington.

17. Serve as the local review board for special valuation and:

a. Make determination concerning the eligibility of historic properties for special valuation;

b. Verify that the improvements are consistent with the Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Maintenance;

c. Enter into agreements with property owners for the duration of the special valuation period as required under WAC 254-20-070(2);

d. Approve or deny applications for special valuation;

e. Monitor the property for continued compliance with the agreement and statutory eligibility requirements during the 10-year special valuation period; and

f. Adopt bylaws and/or administrative rules and comply with all other local review board responsibilities identified in chapter 84.26 RCW.

18. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure to address subsections (A)(3), (4), (6), and (18) of this section, inclusive.

B. Disseminate historical information to any interested persons, groups, and institutions by any of the following means: publishing historical materials such as newsletters and books; maintaining a website that presents information and photographs; holding meetings featuring workshops, lectures, or informative programs; conducting historic tours; marking or restoring historic buildings and sites; and similar means.

C. Plan for the future.

D. Make recommendations to the Burlington parks and recreation advisory board on matters concerning park property.

E. Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation.

F. Commission Staff. Commission and professional staff assistance shall be provided by the planning and community development and parks and recreation departments with additional assistance and information to be provided by other city departments as may be necessary to aid the commission in carrying out its duties and responsibilities under this chapter. (Ord. 1789 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010).


2.96.040 Rules and officers. 

The historic preservation commission shall establish and adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall select from among its membership a chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary to conduct the commission’s business. (Ord. 1789 § 4, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010).


2.96.050 Meetings. 

The historic preservation commission shall hold at least one annual meeting between October 1st and December 31st and at least three additional meetings throughout the year as required to fulfill the duties of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public. (Ord. 1789 § 4, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010).


2.96.060 Burlington register of historic places.

A. Criteria for Determining Designation in the Register. Any building, structure, site, object, or district may be designated for inclusion in the Burlington register if it is significantly associated with the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or cultural heritage of the community; if it has integrity; is at least 50 years old, or is of lesser age and has exceptional importance; and if it falls in at least one of the following categories:

1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of national, state, or local history.

2. Embodies the distinctive architectural characteristics of a type, period, style, or method of design or construction, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction.

3. Is an outstanding work of a designer, builder, or architect who has made a substantial contribution to the art.

4. Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural history.

5. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in national, state, or local history.

6. Has yielded or may be likely to yield important archaeological information related to history or prehistory.

7. Is a building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the only surviving structure significantly associated with an historic person or event.

8. Is a birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding importance and is the only surviving structure or site associated with that person.

9. Is a cemetery which derives its primary significance from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events or cultural patterns.

10. Is a reconstructed building that has been executed in an historically accurate manner on the original site.

11. Is a creative and unique example of folk architecture and design created by persons not formally trained in the architectural or design professions, and which does not fit into formal architectural or historical categories.

B. Process for Designating Properties or Districts to the Burlington Historic Register.

1. Any person may nominate a building, structure, site, object, or district for inclusion in the Burlington register. Members of the historic preservation commission or the commission as a whole may generate nominations. In its designation decision, the commission shall consider the Burlington historic inventory and the comprehensive plan.

2. In the case of individual properties, the designation shall include the UTM reference and all features – interior and exterior – and outbuildings that contribute to its designation.

3. In the case of districts, the designation shall include description of the boundaries of the district; the characteristics of the district justifying its designation; and a list of all properties including features, structures, sites, and objects contributing to the designation of the district.

4. The historic preservation commission shall consider the merits of the nomination, according to the criteria in subsection (A) of this section and according to the nomination review standards established in rules, at a public meeting. Adequate notice will be given to the public, the owner(s) and the authors of the nomination, if different, and lessees, if any, of the subject property prior to the public meeting according to standards for public meetings established in rules and in compliance with chapter 42.30 RCW, Open Public Meetings Act. Such notice shall include publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Burlington and any other form of notification deemed appropriate by the city. If the commission finds that the nominated property is eligible for the Burlington historic register, the commission shall make a recommendation to the city council that the property be listed in the register with the owner’s consent. In the case of historic districts, the commission shall consider a simple majority of property owners to be adequate for owner consent. Owner consent and notification procedures in the case of districts shall be further defined in rules. The public, property owner(s) and the authors of the nomination, if different, and lessees, if any, shall be notified of the listing.

5. Properties listed on the Burlington historic register shall be recorded on official zoning records with an “HR” (for historic register) designation. This designation shall not change or modify the underlying zone classification.

C. Removal of Properties from the Register. In the event that any property is no longer deemed appropriate for designation to the Burlington historic register, the commission may initiate removal from such designation by the same procedure as provided for in establishing the designation, subsection (B) of this section. A property may not be removed from the Burlington historic register without the owner’s consent.

1. Listing on the Burlington historic register is an honorary designation denoting significant association with the historic, archaeological, engineering, or cultural heritage of the community. Properties are listed individually or as contributing properties to an historic district.

2. Prior to the commencement of any work on a register property, excluding ordinary repair and maintenance and emergency measures defined in BMC 2.96.015, Definitions, the owner must request and receive a certificate of appropriateness from the commission for the proposed work. Violation of this rule shall be grounds for the commission to review the property for removal from the register.

3. Prior to whole or partial demolition of a register property, the owner must request and receive a waiver of a certificate of appropriateness.

4. Once the city of Burlington is certified as a certified local government (CLG), all properties listed on the Burlington historic register may be eligible for special tax valuation on their rehabilitation (BMC 2.96.080). (Ord. 1789 § 4, 2013).


2.96.070 Review of changes to Burlington register of historic places and properties.

A. Review Required. No person shall change the use, construct any new building or structure, or reconstruct, alter, restore, remodel, repair, move, or demolish any existing property on the Burlington historic register or within an historic district on the Burlington historic register without review by the commission and without receipt of a certificate of appropriateness, or in the case of demolition, a waiver, as a result of the review.

The review shall apply to all exterior features of the property that contribute to its designation and are listed on the nomination form. Information required by the commission to review the proposed changes is established in rules.

B. Exemptions. The following activities do not require a certificate of appropriateness or review by the commission: ordinary repair and maintenance, which includes painting, or emergency measures defined in BMC 2.96.015, Definitions.

C. Review Process.

1. Requests for Review and Issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness or Waiver. The building or zoning official shall report any application for a permit to work on a designated Burlington historic register property or in a Burlington historic register historic district to the commission. If the activity is not exempt from review, the commission or professional staff shall notify the applicant of the review requirements. The building or zoning official shall not issue any such permit until a certificate of appropriateness or a waiver is received from the commission but shall work with the commission in considering building and fire code requirements.

2. Commission Review. The owner or his/her agent (architect, contractor, lessee, etc.) shall apply to the commission for a review of proposed changes on a Burlington historic register property or within a Burlington historic register historic district and request a certificate of appropriateness or, in the case of demolition, a waiver. Each application for review of proposed changes shall be accompanied by such information as is required by the commission, established in its rules for the proper review of the proposed project.

The commission shall meet with the applicant and review the proposed work according to the design review criteria established in rules. Unless legally required, there shall be no notice, posting, or publication requirements for action on the application, but all such actions shall be made at regular meetings of the commission. The commission shall complete its review and make its recommendations within 30 calendar days of the date of receipt of the application. If the commission is unable to process the request, the commission may ask for an extension of time.

The commission’s recommendations shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision. Any conditions agreed to by the applicant in this review process shall become conditions of approval of the permits granted. If the owner agrees to the commission’s recommendations, a certificate of appropriateness shall be awarded by the commission according to standards established in the commission’s rules.

The commission’s recommendations and, if awarded, the certificate of appropriateness shall be transmitted to the building or zoning official. If a certificate of appropriateness is awarded, the building or zoning official may then issue the permit.

3. Demolition. A waiver of the certificate of appropriateness is required before a permit may be issued to allow whole or partial demolition of a designated Burlington historic register property or in a Burlington historic district. The owner or his/her agent shall apply to the commission for a review of the proposed demolition and request a waiver. The applicant shall meet with the commission in an attempt to find alternatives to demolition. These negotiations may last no longer than 45 calendar days from the initial meeting of the commission, unless either party requests an extension. If no request for an extension is made and no alternative to demolition has been agreed to, the commission shall act and advise the official in charge of issuing a demolition permit of the approval or denial of the waiver of a certificate of appropriateness. Conditions in the case of granting a demolition permit may include allowing the commission up to 45 additional calendar days to develop alternatives to demolition. When issuing a waiver the board may require the owner to mitigate the loss of the Burlington historic register property by means determined by the commission at the meeting. Any conditions agreed to by the applicant in this review process shall become conditions of approval of the permits granted. After the property is demolished, the commission shall initiate removal of the property from the register.

4. Appeal of Approval or Denial of a Waiver of a Certificate of Appropriateness. The commission’s decision regarding a waiver of a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed to the city council within 10 days. The appeal must state the grounds upon which the appeal is based.

The appeal shall be reviewed by the council only on the records of the commission. Appeal of the council’s decision regarding a waiver of a certificate of appropriateness may be appealed to superior court. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1789 § 4, 2013).


2.96.080 Review and monitoring of properties for special property tax valuation.

A. Timelines.

1. Applications shall be forwarded to the commission by the assessor within 10 calendar days of filing.

2. The deadline for applications to be submitted by those requesting special valuation is October 1st each year. Applications shall be reviewed by the commission before December 31st of the calendar year in which the application is made.

3. Commission decisions regarding the applications shall be certified in writing and filed with the assessor within 10 calendar days of issuance.

B. Procedure.

1. The assessor forwards the application(s) to the commission.

2. The commission reviews the application(s), consistent with its rules of procedure, and determines if the application(s) are complete and if the properties meet the criteria set forth in WAC 254-20-070(1) and listed in BMC 2.96.060.

a. If the commission finds the properties meet all the criteria, then, on behalf of the city of Burlington, it enters into an historic preservation special valuation agreement (set forth in WAC 254-20-120 and in this section) with the owner. Upon execution of the agreement between the owner and commission, the commission approves the application(s).

b. If the commission determines the properties do not meet all the criteria, then it shall deny the application(s).

3. The commission certifies its decisions in writing and states the facts upon which the approvals or denials are based and files copies of the certifications with the assessor.

4. For approved applications:

a. The commission forwards copies of the agreements, applications, and supporting documentation (as required by WAC 254-20-090(4) and identified in BMC 2.96.060) to the assessor;

b. Notifies the State Review Board that the properties have been approved for special valuation; and

c. Monitors the properties for continued compliance with the agreements throughout the 10-year special valuation period.

5. The commission determines, in a manner consistent with its rules of procedure, whether or not properties are disqualified from special valuation either because of:

a. The owner’s failure to comply with the terms of the agreement; or

b. Because of a loss of historic value resulting from physical changes to the building or site.

6. For disqualified properties, in the event that the commission concludes that a property is no longer qualified for special valuation, the commission shall notify the owner, assessor, and Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation in writing and state the facts supporting its findings.

C. Criteria.

1. Historic Property Criteria. The class of historic property eligible to apply for special valuation in Burlington means properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places or certified as contributing to a National Register Historic District which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in chapter 84.26 RCW, until the city of Burlington becomes a certified local government (CLG). Once a CLG, the class of property eligible to apply for special valuation in Burlington means properties listed on the Burlington register of historic places or properties certified as contributing to a Burlington register historic district which have been substantially rehabilitated at a cost and within a time period which meets the requirements set forth in chapter 84.26 RCW.

2. Application Criteria. Complete applications shall consist of the following documentation:

a. A legal description of the historic property;

b. Comprehensive exterior and interior photographs of the historic property before and after rehabilitation;

c. Architectural plans or other legible drawings depicting the completed rehabilitation work;

d. A notarized affidavit attesting to the actual cost of the rehabilitation work completed prior to the date of application and the period of time during which the work was performed and documentation of both to be made available to the commission upon request; and

e. For properties located within historic districts, in addition to the standard application documentation, a statement from the Secretary of the Interior or appropriate local official, as specified in local administrative rules or by the local government, indicating the property is a certified historic structure is required.

3. Property Review Criteria. In its review the commission shall determine if the properties meet all the following criteria:

a. The property is historic property;

b. The property is included within a class of historic property determined eligible for special valuation by the city of Burlington under this section;

c. The property has been rehabilitated at a cost which meets the definition set forth in RCW 84.26.020(2) (and identified in this section) within 24 months prior to the date of application; and

d. The property has not been altered in any way which adversely affects those elements which qualify it as historically significant as determined by applying the Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties (WAC 254-20-100(1) and listed in this section).

4. Rehabilitation and Maintenance Criteria. The Washington State Advisory Council’s Standards for the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Historic Properties in WAC 254-20-100 shall be used by the commission as minimum requirements for determining whether or not an historic property is eligible for special valuation and whether or not the property continues to be eligible for special valuation once it has been so classified.

D. Agreement. The historic preservation special valuation agreement in WAC 254-20-120 shall be used by the commission as the minimum agreement necessary to comply with the requirements of RCW 84.26.050(2).

E. Appeals. Any decision of the commission acting on any application for classification as historic property, eligible for special valuation, may be appealed to superior court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598 in addition to any other remedy of law. Any decision on the disqualification of historic property eligible for special valuation, or any other dispute, may be appealed to the county board of equalization. (Ord. 1811 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1789 § 5, 2013).


Chapter 2.100 CREDIT CARDS

Sections:

2.100.010    System implemented.

2.100.020    Distribution.

2.100.030    Authorization and control.

2.100.040    Application.

2.100.050    Credit limits.

2.100.060    Credit card restriction.

2.100.070    Additional policies or procedures.


2.100.010 System implemented.

The mayor and finance director shall implement and maintain the following system for the distribution, authorization and control of credit cards issued to or for the benefit of the city of Burlington and used by city officials and employees. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A), 2011).


2.100.020 Distribution.

Credit cards may be distributed to those city officials and employees who, in the opinion of the mayor, or the mayor’s designee, have job responsibilities that would be facilitated by the use of a credit card. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A)(1), 2011).


2.100.030 Authorization and control.

Credit cards may be issued to the city of Burlington and used by city officers and authorized employees for purchasing goods, supplies and other items from vendors, or incurring registration, training or travel expenses in connection with the performance of their duties on behalf of the city. The finance director shall develop specific administrative guidelines and accounting controls to ensure the proper usage of credit cards and credit card funds. A credit card is to be used when it is in the best interests of the city in conducting its administrative affairs. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A)(2), 2011).


2.100.040 Application.

The individual holder, upon prior approval of the mayor or the mayor’s designee, shall hold each credit card responsibly. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A)(3), 2011).


2.100.050 Credit limits.

The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall set credit limits on each credit card issued. In no event shall credit limits for an individual credit card exceed the following:

A. Mayor: $7,500.

B. Department head: $5,000.

C. Other city employees: $2,500. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A)(4), 2011).


2.100.060 Credit card restriction.

A. The following will be considered an unauthorized purchase or use of any city purchasing/credit card:

1. Cash Advances. Cash advances on credit cards are prohibited;

2. Payment of invoices or statements;

3. Purchases where an open charge account would be utilized;

4. Unauthorized Charges. No official or employee shall use the city-issued credit card for non-city business purposes. No charge(s) shall exceed amounts established and available in the city budget.

B. Disallowed Charges. Consistent with applicable law, disallowed charges will be paid by the employee before the charge card billing is due. The act of obtaining a city credit card does not indicate pre-approval of expenditures/expenses. (Ord. 1736 § 1(A)(5), (6), 2011).


2.100.070 Additional policies or procedures.

The mayor and finance director are authorized to implement any additional policies or administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1736 § 1(B), 2011).

 


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.04    Leasehold Excise Tax

3.08    Special Excise Tax on Lodging

3.11    Sanitary Sewer System Rates

3.12    Sales and Use Tax

3.14    Additional Sales and Use Tax

3.16    Repealed

3.18    Admission Tax Code

3.20    Repealed

3.24    Local Improvement Guaranty Fund

3.25    Foreclosure of Local Improvement Assessments

3.26    Police Department Substance Abuse Prevention and Investigative Fund

3.28    Additional Funds

3.32    Gambling Tax

3.36    Special Initiative Procedure for Tax Alteration

3.40    Bonds and Obligations

3.44    Excise Tax on Real Estate Sales

3.48    Check Handling Charge

3.52    Repealed

3.56    Brokered Natural Gas Tax

3.60    Indigent Defense Administrative Fee

3.64    Payment of Claims or Obligations

3.68    Tax Refunds


Chapter 3.04 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.04.010    Purpose – City council findings.

3.04.020    Levied – Payment and collection.

3.04.030    Exemptions.

3.04.040    Rate – Credits allowed when.

3.04.050    Administration and collection.

3.04.060    Contract with state.

3.04.070    Inspection of records.


3.04.010 Purpose – City council findings.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to levy and collect a leasehold excise tax on the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property through a leasehold interest in publicly owned property within the city limits on or after January 1, 1976, and at a rate of four percent of the taxable rent.

B. The city council recognizes that properties of the state, counties and school district and other municipal corporations are exempted by the State Constitution from property tax obligations, but that private lessees of such public properties receive substantial benefits from governmental services provided by the city, and that there should be a uniform method of taxation to apply to such leasehold interests, and that the lessees of publicly owned property are entitled to those governmental services, and that there is a need to provide for a leasehold excise tax to fairly compensate the city for services rendered. (Ord. 851 § 1, 1976).


3.04.020 Levied – Payment and collection.

There is levied and shall be collected a leasehold excise tax on and after January 1, 1976, upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city through a “leasehold interest” as defined RCW 82.29A.020. The tax shall be paid, collected and remitted to the Department of Revenue of the state at the time and in the manner prescribed by RCW 82.29A.050. (Ord. 851 § 2, 1976).


3.04.030 Exemptions.

Leasehold interests exempted by RCW 82.29A.130 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to BMC 3.04.020. (Ord. 853 § 2, 1976; Ord. 851 § 5, 1976).


3.04.040 Rate – Credits allowed when.

The rate of the tax imposed by BMC 3.04.020 shall be four percent of the taxable rent, as defined by RCW 82.29A.020; provided, that the following credits shall be allowed in determining the tax payable:

A. With respect to a leasehold interest arising out of any lease or agreement, the terms of which were binding on the lessee prior to July 1, 1970, where such lease or agreement has not been renegotiated, as defined by RCW 82.29A.020, since that date, and excluding from such credit:

1. Any leasehold interest arising out of any lease of property covered by the provisions of RCW 28B.20.394; and

2. Any lease or agreement including options to renew which extends beyond January 1, 1985, as follows:

a. with respect to taxes due in calendar year 1976, a credit equal to 80 percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

b. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1977, a credit equal to 60 percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

c. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1978, a credit equal to 40 percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

d. With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1979, a credit equal to 20 percent of the tax produced by the above rate.

B. With respect to a produce lease, as defined by RCW 82.29A.020, a credit of 33 percent of the tax produced by the above rate. (Ord. 851 § 3, 1976).


3.04.050 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 82.29A RCW. (Ord. 851 § 4, 1976).


3.04.060 Contract with state.

The mayor of the city is authorized to execute a contract with the Department of Revenue of the state for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by BMC 3.04.020; provided, that the city attorney shall first approve the form and content of said contract. (Ord. 853 § 2, 1976; Ord. 851 § 7, 1976).


3.04.070 Inspection of records.

The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 851 § 6, 1976).


Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL EXCISE TAX ON LODGING

Sections:

3.08.010    Purpose.

3.08.020    Definitions.

3.08.030    Imposition – Amount.

3.08.040    Administration and collection.

3.08.060    Effective date.

3.08.070    Violation – Penalty.


3.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to impose and levy a special excise tax of four percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging that is subject to tax under chapter 82.08 RCW. The tax imposed under chapter 82.08 RCW applies to the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, or trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property. It shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


3.08.020 Definitions.

The definitions of “selling price,” “seller,” “buyer,” “consumer,” and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, and subsequent amendments thereto, are adopted as the definitions for the tax levied in this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


3.08.030 Imposition – Amount.

The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any other tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city; provided, the first two percent of the tax shall be deducted from the amount of tax the seller would otherwise be required to collect and pay to the Department of Revenue under chapter 82.08 RCW.

There is a special fund in the treasury of the city and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourist promotion, acquisition of tourism-related facilities, or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for any other uses as authorized in chapter 67.28 RCW, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


3.08.040 Administration and collection.

For the purposes of the tax levied in this chapter:

A. The Department of Revenue is designated as the agent of the city for the purposes of collection and administration of the tax.

B. The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and in chapter 82.32 RCW shall apply to administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue.

C. All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of chapter 82.08 RCW are adopted by reference.

D. The Department of Revenue is authorized to prescribe and utilize such forms and reporting procedures as the Department may deem necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


3.08.060 Effective date.

The effective date of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be April 1, 1998, and such tax shall be due and payable to the city on such date and all dates following, to be collected as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


3.08.070 Violation – Penalty.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1358 § 2, 1997).


Chapter 3.11 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM RATES

Sections:

3.11.010    Sanitary sewer fees.

3.11.020    Fees for issuance of permit.

3.11.030    Established procedures.


3.11.010 Sanitary sewer fees.

Fees for the purpose of carrying on the responsibilities of the sanitary sewer, including but not limited to fees, adjustments and billing periods for single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, commercial accounts and residential accounts containing more than three living units, shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1869 § 1, 2019).


3.11.020 Fees for issuance of permit.

Fees and charges to be charged as a condition of issuance of any permit or authorization requiring approval of the utility or in responding to a request for services to be provided by the utility shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1869 § 1, 2019).


3.11.030 Established procedures.

City staff, including but not limited to the finance and public works departments, may establish procedures pertaining to the billing and collection of service charges and other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1869 § 1, 2019).


Chapter 3.12 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.12.010    Imposition.

3.12.020    Rate.

3.12.030    Administration and collection.

3.12.040    Records inspection.

3.12.050    Contract.

3.12.060    Violation – Penalty.


3.12.010 Imposition.

There is imposed a sales or use tax as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city.

The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales or use tax is collected pursuant to chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1970).


3.12.020 Rate.

The rate of tax imposed by BMC 3.12.010 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Skagit County, the rate of tax imposed by this chapter shall be four hundred twenty-five/one thousandths of one percent. (Ord. 726 § 2, 1970).


3.12.030 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.14.050. (Ord. 726 § 3, 1970).


3.12.040 Records inspection.

The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 726 § 4, 1970).


3.12.050 Contract.

The mayor of the city is authorized to enter into the contract with the Department of Revenue for the administration of the tax. (Ord. 726 § 5, 1970).


3.12.060 Violation – Penalty.

Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefits, either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay tax due under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 726 § 6, 1970).


Chapter 3.14 ADDITIONAL SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:

3.14.010    Imposition.

3.14.020    Rate.

3.14.030    Administration and collection.

3.14.040    Records inspection.

3.14.050    Contract.

3.14.060    Special initiative.

3.14.070    Violation – Penalty.


3.14.010 Imposition.

In addition to the tax imposed by chapter 3.12 BMC, and pursuant to RCW 82.14.030(2), there is hereby imposed a sales or use tax, as the case may be, upon every taxable event, as defined in RCW 82.14.020, occurring within the city. The tax shall be imposed upon and collected from those persons from whom the state sales tax or use tax is collected pursuant to chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. A minimum of 13.5 percent and a maximum of 25 percent of the revenues from this tax shall be distributed to the street fund in accordance with the annual budget to be adopted henceforth by the city council. (Ord. 1730 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1662 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1375 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1013 § 1, 1983).


3.14.020 Rate.

The rate of tax imposed by BMC 3.14.010 shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price or value of the article used, as the case may be; provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Skagit County under RCW 82.14.030(2) at a rate equal to or greater than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive 15 percent of the tax imposed by BMC 3.14.010; provided further, that during such period as there is in effect a sales tax or use tax imposed by Skagit County under RCW 82.14.030(2) at a rate which is less than the rate imposed by this section, the county shall receive from the tax imposed by BMC 3.14.010 that amount of revenues equal to 15 percent of the rate of the tax imposed by the county under RCW 82.14.030(2). (Ord. 1662 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1013 § 2, 1983).


3.14.030 Administration and collection.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 1013 § 3, 1983).


3.14.040 Records inspection.

The city consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the city for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue, pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 1013 § 4, 1983).


3.14.050 Contract.

The mayor and clerk-treasurer are authorized to enter into a contract with the Department of Revenue for the administration of this tax. (Ord. 1013 § 5, 1983).


3.14.060 Special initiative.

This chapter shall be subject to a special initiative. The number of registered voters needed to sign a petition for special initiative shall be 15 percent of the total number of names of persons listed as registered voters within the city on the day of the last preceding municipal general election. If a special initiative petition is filed with the city council, the operation of this chapter shall not be suspended pending a final decision on the disposition of the special initiative. The procedures for initiative contained in RCW 35A.11.100 shall apply to any such special initiative petition. (Ord. 1013 § 6, 1983).


3.14.070 Violation – Penalty.

Any seller who fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with the intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any buyer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1013 § 7, 1983).


Chapter 3.16 ANTIRECESSION FISCAL ASSISTANCE FUND

(Repealed by Ord. 1168)


Chapter 3.18 ADMISSION TAX CODE

Sections:

3.18.010    Exercise of revenue license power.

3.18.015    Certificate of registration.

3.18.020    Definitions.

3.18.025    Tax imposed.

3.18.030    Tax on admission.

3.18.035    Exemptions.

3.18.040    Deductions.

3.18.045    Counting number of admissions.

3.18.050    Printing admission charges.

3.18.055    Unlawful sales of tickets in excess of price.

3.18.060    Posting admission charge.

3.18.065    Tickets sold elsewhere than regular ticket office.

3.18.070    Collection and remittance.

3.18.075    Penalty for late payment.

3.18.120    Transient business remittance.

3.18.125    Applications and returns confidential.

3.18.130    Sporting events and places.

3.18.135    Ticket sale outlet.

3.18.140    Overpayment of admissions tax.

3.18.145    Inspection of records.

3.18.150    Violator/violations.

3.18.160    Penalty for violations.


3.18.010 Exercise of revenue license power.

The provisions of this chapter constitute an exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.015 Certificate of registration.

Every person, firm or corporation, prior to conducting or operating any event, or place of entrance, to which an admission charge is made, shall complete a certificate of registration and file the same with the finance director. The certificate of registration shall continue to be valid until December 31st of the same year in which it was issued. A list of admission charges for all events must accompany the certificate of registration. The application for certificate of registration, or a duplicate of it, shall be posted in the ticket office or box office where tickets or admission are sold.

Whenever registration is made for the purpose of operating or conducting a temporary or transitory event by persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of the building, lots or place where the activity is to be conducted, both the person conducting the event and the owner, lessee or custodian of the location of the event shall register for this event. Such owner, lessee or custodian, shall be held jointly liable for collection and remittance of the said tax. The owner, lessee and/or custodian shall be responsible for the remittance of the entire admissions tax unless the tax is paid by the conductor of the event. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter:

A. “Admission charge,” in addition to its usual and ordinary meaning is a monetary charge for an event open to the public, including, but not limited in meaning to:

1. Charges for entrance and observation, including, but not limited to:

a. A charge made for season tickets or subscriptions;

b. A cover charge or a charge made for use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations;

c. A charge made for food and refreshments in any place where any free entertainment, recreation or amusement is provided;

d. A charge made for admission to any theater, public dance or dance hall, cabaret, adult cabaret, amphitheater, club, haunted house, auditorium, stadium, athletic pavilion, park or field, baseball or athletic park, skating rink, swimming pool, circus, or similar place. 

i. Admission to Any Carnival, Amusement Park, Etc. Admission tax shall be imposed upon admission to carnivals, amusement parks, etc.; however, the city will not impose an additional tax upon admissions to any mechanical devices, amusement type booths or activities and/or rides such as merry-go-round, ferris wheel, etc. within that event, unless there is no admission charge “at the gate” for such events. Then the person conducting the event is required to collect a tax for admission to the various rides;

e. A charge made for admission to or rental or use of equipment or facilities to any public golf course, facility, or driving range; if the rental of the equipment or facilities is necessary to the enjoyment of the golf course, facility, or driving range, at which a general admission is charged, the combined charges shall be considered as the admission charge.

2. Other activities, including the following:

a. A charge made for automobile parking where the amount of the charge is determined according to the number of passengers in an automobile;

b. A sum of money referred to as “a donation” or similar payment which must be paid before entrance is allowed.

3. For purposes of illustration only, the following table provides examples of activities subject to the admission tax (this list is not all inclusive):

	Taxable	Not Taxable

	1.    For-profit theater	1.    Annual dinner of a nonprofit organization which is open to members only

	2.    Movie theater	2.    Tickets to a show performed for employees only of a for-profit company

	3.    Cover charge in restaurant lounge	3.    Chamber of Commerce business fair which is open to members only

	4.    Charge for admittance to adult entertainment cabaret	4.    Programs by schools and service organizations

	5.    Charge for entrance to a nonprofit organization’s trade show which is open to the public	 

	6.    Charge for a golf course which is open to the public	 

B. “Chapter” shall mean chapter 3.18 of the Burlington Municipal Code, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time.

C. “Government activities” shall mean activities that are sponsored or conducted by local governments, county, state or federal governments. This shall include programs or events sponsored by the city of Burlington.

D. “Nonprofit tax-exempt organization” means an organization, corporation, or association organized and operated for the advancement, appreciation, public exhibition or performance, preservation, study and/or teaching of the performing arts, visual arts, history, science, or public charity providing human services, or public education which is currently recognized by the United States of America as exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501 (c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as it may be amended or replaced from time to time.

E. “Religious organization” means an organization engaged in the practice of a particular faith or central beliefs.

F. “Secondary or elementary school” means any public or private primary, middle school, junior high school, high school, or any accredited college, junior college, university, or the recognized student body association thereof.

G. “Service organization” means an organization that is dedicated to public service, whether or not a nonprofit tax-exempt organization as defined in subsection D of this section, including but not limited to the Chamber of Commerce, Rotary Club, Kiwanis Club, Soroptimist Club, Lions Club. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.025 Tax imposed.

There is levied and shall be collected a tax from every person, without regard to age, who pays an admission charge. Such tax shall be measured by applying the rates set forth in this chapter to the admission charge. The tax herein levied shall be paid by the person paying the admission charge and shall be collected and remitted by the person to whom the admission charge is paid. The tax required to be collected under this chapter shall be deemed held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted to the clerk as provided in this chapter.

No tax shall be levied on any person who is admitted free and from whom no compensating payment is obtained. The tax on reduced admission charges shall be charged on such reduced charge and not on the regular admission charge. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.030 Tax on admission.

Upon every person who pays an admission charge within the city, as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such activity shall be equal to the admission charge multiplied by the rate of five percent. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.035 Exemptions.

The following shall be exempt from any tax imposed under this chapter:

A. Admission charges for any activity of any elementary or secondary school.

B. Activities of churches and religious organizations.

C. Government activities, provided that for-profit activities conducted in conjunction with such an event shall not be exempt.

D. Events sponsored by nonprofit tax-exempt organizations as defined in BMC 3.18.020(D).

1. The admission tax levied and imposed pursuant to BMC 3.18.025 shall not apply to any person paying an admission charge to an event that is sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization, as defined in BMC 3.18.020(D), when the conditions of both of the following subsections (a) and (b) are met:

a. The nonprofit tax-exempt organization:

i. Publicly sponsors and through its members, representatives or personnel, promotes and publicizes the event, or

ii. Publicly sponsors the event and (1) performs a major portion of the performance; or (2) supplies a major portion of the materials on exhibit; or (3) when the event is part of a season or series of performances or exhibitions, performs the major portion of the performances or exhibitions in the season or series or supplies a major portion of the materials on exhibit;

b. The nonprofit tax-exempt organization receives the use and benefit of the admission charges collected.

2. The exemption to the admission tax provided in this section shall not apply to:

a. An event sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization in which the fee paid for any one for-profit contract is greater than 80 percent of anticipated gross proceeds where the anticipated gross proceeds of the event exceed $300,000;

b. An event in which a nonprofit tax-exempt organization lends its name as an endorsement to an ineligible person or organization for the purpose of invoking the tax exemption provided by this section.

3. In order to receive the benefit of the tax exemption provided by this section, the nonprofit tax-exempt organization must be registered with the city of Burlington finance department pursuant to BMC 3.18.040 at least 30 days prior to the first event for which an exemption is sought.

F. Activities of service organizations. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.040 Deductions.

In computing the tax imposed by this chapter, the following amounts may be deducted from the measure of the tax: Amounts derived from business which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of this state or the Constitution or laws of the United States. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.045 Counting number of admissions.

Whenever a charge is made for admission to any place, a serially numbered or reserved seat ticket shall be furnished to the person paying such charge unless written approval has been obtained from the finance director to use a turnstile or other counting device which will accurately count the number of paid admissions. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.050 Printing admission charges.

The established price of admission, any noncity tax, city tax, and the total price at which each admission ticket or card is sold shall be conspicuously and indelibly printed or written on the face or back of that part of the ticket which is to be retained by the management of the place to which admission is gained. This requirement may be waived in regard to temporary or transient events, which due to time make it impossible to print up admission tickets. This waiver must be reviewed and authorized by the finance director’s office prior to authorizing the event.

It is unlawful for any person to sell an admission ticket or card without having the name of the person conducting the event and the price of admission printed, stamped or written thereon. The admission tax due shall be based on the established price printed on each ticket. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.055 Unlawful sales of tickets in excess of price.

It is unlawful for anyone to sell or offer to sell an admission ticket or card at a price in excess of the price printed, stamped or written thereon. This section does not prohibit a ticket agent, duly authorized to sell tickets by the person or entity responsible for or in charge of conducting the subject event, from collecting a reasonable handling charge from the purchaser, in addition to the disclosed ticket price, consistent with general marketing practices in the Burlington area. The handling charge shall also be subject to tax in a sum equal to five percent of the amount of such excess or handling charge. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.060 Posting admission charge.

At all events, when a charge is made for admission a sign must be posted in a conspicuous place at its entrance or ticket office of the event which breaks down the admission charge as to (1) established price of admission, (2) noncity tax imposed, if any, (3) city tax imposed, and (4) total price. The name of the company or organization conducting the event shall also be posted at the same place. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.065 Tickets sold elsewhere than regular ticket office.

Whenever tickets are sold by a person outside of the city limits for an event located within the city limits, that person shall collect the admission tax imposed thereon. Whenever tickets or cards of admission are sold elsewhere than at the ticket or box office of the place or event, any price or charge made in excess of the established price or charge at such ticket or box office shall also be taxable in a sum equal to five percent of the amount of such excess. This additional tax shall be paid by the person paying the admission charge and shall be collected and remitted in the manner provided in BMC 3.18.070 by the person selling such tickets. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.070 Collection and remittance.

The person, firm or corporation receiving payment for admission on which a tax is levied under this chapter, shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making payment for admission, shall hold said tax in trust until the same is remitted to the finance director as herein provided, and shall be personally liable for the amount of such tax if the same is not collected and remitted as herein provided; provided, however, that for temporary or transient events, the owner, custodian, etc., may be responsible for the payment of the tax per BMC 3.18.015 and 3.18.070.

Unless otherwise provided by the finance director, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable on a quarterly basis and remittance therefor shall accompany each return and be in the finance director’s office by 5:00 p.m. P.S.T. on or before the last day of each April, July, October and January, by the person, firm or corporation collecting the same. The quarterly returns shall be made on forms provided by the finance director, separately stating the number of admissions sold, the price for each admission, and the amount of tax, shall be signed and verified by the person making the return, and shall contain such other information as the finance director may specify. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.075 Penalty for late payment.

For each payment due, if such payment is not made by 5:00 p.m. on the due date, there shall be added penalties as follows:

A. One to 15 days delinquency, 10 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00;

B. After 15 days delinquency, 15 percent with a minimum penalty of $10.00.

Failure to pay tax is a violation of this chapter and may be punished as such in addition to the late fees imposed. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.120 Transient business remittance.

Whenever any theater, carnival, circus, show, exhibition, public dance, entertainment or amusement or the like, makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax herein levied, and the same is of a temporary or transitory nature, of which the finance director shall be the judge, the finance director may require the return and remittance of the admissions tax immediately upon its collection or at the conclusion of the series of performances or exhibitions, whichever the finance director deems appropriate. An application for a certificate of registration shall be required as noted in BMC 3.18.015. For temporary or transient events, the owner, lessee or custodian shall be responsible for payment of this tax if the person conducting the event fails to do so. Failure to comply with any requirement of the finance director as to reporting and remittance of the tax as required shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.125 Applications and returns confidential.

The applications and returns made to the finance director pursuant to this chapter shall not be made public, nor shall they be subject to the inspection of anyone except the mayor, city attorney, finance director or authorized agent, the members of the city council, etc., unless otherwise provided by law. It is unlawful for any person to make public or to inform another person as to the contents or any information contained in or to permit inspection of any application or return except as authorized in this section or otherwise in the State Privacy Act or other provisions of state law. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.130 Sporting events and places.

There shall be levied an admission tax of five percent of the amount paid where an admission is required to be paid to gain entrance to any building, enclosure, place or area in which there is a swimming pool, skating rink, bowling alley, golf course, golf driving range, miniature golf course, short nine, or to gain entrance to such pool, rink or course itself, that shall be applicable to both private and public facilities or any other similar event charging admission fees. This tax shall be assessed on admission charges whether in the form of membership fees or other charges for privilege of using the above areas. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.135 Ticket sale outlet.

The admissions tax shall apply to tickets sold by Burlington based ticket sales outlets for local events only. Additionally, the tax shall also apply to ticket sales outlets which are not located in Burlington but are selling tickets for events in Burlington. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.140 Overpayment of admissions tax.

Any taxpayer who has overpaid taxes due the city under this chapter may submit a petition for a refund in accordance with chapter 3.68 BMC. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.145 Inspection of records.

The books, records, and accounts of any person, firm or corporation collecting a tax herein levied, shall, as to admission charges and tax collections, be at all reasonable times subject to examination and audit by the finance director and/or the State Auditor, and all such records shall be retained and be available for such inspection for a period of at least six years. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.150 Violator/violations.

Any person who directly or indirectly performs or omits to perform any act in violation of this chapter, including reporting and posting requirements, or aids and abets the same, whether present or absent, and every person who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces or otherwise procures another to commit such violation, is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter, subject to penalty, and may be proceeded against as such. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


3.18.160 Penalty for violations.

Every person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this chapter or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the finance director pursuant thereto, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1350 § 1, 1997).


Chapter 3.20 FEDERAL SHARED REVENUE FUND

(Repealed by Ord. 1263)


Chapter 3.24 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

Sections:

3.24.010    Established.

3.24.020    Title – Source of funds.

3.24.030    Expenditures – Certificates of delinquency.

3.24.040    Improvements.

3.24.050    Liability.


3.24.010 Established.

There is established for the city a fund for the purpose of guaranteeing, to the extent of such fund and in the manner provided in this chapter, the payment of its local improvement bonds and warrants issued to pay for any local improvement ordered subsequent to April 7, 1926. (Ord. 322 § 1, 1927).


3.24.020 Title – Source of funds.

The fund is designated the “local improvement guaranty fund.” For the purpose of maintaining the same, the city council shall levy from time to time as other taxes are levied such sums as may be necessary to meet the financial requirements thereof; provided, that such sums so levied in any year shall not be more than sufficient to pay the outstanding warrants on said fund and to establish therein a balance, which combined levy in one year shall not exceed five percent of the outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed. The tax levies in this chapter authorized and directed shall be additional to (and if need be in excess of) any and all statutory and other limitations applicable to the tax levies of the city. (Ord. 322 § 2, 1927).


3.24.030 Expenditures – Certificates of delinquency.

A. Whenever there shall be paid out of the local improvement guaranty fund any sum on account of principal or interest of a local improvement bond or warrant, the city as trustee for the fund shall be subrogated to all the rights of the holder of the bond or interest coupon or warrant so paid, and the proceeds thereof, or the assessment underlying the same, shall become part of such local improvement guaranty fund. There shall also be paid into such fund the interest received from bank deposits of the fund as well as any surplus remaining in any local improvement fund guaranteed in this chapter after the payment of all outstanding bonds or warrants payable primarily out of such local improvement fund. Warrants drawing interest at the rate not to exceed six percent shall be issued as other warrants are issued by the city against such local improvement guaranty fund to meet any liability against the same. At the time of making the annual budget and tax levy, the city shall provide for the levying and collecting of a sum sufficient with the other resources of the fund to pay all warrants so issued during the preceding fiscal year; provided, that such warrants at no time exceed five percent of the outstanding bond or warrant obligations guaranteed by the fund. Among the several issues of bonds or warrants guaranteed by the fund no preference shall exist but defaulted interest coupon bonds and warrants shall be purchased out of the fund in the order of their presentation.

B. So much of the money of the said local government guaranty fund as is necessary may be used to purchase certificates of delinquency for the general taxes on property subject to local improvement assessments underlying bonds or warrants guaranteed by said fund or to purchase such property at county foreclosure or from the county after foreclosure, for the purpose of protecting the guaranty fund. The fund shall be subrogated to the rights of the city and the city may foreclose the lien of such general tax certificates of delinquency and purchase the property at the foreclosure sale. After so acquiring title to real property, the city may lease or sell and convey the same as public or private sale for such price and on such terms as may be determined by resolution of the city council, any provision of law or other ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, and all proceeds resulting from such sale shall belong to and be paid into such guaranty fund. The city clerk-treasurer shall be the executive officer of said fund under and subject to the direction of the city council by resolution. (Ord. 322 § 3, 1927).


3.24.040 Improvements.

A. The city shall not order any local improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by local improvement assessments where the estimated cost of such improvement, if such cost is all to be assessed in the district, or that portion of the estimated cost to be assessed if a portion only of the estimated cost is to be assessed, when added to all other outstanding and unpaid local improvement assessment against the property included in the district, excluding penalties and interest, shall exceed the actual value of the real property, exclusive of improvements thereon, within the district according to the valuation last placed upon it for the purposes of general taxation. When a local improvement is petitioned for by the owners of 75 percent of the lineal frontage upon the improvement and 75 percent of the area of the property within the district, and the petition requests that such limitation be exceeded, the city council may proceed with the improvement in the usual manner if the property owners so petitioning, or any of them, or any person in their behalf, shall deposit with the city a sum in cash equal to the amount that the improvement exceeds the limitations provided in this section. The sum so deposited shall be applied and credited on the assessment roll for the district by the city clerk-treasurer upon his receipt of the roll for collection. The city council may by unanimous vote order the construction of sanitary sewers and necessary accessories for the disposal of sewage, or for the construction of any sanitary fill or for the filling of any street to the established grade over any tide flats or tidelands in the manner now provided by law where in its judgment, the same are necessary for the public health, and may assess a part or the whole of the cost thereof to the property benefited without regard to the above and foregoing limitation. No assessment for diking, draining, sanitary fill or filling any street to the established grade over any tide flats or tidelands or for storm or sanitary sewers or water mains shall be included in any computation of outstanding assessments under the provisions of this section.

B. Before ordering any improvement under this section, the city council shall require and receive a report from the street committee and city engineer certifying in detail the local improvement assessments outstanding and unpaid against the property in the proposed district together with the aggregate of the actual value of the real property in the district, exclusive of the improvements thereon, according to the valuation last placed upon it for the purpose of general taxation. In the absence of fraud or gross mistakes, such certificate shall be final and conclusive in computing the valuation of any property in the district, any nonassessable railroad operating property or property owned by the United States or the state, Skagit County, or any school district or other public corporation, shall be valued at the same rate as assessed property similarly situated. (Ord. 322 § 4, 1927).


3.24.050 Liability.

Neither the holder nor the owner of any bond or warrant issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have any claim therefor against the city except for payment from the special assessments made for the improvement for which said bond or warrant was issued, and except as against the local improvement guaranty fund of the city. The city shall not be liable to any holder or owner of a bond or warrant for any loss to the guaranty fund occurring in the lawful operation thereof by the city. The remedy of the holder or owner of a bond or warrant in case of nonpayment shall be confined to the enforcement of the assessment and said local improvement guaranty fund. A copy of the foregoing part of this section shall be plainly written, printed or engraved on each bond issued and guaranteed under the provisions of this chapter, and such writing, printing or engraving shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with the requirements of Section 9405 of Remington’s Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 322 § 5, 1927).


Chapter 3.25 FORECLOSURE OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS

Sections:

3.25.010    Time of commencement of foreclosure action.

3.25.020    Notice to property owner.

3.25.030    Acceleration of installments – Attorneys’ fees.


3.25.010 Time of commencement of foreclosure action.

Actions for the foreclosure of delinquent local improvement assessments shall be commenced by the city on or before August 1st of the year in which the delinquency occurs. Said foreclosure proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 35.50 RCW and prior to the commencement of any such action, the city treasurer shall comply with the procedural requirements of chapter 35.50 RCW, concerning the commencement of such foreclosure actions. (Ord. 1167 § 1, 1990).


3.25.020 Notice to property owner.

The city treasurer shall send by certified mail to each person whose name appears on the assessment roll charged with any delinquent assessment or installment, at each address listed on said assessment roll and/or county tax roll, a notice at least 30 days before commencement of any action to foreclose a delinquent assessment or installment. The notice shall state the amount due on each separate lot, tract or parcel of land, and the date after which the foreclosure proceedings will commence. (Ord. 1167 § 2, 1990).


3.25.030 Acceleration of installments – Attorneys’ fees.

In any action brought for the foreclosure of a delinquent assessment or installment, future installments not otherwise due and payable shall thereupon be accelerated and the entire balance of the assessment with interest, penalty and cost shall become due and payable and the collection thereof shall be enforced by foreclosure as set forth in this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of such foreclosure there shall be added to the cost and expense of foreclosure such reasonable attorneys’ fees as the court may adjudge to be equitable, and the amount thereof apportioned to each delinquent assessment or installment appearing on the assessment roll. (Ord. 1167 § 3, 1990).


Chapter 3.26 POLICE DEPARTMENT SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION AND INVESTIGATIVE FUND

Sections:

3.26.010    Created.

3.26.020    Source of funds.

3.26.030    Interest.

3.26.040    Withdrawal of funds.

3.26.050    Release of funds.

3.26.060    Accounting.


3.26.010 Created.

There is created a special revenue fund entitled police department substance abuse prevention and investigative fund, which fund shall be used for the purpose of funding activities intended to prevent or limit substance abuse including, but not limited to, the providing of educational materials, costs associated with educating the public in regard to dangers of substance abuse, contracting with private and other public agencies in preventing substance abuse, and investigation of criminal activities relating to substance abuse. (Ord. 1115 § 1, 1987).


3.26.020 Source of funds.

Such fund shall receive in addition to any other moneys made available by the city council funds received through seizure and/or forfeiture in criminal drug cases and funds received from donations made by criminal defendants and others. (Ord. 1115 § 2, 1987).


3.26.030 Interest.

Any interest earned by moneys in the fund shall be retained by the fund. (Ord. 1115 § 3, 1987).


3.26.040 Withdrawal of funds.

The police chief for the city of Burlington is hereby granted authority to withdraw funds from the police department’s substance abuse prevention and investigative fund when, in the police chief’s opinion the use of said funds is necessary to achieve the purpose for which said fund was established. (Ord. 1147 § 1, 1989).


3.26.050 Release of funds.

The city clerk/treasurer of the city of Burlington is authorized to release said funds to the Burlington police chief upon the police chief’s written request. (Ord. 1147 § 2, 1989).


3.26.060 Accounting.

The Burlington police chief shall provide the city clerk/treasurer with an accounting of how said funds were utilized. Said accounting shall be in such form as shall meet the State Auditor’s standards. (Ord. 1147 § 3, 1989).


Chapter 3.28 ADDITIONAL FUNDS

Sections:

3.28.010    Arterial street fund – Purpose – Establishment.

3.28.020    Repealed.

3.28.030    Cemetery fund – Created.

3.28.040    Cemetery fund – Perpetual care.

3.28.045    Cemetery capital outlay and equipment cumulative reserve fund.

3.28.050    Claims fund – Created – Use and accounting.

3.28.060    Claims fund – Transfers.

3.28.070    Repealed.

3.28.080    Superseded.

3.28.090    Cumulative reserve fund – Expenditures.

3.28.100    Refunding bond fund.

3.28.110    Payroll fund – Created.

3.28.120    Payroll fund – Transfers.

3.28.130    Repealed.

3.28.140    Repealed.

3.28.150    Repealed.

3.28.160    Parks enhancement trust fund.

3.28.170    Parks endowment fund.

3.28.180    Parks and recreation capital reserve fund.


3.28.010 Arterial street fund – Purpose – Establishment.

The purpose of BMC 3.28.010 and 3.28.020 is to establish a fund to be known as the “arterial street fund,” separate and distinct from the “street fund,” and to prescribe the manner of its operation. (Ord. 588 § 1, 1961).


3.28.020 Arterial street fund – Operation.

Repealed by Ord. 1723. (Ord. 588 § 2, 1961).


3.28.030 Cemetery fund – Created.

There is created a fund to be known as the “cemetery fund” into which shall be deposited all funds received from taxation or other sources for cemetery purposes and from the sale of lots, blocks and grave spaces from tracts conveyed to the city by the Burlington Cemetery Association, or other property hereafter acquired by the city, less such amounts as may be set aside from time to time as a permanent cemetery improvement fund for the maintenance fund or perpetual care fund for the maintenance, upkeep and improvement of said cemetery property and in the care of lots and tracts now and hereinafter occupied for burial purposes as provided in BMC 3.28.040. (Ord. 525 § 1, 1954).


3.28.040 Cemetery fund – Perpetual care.

At least 10 percent of the proceeds received from the sale of lots, tracts or parcels of land for burial purposes shall be set aside into a permanent fund to be known as the “cemetery perpetual care fund.” Said fund shall be kept perpetually invested from time to time in safe, interest-bearing securities as directed by the city council. The interest only received from the investment of said fund shall be used in the care and upkeep of the lots or tracts so sold. The sum of $7,000 from the perpetual care fund of the Burlington Cemetery Association, which sum was donated to the city for the care of the cemetery, shall also be conveyed into the cemetery perpetual care fund, and the interest therefrom shall be used for the care of the lots or tracts for which said $7,000 was contributed. The fund shall be perpetual and irreducible, and shall be used for no other purposes than specified in this section. (Ord. 1104 § 2, 1987; Ord. 525 § 2, 1954).


3.28.045 Cemetery capital outlay and equipment cumulative reserve fund.

At least 15 percent of the proceeds received from the sale of lots, tracts or parcels of land for burial purposes shall be set aside into a fund to be known as the “cemetery capital outlay and equipment cumulative reserve fund.” Such fund shall be kept invested in safe, interest-bearing securities as directed by the city council. The interest only received from the investment of the fund shall be used in the care and upkeep of the lots or tracts so sold. (Ord. 1104 § 3, 1987).


3.28.050 Claims fund – Created – Use and accounting.

There is created a fund to be known as the “claims fund,” into which fund there may be paid moneys from time to time from any funds which are available, and upon which fund warrants may be issued and paid in payment of claims against the city for any purpose. Appropriate accounting shall be maintained to show the department or departments and the respective amounts for which the warrants are issued and paid. (Ord. 513 § 2, 1953).


3.28.060 Claims fund – Transfers.

Transfers from an insolvent fund to the claims fund shall be by warrant. (Ord. 513 § 3, 1953).


3.28.070 Cumulative reserve fund – For garbage equipment.

Repealed by Ord. 1723. (Ord. 785 § 1, 1972).


3.28.080 Cumulative reserve fund – For cemetery capital outlay and equipment.

Superseded by Ord. 1104.1 (Ord. 785 § 2, 1972).


3.28.090 Cumulative reserve fund – Expenditures.

All expenditures relevant to the fund established in BMC 3.28.070 shall be paid out and accounted for. (Ord. 785 § 3, 1972).


3.28.100 Refunding bond fund.

A. The purpose of this section is to establish funds and to set forth the procedure and accounting thereof.

B. The following fund is created in the treasury of the city for the deposit and expenditures of all funds related to its respective activity:

1. Refunding bond fund.

C. For accounting purposes, the fund shall be identified as follows:

1. Refunding bond fund, code 404. (Ord. 1067, 1985; Ord. 902 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1978).


3.28.110 Payroll fund – Created.

There is created a fund to be known as the “payroll fund,” into which fund there may be placed from time to time such amounts from any funds available as the city council shall in its discretion direct, and upon which fund warrants may be drawn and cashed for the purpose of paying any moneys due city employees for salaries and wages. Appropriate accounting records shall be kept to show the department or departments and the various amounts to which payments from said fund are properly chargeable. (Ord. 513 § 1, 1953).


3.28.120 Payroll fund – Transfers.

Transfers from an insolvent fund to the payroll fund shall be by warrant. (Ord. 513 § 3, 1953).


3.28.130 Travel expenses revolving fund.

Repealed by Ord. 1838. (Ord. 1146 §§ 1 – 3, 1989).


3.28.140 Cumulative reserve fund – Sewer capital expenditures.

Repealed by Ord. 1723. (Ord. 1245 §§ 1 – 4, 1993).


3.28.150 Cumulative reserve fund – Current expense capital expenditures.

Repealed by Ord. 1723. (Ord. 1246 §§ 1 – 4, 1993).


3.28.160 Parks enhancement trust fund.

A. There is established in the city treasury a special fund to be known and designated as the “Burlington parks enhancement trust fund.” 

B. The Burlington parks enhancement trust fund may receive funds from private or public gifts, endowments, donations, bequests, or other similar sources or grants which are intended to be deposited in the Burlington parks enhancement trust fund. Funds which have been deposited in the fund shall be maintained and carried forward at the end of each budget year including interest from investment earnings of the funds. 

C. The Burlington parks department shall adopt guidelines for the expenditure of funds which shall be approved by the city council. The city administrator shall be authorized to make expenditures subject to approval by the city council itemizing the various expenditures made. Expenditures from the fund shall be made to supplement and enhance the current parks department budget. (Ord. 1298 §§ 1 – 3, 1995).


3.28.170 Parks endowment fund.

A. There is established in the city treasury a special fund to be known and designated as the “Burlington parks endowment fund.” 

B. Funding of the Burlington parks endowment fund shall be by private or public gifts, endowments, donations, bequests or other such sources or grants which are intended to be deposited in the Burlington parks endowment fund. Only income earned from investment of the funds in the endowment fund may be expended unless the city council shall specifically authorize expenditure of principal. All invested funds, including unspent income from investments, shall be maintained in the Burlington parks endowment fund, and carried forward at the end of each budget year. 

C. The Burlington parks department shall adopt guidelines for the expenditure of funds from the Burlington parks endowment fund which shall be approved by the city council. All expenditures will be made from the fund only upon recommendation of the parks director and the approval of the city administrator or a designated committee of the board, subject to approval by the city council. (Ord. 1298 §§ 4 – 6, 1995).


3.28.180 Parks and recreation capital reserve fund.

A. There is established in the city treasury a special fund to be known and designated as the “Burlington parks and recreation capital reserve fund.”

B. The Burlington parks and recreation capital reserve fund may receive funds from real estate excise taxes, property and sales taxes, park impact fees, admission taxes, and hotel/motel taxes or other similar sources or grants which are intended or directed to be deposited in the fund. Funds which have been deposited in the fund shall be maintained and carried forward at the end of each year including interest from investment earnings of the fund.

C. The Burlington parks and recreation board shall adopt guidelines for the expenditure of funds which shall be approved by the city council. The parks and recreation director shall be authorized to make expenditures subject to approval by the city council itemizing the various expenditures to be made. The expenditures will be for park capital improvements and acquisitions and parks and recreation machinery and equipment. Expenditures for the fund shall be made to supplement and enhance the current parks and recreation department budget. (Ord. 1409 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1999).1

Code reviser’s note: Ord. 1104 is codified in BMC 3.28.045. This section has been removed from the code at the request of the city. 


Chapter 3.32 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.32.010    Definitions.

3.32.020    Taxes imposed – Amounts.

3.32.030    Tax to be computed and paid quarterly – Exceptions.

3.32.040    Administration and collection of tax.

3.32.050    Method of payment.

3.32.060    Failure to make timely payments of tax or fee.

3.32.070    Notice of intention to engage in activity to be filed.

3.32.080    Records required.

3.32.090    Overpayment or underpayment of tax.

3.32.100    Failure to make return.

3.32.110    Tax additional to others.

3.32.120    Limitations on right to recovery.

3.32.130    Revenue.

3.32.140    Taxes, penalties and fees constitute debt to municipality.

3.32.150    Causing person to violate rule or regulation as violation – Penalty.

3.32.160    Violation relating to fraud or deceit – Penalty.

3.32.170    Defrauding or cheating other participant or operator as violation – Causing another to do so as violation – Penalty.

3.32.180    Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

3.32.190    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving as violation – Penalty.

3.32.200    Violation – Penalties.


3.32.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the words and terms used shall have the same meanings as each has under Chapter 218, Laws of 1973, 1st Ex. Sess. and chapter 9.46 RCW, each as amended, and under the rules of the Washington State Gambling Commission, Title 230 WAC, unless otherwise specifically provided or the context in which they are used herein clearly indicates that they be given some other meaning. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1981).


3.32.020 Taxes imposed – Amounts.

There is hereby levied a tax upon all persons, associations, and organizations who conduct or operate gambling activities within the city of Burlington and who have been duly licensed by the Washington State Gambling Commission to conduct or operate such gambling activities, which tax shall be paid on the following gambling activities in the following respective amounts:

A. Bingo and Raffle Games. Any bingo or raffle activity, a tax computed at the rate of five percent of the difference between the gross revenue received from the conduct of such activity and the amount paid for or as prizes in the conduct of such activity; provided, however, that no tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on bingo or raffles when such activity or any combination thereof is conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in RCW 9.46.020(3), which organization has no paid operating or management personnel; and provided further, that activities carried out by public or private schools or by organizations sponsored by or related to public or private schools, including parent organizations and student body organizations, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter when the proceeds of such activities are applied for the benefit of any such school, or school-sponsored or school-related organization; and provided further, that any deviation from exemption restrictions enumerated herein shall subject such organization to the requirements of this chapter to the same extent if such exemption had not been granted, including required payment within 10 days after written demand of the city of any taxes formerly granted exemption hereunder.

B. Punchboard or Pull Tab. Any punchboard or pull tab, a tax computed at the rate of four percent of the gross receipts from the conduct of such activity, excepting punchboard or pull tabs operated by bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations. Punchboards or pull tabs operated by such bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations shall be taxed at a rate of eight percent of the gross receipts from the operation of the games less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes.

C. Card Games. Any card game, a tax computed at the rate of five percent of the gross receipts received from the conduct of such activity.

D. Fund-Raising Event. Any fund-raising event, a tax computed at the rate of 10 percent of the net income received from the conduct of such event. (Ord. 1505 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1446 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1415 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1354 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1337 § 1, 1997; Ord. 997 § 2, 1982; Ord. 977 § 2, 1981).


3.32.030 Tax to be computed and paid quarterly – Exceptions.

Each of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the basis of activity during each calendar year. They shall be due and payable in quarterly installments and the remittance, together with return forms, shall be made to the city. This shall be done on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax is accrued; that is on January 31st, April 30th, July 31st, and October 31st, of each year. The following exceptions to this payment schedule shall be allowed or required:

A. Whenever any person, association, or organization taxable hereunder, conducting or operating a taxable activity on a regular basis discontinues operation for a period of more than four consecutive weeks, or quits business, sells out or otherwise disposes of the business, or terminates the business, any tax due shall become payable, and such taxpayer shall within 10 days make a return and pay the tax.

B. Whenever it appears to the city that the collection of taxes from any person, association, or organization may be in jeopardy, the city, after not less than 15 days’ notice to the taxpayer, may require the taxpayer to remit taxes and returns at whatever intervals the city deems appropriate under the circumstances.

C. Whenever reports required by the State Gambling Commission under the provisions of chapter 9.46 RCW are required on less than a quarterly basis any person, association, or organization taxable hereunder shall report to the city on the same basis. (Ord. 977 § 3, 1981).


3.32.040 Administration and collection of tax.

A. Administration and collection of the various taxes imposed herein shall be the responsibility of the city. Remittance of the amount due shall be accompanied by a completed return form prescribed and provided by the city. The taxpayer shall be required to swear and affirm that the information given in the return is true, accurate, and complete. The city is authorized, but not required, to mail to taxpayers the necessary forms. Failure of the taxpayers to receive such a form shall not excuse them from making the return and timely paying all taxes due. The city shall make forms available to the public in reasonable numbers at City Hall during regular business hours.

B. In addition to the return form, a copy of the taxpayers quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission required by chapter 230-08 WAC for the period in which the tax accrued shall accompany remittance of the tax. (Ord. 977 § 4, 1981).


3.32.050 Method of payment.

Taxes payable shall be remitted to the city on or before the time required by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, or in cash. If payment is made by draft or check the tax shall not be deemed paid until the draft or check is honored in the usual course of business, nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the city be an acquittance or discharge of the tax unless the taxes are paid in full. The return and a copy of the quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission shall be filed in the office of the city after notation by that office upon the return of the amount actually received from the taxpayer. (Ord. 977 § 5, 1981).


3.32.060 Failure to make timely payments of tax or fee.

A. If full payment of any tax or fee due is not received by the city on or before the date due, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee as follows:

1. One to 10 days late, six percent of tax due;

2. Eleven to 20 days late, eight percent of tax due;

3. Twenty-one to 31 days late, 10 percent of tax due;

4. Thirty-two to 60 days late, 11 percent of tax due; but in no event shall the penalty amount be less than $5.00. In addition to this penalty the city may charge the taxpayer interest of one percent of all taxes and fees due for each 30-day period, or portion thereof, that said amounts are past due.

B. Failure to make payment in full of all tax amounts, and penalties, within 60 days following the day the tax amount initially became due shall be both a civil and criminal penalty of this section. (Ord. 977 § 6, 1981).


3.32.070 Notice of intention to engage in activity to be filed.

A. In order that the city may identify those persons who are subject to taxation under these provisions, each person, association, or organization shall file with the city a form “declaration of intent” to conduct an activity taxable as herein provided. The declaration of intent shall be a form to be prescribed by the city and shall be submitted with a copy of the license issued by the Washington State Gambling Commission. The filing shall be made not later than 10 days prior to conducting or operating a taxable activity or 20 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, if the activity is being conducted prior to its adoption. No fee shall be charged for such filing, which is not for the purpose of regulation of this activity.

B. Failure to timely file shall not excuse any person, association or organization from any tax liability. (Ord. 977 § 7, 1981).


3.32.080 Records required.

A. Each person, association or organization engaging in an activity taxable under these provisions shall maintain records respecting that activity which truly, completely, and accurately disclose all information necessary to determine the tax liability during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than three years. In addition, all information and items required by the Washington State Gambling Commission under chapter 230-08 WAC, and the United States Internal Revenue Service respecting taxation, shall be kept and maintained for the periods required by those agencies.

B. All books, records and other items required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be subject to and immediately available for inspection and audit at any reasonable time with reasonable notice. Inspection shall be made upon demand by the city or its designee, at the place where such records are kept, for the purpose of enforcing these provisions.

C. Where the taxpayer does not keep all of the books, records, or items required in this jurisdiction, the taxpayer shall either:

1. Produce all the required books, records, or items within the city for such inspection within seven days following a request of the city; or

2. Bear the actual cost of the inspection by the city or its designee, at the location at which such books, records, or items are located; provided, that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall pay in advance to the city the estimated cost thereof, including but not limited to, round trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. The actual amount due, or to be refunded, for expenses shall be determined following said examination of the records. (Ord. 977 § 8, 1981).


3.32.090 Overpayment or underpayment of tax.

Any taxpayer who has overpaid taxes due the city under this chapter may submit a petition for a refund in accordance with chapter 3.68 BMC. (Ord. 1762 § 3, 2012; Ord. 977 § 9, 1981).


3.32.100 Failure to make return.

If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make and file his return as and when required under these provisions, the city is authorized to determine the amount of tax payable, together with any penalty and/or interest assessed. The taxpayer shall then be notified by mail of the amount which shall become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 977 § 10, 1981).


3.32.110 Tax additional to others.

The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 977 § 11, 1981).


3.32.120 Limitations on right to recovery.

The right of recovery by the city from the taxpayer for any tax provided hereunder shall be outlawed after the expiration of three calendar years from the date that tax became due. The right of recovery against the city because of overpayment of tax by any taxpayer shall be outlawed after the expiration of three calendar years from the date such payment was made. (Ord. 977 § 13, 1981).


3.32.130 Revenue.

Any revenue collected from such tax shall be used primarily by the city for the purpose of the enforcement of the provisions of chapter 9.46 RCW, the rules and regulations of the Washington State Gambling Commission, and this chapter. (Ord. 977 § 20, 1981).


3.32.140 Taxes, penalties and fees constitute debt to municipality.

Any tax due and unpaid under these provisions and all penalties or fees shall constitute a debt to the city, a municipal corporation, and may be collected by court proceedings the same as any other debt in like amount, but shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 977 § 12, 1981).


3.32.150 Causing person to violate rule or regulation as violation – Penalty.

Any person who knowingly causes, aids, abets, or conspires with another to cause any person to violate any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to chapter 9.46 RCW originally and as amended shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $5,000 or both. (Ord. 977 § 15, 1981).


3.32.160 Violation relating to fraud or deceit – Penalty.

Any person or association or organization operating any gambling activity who or which, directly or indirectly, shall in the course of such operation:

A. Employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud, or

B. Make any untrue statement of a material fact, or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statement made not misleading, in the light of the circumstances under which said statement is made, or

C. Engage in any act, practice or course of operation as would operate as a fraud or deceit upon any person, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $5,000, or both. (Ord. 977 § 16, 1981).


3.32.170 Defrauding or cheating other participant or operator as violation – Causing another to do so as violation – Penalty.

A. No person participating in a gambling activity shall in the course of such participation, directly or indirectly:

1. Employ or attempt to employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud any other participant or any operator;

2. Engage in any act, practice, or course of operation as would operate as a fraud or deceit upon any other participant or any operator;

3. Engage in any act, practice, or course of operation while participating in a gambling activity with the intent of cheating any other participant or the operator to gain an advantage in the game over the other participant or operator;

4. Cause, aid, abet, or conspire with another person to cause any other person to violate subsections A through C of this section.

B. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than $5,000, or both. (Ord. 977 § 17, 1981).


3.32.180 Working in gambling activity without license as violation – Penalty.

Any person who works as an employee or agent or in a similar capacity for another person in connection with the operation of an activity for which a license is required under chapter 9.46 RCW originally and as amended or by rule of the Washington State Gambling Commission created in chapter 9.46 RCW without having obtained the applicable license required by the Washington State Gambling Commission under RCW 9.46.070(16) shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by not more than one year in the county jail or a fine of not more than $5,000, or both. (Ord. 977 § 18, 1981).


3.32.190 Gambling information, transmitting or receiving as violation – Penalty.

Whoever knowingly transmits or receives gambling information by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means, or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of gambling information, other than satellite wagering (pari-mutuel betting on horse racing), shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to such information transmitted or received or equipment installed or maintained relating to activities as enumerated in RCW 9.46.030 or any act or acts in furtherance thereof when conducted in compliance with the provisions of chapter 9.46 RCW originally and as amended and in accord with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1287 § 1, 1995; Ord. 977 § 19, 1981).


3.32.200 Violation – Penalties.

A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

B. Each such taxpayer is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of these provisions is committed, continued, or permitted by any such taxpayer and he is punishable accordingly. (Ord. 977 § 14, 1981).


Chapter 3.36 SPECIAL INITIATIVE PROCEDURE FOR TAX ALTERATION

Sections:

3.36.010    Ordinances subject to procedure.

3.36.020    Petition – Filing.

3.36.030    Petition – Form.

3.36.040    Petition – Signatures.

3.36.050    Clerk-treasurer to determine sufficiency of signatures.

3.36.060    Taxpayer recourse.

3.36.070    Procedure to follow city standards.

3.36.080    Notice requirements.

3.36.090    Form of ballots.

3.36.100    Effective date of successful petition.

3.36.110    Notation by clerk-treasurer.


3.36.010 Ordinances subject to procedure.

Every ordinance imposing or altering a sales tax under Section 17(2), Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, 1st Ex. Sess.; every ordinance imposing or altering an excise tax on the sale of real property under Sec. 11(2) of that chapter; and every ordinance first imposing or increasing the rate of a business and occupation tax shall be subject to a special initiative procedure as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 1983).


3.36.020 Petition – Filing.

A. An initiative petition proposing to repeal a tax ordinance referred to in BMC 3.36.010 may be filed at any time. The petition shall be filed with the city, signed by a number of registered voters equaling at least 15 percent of the total number of persons listed as registered voters within the city on the day of the last preceding municipal general election. Upon the filing of such a petition the city shall either:

1. Pass the proposed ordinance without alteration within 20 days after the city clerk-treasurer’s certification that the number of signatures on the petition are sufficient; or

2. Immediately after the clerk-treasurer’s certificate of sufficiency is attached to the petition, cause to be called a special election as provided by state law for submission of the proposed ordinance without alteration to a vote of the people.

B. Pending an election, the tax ordinance subject to the special initiative shall remain in effect and the tax shall continue to be collected until the result of the election repealing the ordinance is declared or certified as provided by state law. (Ord. 1014 § 2, 1983).


3.36.030 Petition – Form.

The special initiative petition shall include a proposed ordinance repealing the existing tax ordinance and shall be as follows:

Special Initiative Repealing _____ Tax (Chapter 49, Laws of 1982, 1st Ex. Sess.)

Shall Ordinance No. ____ of the (city) of     _______, (imposing) (increasing) a (one-half cent sales tax, etc.) be repealed by the following:

An Ordinance of the (city) of ____, repealing Ordinance No. ____, and providing an effective date.

Be it enacted by the voters of the (city) of _________.

Sec. 1. Ordinance No. ___ of the (city) of _____ adopted ____, 19__, is hereby repealed.

Sec. 2. This ordinance shall take effect on the first day of the calendar quarter which begins 30 days or more after the effective date of the approval of the Special Initiative by the (city) (governing body) or on the first day of the calendar quarter which begins 30 days or more after the certification of the results of the election at which the Special Initiative was approved by the voters.

(Ord. 1014 § 3, 1983).


3.36.040 Petition – Signatures.

Every signer to a petition submitting a proposed ordinance to the city shall add to the signature the signer’s place of residence giving street and number. The signatures need not all be appended to one paper, but one of the signers on each paper must attach thereto an affidavit stating the number of signatures thereon, that each signature thereon is a genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that the statements therein made are true as such person believes. (Ord. 1014 § 4, 1983).


3.36.050 Clerk-treasurer to determine sufficiency of signatures.

Within 10 days from the filing of a petition submitting a proposed ordinance the city clerk-treasurer shall ascertain and append to the petition a certificate stating whether or not it is signed by a sufficient number of registered voters, using the registration records and returns of the preceding municipal election as the sources of information, and the city shall allow extra help for that purpose, if necessary. If the signatures are found by the clerk-treasurer to be insufficient, the petition may be amended in that respect within 10 days from the date of the certificate. Within 10 days after submission of the amended petition the clerk-treasurer shall make an examination thereof and append a certificate thereto in the same manner as before. If the second certificate shall also show the number of signatures to be insufficient, the petition shall be returned to the person filing it. (Ord. 1014 § 5, 1983).


3.36.060 Taxpayer recourse.

If the clerk-treasurer finds the petition insufficient or if the city refuses either to pass an initiative ordinance or order an election thereon, any taxpayer may commence an action in the superior court against the city and procure a decree ordering an election to be held in the city for the purpose of voting upon the proposed ordinance if the court finds the petition to be sufficient. (Ord. 1014 § 6, 1983).


3.36.070 Procedure to follow city standards.

Publication of notice, the election, the canvass of the returns and declaration of the results shall be conducted in all respects as are other city elections. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted on at the same election, but there shall not be more than one special election for the purpose during any one six-month period unless otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 1014 § 7, 1983).


3.36.080 Notice requirements.

The clerk-treasurer shall cause any ordinance required to be submitted to the voters at an election to be published once in each of the daily newspapers in the city not less than five nor more than 20 days before the election. If no daily newspaper is published in the city, publication shall be made in each of the weekly newspapers published in the city not less than five nor more than 20 days before the election. The publication required by this section shall be in addition to the notice required in chapter 29.27 RCW. (Ord. 1014 § 8, 1983).


3.36.090 Form of ballots.

The ballots used for voting upon the proposed ordinance initiated by petition shall be similar to those used at a general municipal election in the city and shall contain the words “for the ordinance” (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance) and “against the ordinance” (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). (Ord. 1014 § 9, 1983).


3.36.100 Effective date of successful petition.

If a majority of votes cast thereon favor the proposed ordinance initiated by petition, it shall become effective on the first day of the calendar month following the month in which the election is officially certified, or a later date specified in the proposed ordinance in conformity with state law, and shall be made a part of the record of ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1014 § 10, 1983).


3.36.110 Notation by clerk-treasurer.

Upon the adoption of an ordinance initiated by petition, the clerk-treasurer shall write on the margin of the record thereof “ordinance by petition No. _____”, or “ordinance by vote of the people.” (Ord. 1014 § 11, 1983).


Chapter 3.40 BONDS AND OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.40.010    Definitions.

3.40.020    Findings.

3.40.030    Adoption of registration system.

3.40.040    Statement of transfer restrictions.


3.40.010 Definitions.

The following words shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

A. “Bond” or “bonds” shall have the meaning defined in Section 2(1), Chapter 167, Laws of 1983, as it may be from time to time amended.

B. “City” means the city of Burlington, Washington.

C. “Fiscal agencies” means the duly appointed fiscal agencies of the state of Washington serving as such at any given time.

D. “Obligation” or “obligations” shall have the meaning defined in Section 2(3), Chapter 167, Laws of 1983, as it may be from time to time amended.

E. “Registrar” means the person or persons designated by the city to register ownership of bonds or obligations under this chapter. (Ord. 1026 § 1, 1983).


3.40.020 Findings.

The city council finds that it is in the city’s best interest to establish a system of registering the ownership of the city’s bonds and obligations in the manner permitted by law. (Ord. 1026 § 2, 1983).


3.40.030 Adoption of registration system.

The city adopts the following system of registering the ownership of its bonds and obligations:

A. Registration Requirement. All bonds and obligations offered to the public, having a maturity of more than one year and issued by the city after June 30, 1983, on which the interest is intended to be exempted from federal income taxation, shall be registered as to both principal and interest as provided in this section.

B. Method of Registration. The registration of all city bonds and obligations required to be registered shall be carried out either by:

1. A book entry system of recording the ownership of the bond or obligation on the books of the city or the fiscal agencies, whether or not a physical instrument is issued; or

2. By recording the ownership of the bond or obligation and requiring as a condition of the transfer of ownership of any bond or obligation the surrender of the old bond or obligation and either the reissuance of the old bond or obligation or the issuance of a new bond of obligation to the new owners.

No transfer of any bond or obligation subject to registration requirements shall be effective until the name of the new owner and the new owner’s mailing address, together with such other information deemed appropriate by the registrar, shall be recorded on the books of the registrar.

C. Denominations. Except as may be provided otherwise by the ordinance authorizing their issuance, registered bonds or obligations may be issued and reissued in any denomination up to the outstanding principal amount of the bonds or obligations of which they are a part. Such denominations may represent all or a part of a maturity or several maturities and on reissuance may be in smaller amounts than the individual denominations for which they are reissued.

D. Appointment of Registrar. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of registered bonds or obligations, the city clerk-treasurer shall be the registrar for all registered interest-bearing warrants, installment contracts, interest-bearing leases and other registered bonds or obligations not usually subject to trading, and the fiscal agencies shall be the registrar for all other city bonds and obligations.

E. Duties of Registrar.

1. The registrar shall serve as the city’s authenticating trustee, transfer agent, registrar and paying agent for all registered bonds and obligations for which he, she, or it serves as registrar and shall comply fully with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations respecting the carrying out of those duties.

2. The rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation of the registrar shall be prescribed in each ordinance authorizing the issuance of the bonds or obligations, which rights, duties, responsibilities and compensation shall be embodied in a contract executed by the city clerk-treasurer and the registrar.

3. In instances when the fiscal agency serves as registrar, the city adopts by reference the contract between the State Finance Committee of the state of Washington and the fiscal agencies in lieu of executing a separate contract and prescribing by ordinance the rights, duties, obligations and compensation of the registrar. As well, when the city clerk-treasurer serves as registrar, a separate contract shall not be required.

4. In all cases when the registrar is not the fiscal agency, the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the registered bonds or obligations shall specify the terms and conditions of:

a. Making payments of principal and interest;

b. Printing any physical instruments, including the use of identifying numbers or other designation;

c. Specifying record and payment dates;

d. Determining denominations;

e. Establishing the manner of communicating with the owners of the bonds or obligations;

f. Establishing the methods of receipting for the physical instruments for payment of principal, the destruction of such instruments and the certification of such destruction;

g. Registering or releasing security interests, if any; and

h. Such other matters pertaining to the registration of the bonds or obligations authorized by such ordinance as the city may deem to be necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 1026 § 3, 1983).


3.40.040 Statement of transfer restrictions.

Any physical instrument issued or executed by the city subject to registration under this chapter shall state on its face that the principal of and interest on the bonds or obligations shall be paid only to the owner thereof registered as such on the books of the registrar as of the record date defined in the instrument and to no other person, and that such instrument, either principal or interest, may not be assigned except on the books of the registrar. (Ord. 1026 § 4, 1983).


Chapter 3.44 EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES

Sections:

3.44.010    Imposition of tax.

3.44.020    Rate of tax imposed.

3.44.030    State law adopted by reference.

3.44.040    Local capital improvement fund.

3.44.050    Disposition of proceeds – No limitation imposed on city.

3.44.060    Disposition of proceeds by county.

3.44.070    Tax an obligation of seller.

3.44.080    Tax lien on real property.

3.44.090    Duties of county treasurer.

3.44.100    Tax due and payable when.

3.44.110    Refunds.


3.44.010 Imposition of tax.

There is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in chapter 82.46 RCW and occurring within the corporate limits of the city. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the state under chapter 82.46 RCW and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate tax provisions as imposed by the state under chapter 82.46 RCW. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1127 § 1, 1988).


3.44.020 Rate of tax imposed.

The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be one-half of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by BMC 3.44.010. (Ord. 1311 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1238 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1127 § 2, 1988).


3.44.030 State law adopted by reference.

Chapter 82.46 RCW and any and all subsequent amendments to said statute are adopted by this reference as if set forth in full herein. The city clerk-treasurer is directed to maintain one copy of chapter 82.46 RCW as currently enacted or as subsequently amended on file for public use and examination during regular city business hours. Copies of said statute shall be attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and authenticated by the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 1238 § 3, 1993; Ord. 1127 § 11, 1988).


3.44.040 Local capital improvement fund.

There is created a special fund No. 301 known as “local capital improvements fund,” into which shall be deposited all proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter and distributed to the city. (Ord. 1238 § 4, 1993; Ord. 1127 § 12, 1988).


3.44.050 Disposition of proceeds – No limitation imposed on city.

All proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed by the city clerk-treasurer in a capital improvement fund and shall be used for capital improvements, including those listed in RCW 35.43.040; provided, that one-fourth of one percent of the tax shall be dedicated to parks department capital improvement projects. This section shall not limit the existing authority of this city to impose special assessments on property benefited thereby in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 1311 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1238 § 5, 1993; Ord. 1127 § 3, 1988).


3.44.060 Disposition of proceeds by county.

The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed by BMC 3.44.010 in the county current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from city taxes imposed herein shall be distributed to the city monthly. (Ord. 1127 § 4, 1988).


3.44.070 Tax an obligation of seller.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.44.010 are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (Ord. 1127 § 5, 1988).


3.44.080 Tax lien on real property.

The taxes imposed by BMC 3.44.010 and any interest or penalties thereon are a specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. 1127 § 6, 1988).


3.44.090 Duties of county treasurer.

A. The taxes imposed by BMC 3.44.010 shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of the county within which is located the real property which was sold. The county treasurer shall act as agent for the city within the county imposing the tax.

B. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in BMC 3.44.080 and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions of mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the county auditor for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. (Ord. 1127 § 7, 1988).


3.44.100 Tax due and payable when.

The tax imposed by BMC 3.44.010 shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within 30 days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time of sale until the date of payment. (Ord. 1127 § 8, 1988).


3.44.110 Refunds.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. (Ord. 1127 § 9, 1988).


Chapter 3.48 CHECK HANDLING CHARGE

Sections:

3.48.010    Adopted.

3.48.020    Assessment authorized.


3.48.010 Adopted.

There is a check-handling charge for all checks or drafts payable to the city which are dishonored for payment by the bank or institution upon which said checks or drafts are drawn, which check-handling charge shall be adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 1799 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1501 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1142 § 1, 1989).


3.48.020 Assessment authorized.

The city finance director shall be, and is authorized and directed to assess said check-handling charge in addition to, and as part of, the payment or obligation due or made to the city of Burlington for which the dishonored check or draft was issued. (Ord. 1501 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1142 § 2, 1989).


Chapter 3.52 REFUSE COLLECTION TAX

(Repealed by Ord. 1588)


Chapter 3.56 BROKERED NATURAL GAS TAX

Sections:

3.56.010    Imposed.


3.56.010 Imposed.

A. As authorized by RCW 82.14.230, there is hereby fixed and imposed on every person a use tax for the privilege of using natural gas or manufactured gas in the city of Burlington as a consumer. The tax shall be in an amount equal to the value of the article used by the taxpayer multiplied by the rate of tax on the business of selling or furnishing gas for domestic, business or industrial consumption set forth in BMC 5.12.070(E). The “value of the article used” shall have the meaning set forth in RCW 81.12.010(1), and does not include any amounts that are paid for the hire or use of a natural gas business in transporting the gas subject to tax under this section if those amounts are subject to tax under BMC 5.12.070(E).

B. The tax imposed under this section shall not apply to the use of natural or manufactured gas if the person who sold the gas to the consumer has paid a tax under BMC 5.12.070(E) with respect to the gas for which exemption is sought under this subsection.

C. There shall be a credit against the tax levied under this section in an amount equal to any tax paid by:

1. The person who sold the gas to the consumer when that tax is a gross receipts tax similar to that imposed under BMC 5.12.070(E) by another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this subsection; or

2. The person consuming the gas upon which a use tax similar to the tax imposed by this section was paid by another state with respect to the gas for which a credit is sought under this subsection.

D. The use tax herein imposed shall be paid by the consumer. The administration and collection of the tax hereby imposed shall be by the Washington State Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.14.050. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 1998).


Chapter 3.60 INDIGENT DEFENSE ADMINISTRATIVE FEE

Sections:

3.60.010    Repealed.

3.60.020    Collection.

3.60.030    Inability to pay.


3.60.010 Indigent defense administrative fee.

Repealed by Ord. 1799. (Ord. 1580 § 1, 2005).


3.60.020 Collection.

Administrative fees are payable at the time the request for a public defense is made to the city. (Ord. 1580 § 1, 2005).


3.60.030 Inability to pay.

No applicant who is determined to be indigent will be denied a public defense if such applicant is unable to pay the administrative fee. (Ord. 1580 § 1, 2005).


Chapter 3.64 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS OR OBLIGATIONS

Sections:

3.64.010    Payment of claims or obligations of the city.


3.64.010 Payment of claims or obligations of the city.

Pursuant to RCW 35A.40.020, payment of claims or obligations of the city shall be by check. The qualified public depository, whereon such checks are to be drawn, shall be designated by the finance director or designee. The city officers authorized to sign checks shall be the mayor, mayor pro tem, finance director and accounting manager. Two signatures will be required on all checks. (Ord. 1837 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1732 § 1, 2011).


Chapter 3.68 TAX REFUNDS

Sections:

3.68.010    Procedure upon overpayment.

3.68.020    Appeals.

3.68.030    Invalidity.


3.68.010 Procedure upon overpayment.

A. Whenever, upon petition by a taxpayer for a refund, or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns, the finance director determines that a sum paid for taxes, penalty, or interest under this title or BMC Title 5 was in excess of the amount properly due within a three-year period preceding the director’s determination or written petition for a refund, and a refund is payable, the director shall credit the overpayment to the taxpayer’s account or refund it at the taxpayer’s option. The finance director’s decisions may be appealed as provided in BMC 3.68.020.

B. Petitions for refunds must state, in writing:

1. The taxpayer’s name, address and telephone;

2. The dates of payment of tax, method of payment, amount and proof of payment;

3. The tax periods involved and taxpayer’s gross income from business activity in the city for said period; and

4. Reasons why a refund is proper.

C. Refunds may be denied or limited, in the finance director’s discretion, when it appears that:

1. Information supplied by the taxpayer is materially misleading, incomplete, false, or fraudulent;

2. The overpayment was the result of taxpayer negligence; or

3. The tax was paid without written protest, delivered with payment to the finance department, under circumstances in which the taxpayer knew or should have known of an objection or basis of claim for overpayment.

D. Interest Calculation on Refunds or Overpayments. After May 1, 2012, the finance director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended. If this title is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.060 existing at the effective date of this chapter shall apply.

E. No provision of this section extends the time necessary for a taxpayer to commence a legal action. No provision creates a right to a refund except and to the extent required by the Constitution and laws of the state of Washington or the United States. (Ord. 1762 § 1, 2012).


3.68.020 Appeals.

A. The finance director’s determination of tax owing, including penalties and interest, may be appealed by filing, in proper form, an appeal with the city council within 20 days of the date of determination. Copies are also to be provided by the appealing party at the same time to the city attorney and the finance director. The date of determination is the date reflected therein or, if mailed, three days from the date of mailing, whichever is later. Filing by a taxpayer requires actual receipt. As a further condition of appeal, a taxpayer must tender to the finance director, pending the outcome of the appeal, the full amount of all taxes, fees, penalties and delinquencies assessed by the city.

B. To be accepted, in proper form, as timely, appeals must show:

1. The taxpayer’s name, telephone number and business address;

2. The tax period and taxpayer’s gross income from business activity in the city for that period with which the appeal is concerned;

3. A receipt or other proof from the finance director showing payment of the amount determined owing by the finance department;

4. The amount of tax, interest and penalty the taxpayer contends is due and method of calculation; and

5. Reasons why a correction should be granted. The appeal must be signed, verified under oath, and dated by an authorized representative of the taxpayer.

C. At the hearing before the city council the determination appealed from is regarded as prima facie correct. The city council may require any party to the appeal to testify under oath and upon personal knowledge and to produce documents or records deemed relevant or necessary. The city council preserves a record of the hearing in such form and manner as the council may deem proper. The city council may reverse or modify the department’s decision and may assess the correct amount of tax, penalty, or interest due if the city council determines the assessment violates the provisions of this chapter or is contrary to law. The decision of the city council is final, subject to review by either party under the provisions of RCW 7.16.040, so long as the appealing party files and serves upon all necessary parties the petition for granting a writ of review within 20 days of the date of issuance of the city council’s decision.

D. Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner as provided in BMC 3.68.010, upon the filing with the director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court. (Ord. 1762 § 1, 2012).


3.68.030 Invalidity.

If any section of this chapter is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such invalidity shall not invalidate the remaining sections of this chapter, and to that extent, the sections of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 1762 § 1, 2012).

 


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.08    Taxicabs

5.12    Utility Occupation Licenses

5.16    Peddlers and Solicitors

5.20    Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers

5.24    Amusement Centers

5.30    Mobile Vendors


Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.04.010    City power to license.

5.04.020    Definitions.

5.04.030    Exemptions.

5.04.040    Application – Issuance conditions.

5.04.050    Nontransferable – More than one required when – Posting.

5.04.060    Operating under another’s license prohibited.

5.04.070    Time limit – Delinquency.

5.04.080    Expiration.

5.04.090    Fee – Levied annually – Business activities designated.

5.04.140    Fee – Publishers.

5.04.150    Fee – Prorated when.

5.04.160    Fee – Additional to others.

5.04.170    Tax constitutes debt to city – Collection.

5.04.180    Recordkeeping and disposition of fees – Enforcement.

5.04.190    Violations – Penalties.


5.04.010 City power to license.

The licenses provided for herein shall be for the purpose of regulation. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the public, economic and social welfare, health, peace and morals, and all of its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ord. 1590 § 1, 2005).


5.04.020 Definitions.

A. In construing the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise declared or clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions shall be applied:

1. “Business” includes all activities engaged in the object of gain, benefit or advantage to the licensee or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.

2. “Engage in business” or “engaging in business activities” means commencing, conducting or continuing in business and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves up to the public as conducting such business.

3. “Person” means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation, association, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.

B. Words in the singular number include the plural and the plural includes the singular. Words in one gender include all other genders. (Ord. 573 § 2, 1960).


5.04.030 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A. Any instrumentality of the United States, the state of Washington, or political subdivisions thereof with respect to the exercise of governmental functions;

B. Any person paying a business and occupation tax to the city under the terms of chapter 5.12 BMC or under the terms of future ordinances of the city shall be exempt from the payment of any license or tax under this chapter during the year or years covered by such other ordinances;

C. Employees of any business entity, while such employees engage in business solely on behalf of that business entity;

D. Newspaper carriers under the age of 18;

E. Any business entity located outside the corporate limits of Burlington making delivery of goods purchased outside the city’s corporate limits, where such business entity is not otherwise subject to the licensing provisions of this chapter;

F. The nonbusiness activities of religious organizations are exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, that any religious organization which engages in business for which it may be required by federal law to file a federal income tax return shall, to that extent only, be subject to the license and license fee requirements of this chapter;

G. Any person, business, enterprise, firm, or corporation which the city is forbidden to tax under state or federal law; or

H. For purposes of the license provided by this chapter, any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the city is equal to or less than $2,000 and who does not maintain a place of business within the city shall submit a business license registration to the city finance director or designee. The threshold does not apply to regulatory license requirements or activities that require a specialized permit. (Ord. 1861, 2018; Ord. 1590 § 2, 2005).


5.04.040 Application – Issuance conditions.

Applications for a business license and/or business registration shall be made to and issued by the finance director of the city on forms provided by the finance director, on which shall be stated the residence of the applicant; an emergency notification name, address, and telephone number; the nature of the applicant’s business or business activity; the place where it is proposed to be conducted; the applicant’s uniform business identification number (if such number is required to be issued by the state of Washington); and the amount of the fee prescribed by this chapter. If the city finance director finds the application to be correct, the finance director shall, upon payment of the fee, issue a license in accordance with this chapter. If required by the state of Washington, or at the discretion of the finance director if not required by the state of Washington, business license applications may instead be administered by the state of Washington through the state’s Business Licensing Service (BLS) or other similar service offered now or in the future by Washington State. (Ord. 1861, 2018; Ord. 1590 § 3, 2005).


5.04.050 Nontransferable – More than one required when – Posting.

The license shall be personal and nontransferable. In case business is transacted at two or more separate places by one person within the city, a separate license for each place in which business is transacted with the public shall be required, in accordance with the classifications set forth in this chapter, and the person shall pay for each place of business a fee in accordance with said classification. Each license shall at all times be conspicuously posted in the place of business for which it is issued. Where a place of business of a taxpayer is changed, the taxpayer shall return the license to the city clerk-treasurer and a new license shall be issued for the new place of business free of charge. (Ord. 573 § 4, 1960).


5.04.060 Operating under another’s license prohibited.

No person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall suffer or allow any other person for whom a separate license is required, to operate under or display such license, nor shall any such other person operate under or display such license. (Ord. 573 § 4, 1960).


5.04.070 Time limit – Delinquency.

The licenses required by the terms of this chapter shall be procured by the licensee prior to January 31st of the calendar year for which required, or prior to the commencement of operation of business in the city, whichever date is later. For any license procured after the applicable date required by this section, there is assessed, and there shall be collected by the city clerk-treasurer, in addition to the required annual license fee, a delinquency charge of 10 percent of the annual license fee for each month or part of a month accruing between the time such license is procured and the time when the same should have been procured under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 573 § 7, 1960).


5.04.080 Expiration.

The business license referred to in this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year for which it is issued and a new license shall be required for each calendar year. A new applicant shall pay for the license fee applicable to his classification. (Ord. 573 § 4, 1960).


5.04.090 Fee – Levied annually – Business activities designated.

On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is levied upon and shall be collected from and paid as hereinafter provided, by every person, on account and for the privilege of engaging in business activities within the city an annual license fee or occupation tax per calendar year, or any portion thereof, in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1132 § 1, 1988; Ord. 590 § 1, 1962; Ord. 573 § 3, 1960).


5.04.140 Fee – Publishers.

Publishers of newspapers, periodicals or any other publications, may, in lieu of procuring any license provided for by this chapter, pay to the city a sum of money equal in amount of the appropriate license fee set forth in BMC

5.04.090, and upon payment thereof, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, said exemption to apply for one calendar year, and to be renewable from year to year upon an additional payment of the sum. (Ord. 573 § 8, 1960).


5.04.150 Fee – Prorated when.

The license fee for a person commencing operations after July 1st in any year shall be one-half the applicable fee for the remainder of the calendar year. (Ord. 573 § 9, 1960).


5.04.160 Fee – Additional to others.

The license fee and tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the city, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. (Ord. 573 § 5, 1960).


5.04.170 Tax constitutes debt to city – Collection.

Any license fee or tax due or unpaid under this chapter, and all penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city, and may be collected by court proceeding in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 573 § 10, 1960).


5.04.180 Recordkeeping and disposition of fees – Enforcement.

A. The city clerk-treasurer shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received under the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of any license fee or penalties collected under the provisions of this chapter, he shall deposit the same to the credit of the current expense fund.

B. It shall be the duty of the city clerk-treasurer to require all parties engaging in any business activity to procure such license, and should there be any license fee not paid by any person, it shall be the duty of the city clerk-treasurer to enforce collection thereof in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 573 § 12, 1960).


5.04.190 Violations – Penalties.

Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed an infraction, and upon a final determination of having committed such infraction, such person shall be subject to the following monetary penalties:

A. Any person who engages in or carries on any business subject to licensing hereunder without having a business license to do so shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter for each day during which the business is engaged in or carried on, and any person who fails or refuses to pay the license fee or tax or any part thereof on or before the due date shall be deemed to be operating without having a license so to do. 

B. All violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the monetary penalty for like violations as set forth in the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction promulgated by the Washington State Supreme Court, as such rules now exist or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1590 § 4, 2005).


Chapter 5.08 TAXICABS

Sections:

5.08.010    Business and vehicle license required.

5.08.020    Purpose – Immunity.

5.08.030    Definitions.

5.08.040    License fees.

5.08.050    Issuance of vehicle license.

5.08.060    Term of license.

5.08.070    License application.

5.08.080    Identification.

5.08.090    Right to refuse employment, carry more than one fare, and require advance fare.

5.08.100    Taximeter required.

5.08.110    Taximeter, requirements, vehicle condition, and trip log.

5.08.120    Inspection of for-hire vehicles.

5.08.130    For-hire vehicle driver’s license.

5.08.140    Qualifications for for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

5.08.150    Application for for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

5.08.160    Issuance of for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

5.08.170    For-hire vehicle driver’s license fee.

5.08.180    Suspension and revocation of driver’s license.

5.08.190    Liability insurance.

5.08.200    Enforcement.


5.08.010 Business and vehicle license required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to hold out, advertise, solicit, operate, drive, or use any vehicle as a for-hire vehicle in the city without having first obtained the licenses required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and as provided in BMC 5.04.010 through 5.08.200. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.020 Purpose – Immunity.

It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or designate any particular class of persons who will or should be specially protected by its terms. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the city or its employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the city or its employees. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases used herein shall mean as follows:

“Driver” and “operator” means the person physically engaged in driving a for-hire vehicle, whether or not said person is the owner of or has any financial interest in the ownership of said vehicle.

“For-hire vehicle” means a taxicab or sight-seeing car.

“Sight-seeing car” or “charter bus” means every motor vehicle held for public hire as a common carrier, used primarily for sight-seeing purposes and generally over a fixed route for a stipulated consideration per trip.

“Taxicab” means every motor vehicle held for public hire as a common carrier, usually for transportation of individuals, subject to call by the public generally and not operating over a fixed route or between fixed termini.

“Taxicab stand” means that portion of any street set aside and designated exclusively as parking or standing space to be occupied by for-hire vehicles.

“Unrestricted license” means a license that is not intermediate under RCW 46.20.075, or a permit, or has restrictions that are court mandated placed on the holder of that license. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.040 License fees.

The license fees under this chapter are hereby fixed in an amount determined by resolution of the city council for the following activities:

A. Application fee (first time for each driver);

B. Renewal for following year;

C. Taxicab company every year;

D. Owners of cab company as driver.

There are currently no owner or vehicle transfer fees. (Ord. 1688 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.050 Issuance of vehicle license.

The finance department shall issue a vehicle license upon satisfactory police department inspection, compliance with the insurance requirements of this chapter, and payment of the prescribed vehicle license fee. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.060 Term of license.

All licenses shall expire on December 31st of the year of issue, but may be reissued for succeeding years to the same licensee and for the same motor vehicle when the requirements of this chapter are otherwise met, and may, subject to the requirements of this chapter, be reissued to the same licensee for a substitute vehicle. 

A. It is unlawful for an owner of a taxicab or for-hire vehicle business to operate a vehicle to convey passengers for compensation without a current and valid vehicle license.

B. It is unlawful for a driver of a taxicab or for-hire vehicle to convey passengers for compensation without a current and valid vehicle license. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.070 License application.

Applications for licenses for taxicabs shall be made in the name of the owner or owners thereof upon forms to be furnished by the city and shall give full information concerning the ownership, number, and classification of each motor vehicle to be operated, the name, fictitious or otherwise, under which the applicant will operate, the distinguishing color scheme, design, or dress, including any monogram or insignia to be used upon each such motor vehicle. If the owner of said vehicle shall be a firm, partnership, or association, or if there be more than one owner, full information shall be furnished as to the natural persons having an interest therein and the extent of such interest in such firm, partnership, or association. The applicant shall furnish such other information as may be required by the finance director as deemed necessary to aid in the enforcement of this chapter. 

The chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation, including any hearing deemed desirable, as to the fitness of an applicant to conduct the business requested, and in connection therewith may investigate the fitness of the officers and stockholders of any corporation making such application. In determining the fitness or lack of fitness of an applicant, the chief of police shall take into consideration the applicant’s record and reputation as to the applicant being law-abiding, the applicant’s business experience, and the nature and kind of occupation or business in which the applicant has previously been engaged. In considering applications for renewal of licenses, the finance director may take into consideration the manner in which an applicant has previously conducted his, her, or its business. If any person having a valid license shall make a timely application for its renewal and the finance director shall not have acted upon such application prior to its expiration, such person may operate under his or her license for the year immediately preceding until the finance director shall have acted upon the application and notified him or her of his action. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.080 Identification.

For-hire vehicles used for charter services and also licensed taxicabs under the provisions of this chapter shall not be required to be painted an identifying color scheme or to be lettered except as herein otherwise provided; however, there shall be attached in a conspicuous place on each side of such vehicles, whenever they are used as taxicabs, a detachable panel, painted in the same color scheme authorized for the licensee’s taxicabs and showing the trade name of the licensee in letters at least two inches in height. Every other for-hire vehicle licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be painted with the colors and in the manner set forth in the license application for said vehicle; provided, that such color scheme can be changed only after a supplemental application is filed with the city setting forth the same in detail; provided further, that such color scheme is not the same or similar to a color scheme being used by another licensee. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.090 Right to refuse employment, carry more than one fare, and require advance fare.

Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless it be prepaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person other than the passenger first employing the taxicab without the consent of such passenger. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.100 Taximeter required.

No taxicab shall be licensed unless there is installed therein a taximeter capable of calculating the rates for hire hereafter set forth, and no for-hire vehicle shall be licensed unless the same is in a safe condition for use as such, nor until there is furnished proof of compliance with the provisions of chapter 46.72 RCW, et seq., as now or hereafter amended, relating to financial responsibility. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.110 Taximeter, requirements, vehicle condition, and trip log.

A. Every taxicab shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of standard size and design.

B. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter which shall be in such condition as to be over five percent incorrect. For the purpose of checking the accuracy of said taximeter, the taxicab to which the same is fixed shall be made available to the city at such times as the finance director may direct.

C. No person shall use or permit to be used or drive for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed and not having its cover and gear intact.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or driving a taxicab to operate or drive such taxicab unless such taximeter is used in determining the fare to be charged, and no other or different fare shall be charged to the passenger than is recorded on the reading face of said taximeter for the trip. No other rates or methods of measuring the distance or time charged shall be allowed except as herein provided. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.120 Inspection of for-hire vehicles.

The police department shall maintain constant vigilance over all for-hire vehicles to see that they are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use, and to this end its officers and inspectors shall inspect all for-hire vehicles on the complaint of any citizen, or from time to time, as it may deem necessary or convenient.

A. Each vehicle to be used in conveying passengers shall be inspected and approved by the police department. Inspection shall include: 

1. Confirmation of current state vehicle license and registration.

2. Proof of liability insurance as required by this chapter.

3. Confirmation that each vehicle is equipped in accordance with state law and city ordinances and that all required equipment is in good working order.

4. Taxicabs shall be checked for an accurate taximeter; other vehicles are not subject to this requirement. It is unlawful for an owner or driver to operate a taxicab with an inaccurate taximeter. Violation shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided in BMC 1.24.020.

5. A schedule of fare rates shall be posted so it can be clearly read by passengers.

6. Any additional inspection regulations promulgated by the police department. These regulations shall be reasonable and necessary to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. The items to be inspected shall be listed on a form to be provided by the police department.

B. Upon satisfactory inspection, the police department shall notify the finance department of vehicle approval.

C. Vehicles shall be inspected at least once a year at a time and place scheduled with the police department.

D. Any additional or replacement vehicles must be inspected before being used as a taxicab or for-hire vehicle.

E. It is unlawful for an owner or driver to operate a taxicab or for-hire vehicle without a current, valid, inspection. Violation shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided in BMC 1.24.020.

F. It is the responsibility of the owner to maintain all taxicabs or for-hire vehicles in compliance with the requirements of RCW Title 46, WAC Titles 204 and 308, and municipal vehicle ordinances at all times.

G. Vehicles are subject to inspection by the police department upon verified complaint of a citizen, or on a police officer’s reasonable suspicion of violation of any state or municipal traffic or vehicle equipment law.

H. Failure to comply with state vehicle requirements of RCW Title 46, WAC Titles 204 and 308, and municipal vehicle ordinance requirements is cause for a vehicle to be suspended from use until compliance is met. To prove compliance, the vehicle must be reinspected by the police department. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.130 For-hire vehicle driver’s license.

It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, or use any vehicle as a for-hire vehicle unless such person is the holder of a valid for-hire vehicle driver’s license issued to him in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.140 Qualifications for for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

No for-hire vehicle driver’s license shall be issued to any person unless said person shall:

A. Possess an unrestricted valid Washington State driver’s license for a period of no less than three years;

B. Be able to speak, read, and write the English language;

C. Be not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics;

D. Not have been convicted of an offense involving moral turpitude, nor within a period of one year prior to his or her application for a taxicab driver’s license have been convicted of the offense of driving while under the influence of or affected by the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, or the offense of reckless driving. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.150 Application for for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

Each applicant for a for-hire vehicle driver’s license shall fill out in detail an application form provided by the city, which shall answer each of the requirements set forth in BMC 5.08.140 and, in addition thereto, shall state the applicant’s full name; place of residence at the time of application and for a period of two years prior thereto; age; color; height; color of eyes; hair; place of birth; length of time a resident of the city; whether a citizen or non-citizen; last place of employment; whether he or she has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; whether he or she has been previously licensed as a driver and if so, when and where; and whether such license has ever been suspended or revoked and for what cause. Said application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the city as a permanent record and shall contain the names and addresses of four persons, not relatives, who have known the applicant for at least two years last past. Each applicant shall present to the finance director satisfactory evidence of his or her fitness and ability to operate a for-hire vehicle. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.160 Issuance of for-hire vehicle driver’s license.

The chief of police shall review the applicant’s request and application for a for-hire vehicle driver’s license and shall investigate the statements contained therein and obtain such other information as he deems necessary concerning the applicant’s character, integrity, personal habits, past conduct, and general qualifications, as well as show the applicant’s ability and skill as a driver of a for-hire vehicle and whether the applicant is a suitable person to drive such for-hire vehicle. If the chief of police determines that the for-hire vehicle driver’s license should be issued or renewed, there shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee. For-hire vehicle driver’s licenses shall be issued for the calendar year. If the chief of police determines that a for-hire vehicle driver’s license should not be issued or renewed, he shall notify the applicant and the finance director thereof in writing, setting forth the reasons for such rejection. Any applicant whose for-hire vehicle driver’s license is rejected may appeal to the city administrator, who may exercise his or her discretion in granting or renewing such license. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.170 For-hire vehicle driver’s license fee.

The fee for a for-hire vehicle driver’s license shall be in an amount determined by resolution of the city council for the following activities: first year for which said license is issued and per annum for renewals of such license. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.180 Suspension and revocation of driver’s license.

Any driver’s license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be automatically suspended for a period of 90 days on the first conviction of the holder thereof of any of the following misdemeanors: driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or reckless driving; violation of any law involving the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; or violation of any law involving prostitution, indecent exposure, or any lewd or immoral acts. On the second conviction of one or more of these offenses, such license shall be automatically revoked for a period of six months. Any driver’s license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be automatically revoked for a period of six months on the conviction of any felony or the violation of any law involving the sale, use, distribution, manufacture, or transportation of narcotics. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.190 Liability insurance.

A. Prior to the issuance of any taxicab or for-hire vehicle license, every applicant shall file with the finance department the policy or policies of public liability insurance, approved as to sufficiency by the finance department, issued by an insurance company or companies indemnity for or protection to the city, as well as providing public authorization to do business in the state of Washington, providing liability insurance coverage for each and every taxicab or for-hire vehicle owned, operated and/or leased by the applicant, for injury to or death of persons, passengers, or otherwise, in accidents resulting from any cause by which the owner of the vehicle would be liable on account of any liability imposed upon him by law, regardless of whether the taxicab or for-hire vehicle was being driven by the owner or his agent. Such insurance shall be in the sum of $100,000 for the injury or death of one person, or $300,000 for the injury or death of more than one person in any one accident, and $50,000 for property damage.

B. Every such policy of insurance shall continue to the full amount thereof notwithstanding any recovery thereon and shall provide that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured. Each insurance policy required under this section shall extend for the period covered by the license applied for and the insurer shall be obliged to give not less than 10 days’ written notice to the finance department in the event of change or cancellation. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


5.08.200 Enforcement.

Any police officer may enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. Failure to produce a license shall constitute probable cause for enforcement action. (Ord. 1620 § 1, 2007).


Chapter 5.12 UTILITY OCCUPATION LICENSES

Sections:

5.12.010    Exercise of revenue license power.

5.12.020    Definitions.

5.12.030    Required.

5.12.035    Quarterly installments – Due date.

5.12.040    Application.

5.12.050    Expiration.

5.12.060    Applications and returns not public – Inspection authorized when.

5.12.070    Fee schedule.

5.12.080    Deductions.

5.12.090    Recordkeeping.

5.12.100    Right of entry for inspection.

5.12.110    Overpayment of tax.

5.12.120    Liability.

5.12.125    Annexation – Copies of ordinance provided.

5.12.126    Referendum procedure.

5.12.130    Violation – Penalty.


5.12.010 Exercise of revenue license power.

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as exercise of the power of the city to license for revenue. (Ord. 459 § 1, 1947).


5.12.020 Definitions.

In constructing this chapter, except when otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, the following definitions shall be applied:

A. “Competitive telephone service” means the providing by any person of telephone equipment, apparatus, or service, other than toll service, which is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under Title 80 RCW and for which a separate charge is made.

B. “Gross income” means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible property or service, and receipts (including all sums earned or charged which are collected) by reason of the investment of capital in the business engaged in, including rentals, royalties, fees or other emoluments however designated, derived wholly within the city (excluding receipts or proceeds from the use or sale of personal property constituting plant or equipment not sold in the ordinary course of trade or any interest therein, and proceeds and receipts from the sale of notes, bonds, mortgages or other evidences of indebtedness, or shares of stock and the like) and without any deductions on account of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest paid or any expense whatsoever, and without any deduction on account of losses.

C. “Person” or “persons” means person or persons of either sex, firms, copartnerships, corporations and other associations of natural persons, whether acting by themselves or by servants, agents or employees.

D. “Taxpayer” means any person liable to the license fee or tax imposed by this chapter.

E. “Tax year” or “taxable year” means the calendar year commencing on January 1st and ending on the last day of December, or, in place thereof, the taxpayer’s fiscal year when permission is obtained from the city clerk-treasurer to use the same as his tax period.

F. “Telephone business” means the business of providing access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, or coin telephone services, or providing telephonic, video, data, or similar communication or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, or similar communication or transmission system. It includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating an exchange. Telephone business does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, nor the providing of cable television service.

G. “Telecommunication business,” for the sole purpose of this chapter, means the business of providing access to a wireless phone or pager service. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 2000; Ord. 991 § 1, 1981; Ord. 459 § 2, 1947).


5.12.030 Required.

A. After the first day of January, 1948, no person shall engage in or carry on any business, occupation, pursuit or privilege for which a license fee or tax is imposed by this chapter without first having obtained, and being the holder of a valid and subsisting license to do so, to be known as an “occupation license.”

B. Any taxpayer who engages in, or carries on, any business subject to tax under this chapter without first obtaining his occupation license to do so is guilty of a violation of this chapter for each day during which the business is so engaged in or carried on, and any taxpayer who fails or refuses to pay the license fee or tax, or any part thereof, on or before the due date shall be deemed to be operating without a license. (Ord. 459 § 3, 1947).


5.12.035 Quarterly installments – Due date.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments. Remittance shall be made on or before the 30th day of the month of the next succeeding end of the quarterly period for which the tax accrues, that is on January 30th, April 30th, July 30th, and October 30th of each year. The remittance shall be made to the clerk/treasurer/finance director and accompanied by a return on a form to be provided and prescribed by the clerk/treasurer/finance director. On the return, the taxpayer shall be required to swear or affirm that the information therein given is full and true and that the taxpayer knows the same to be so. (Ord. 1243 § 2, 1993).


5.12.040 Application.

A. On or before February 15th of each tax year, and commencing on or before February 15, 1948, every taxpayer shall apply to the city clerk-treasurer for an occupation license, upon blanks or forms to be prepared and provided by him requesting such information as may be necessary to enable him to arrive at the lawful amount of the fee or tax. The taxpayer shall fill in such form giving the information required and shall sign the same by affidavit swearing or affirming that the information therein given is full and true and that he knows the same to be so.

B. Every such application or return shall be accompanied by a bank draft, certified check or United States money order, payable to the city clerk-treasurer, or by cash, in the amount of the tax or fee required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 459 § 7, 1947).


5.12.050 Expiration.

A. All occupation licenses shall be for the tax year for which issued and shall expire at the end of such tax year.

B. Such occupation license, and the fee or tax therefor, imposed by this chapter, shall be for the year commencing on the first day of January and ending on the last day of December of each year; provided, however, that if the taxpayer in carrying on his business keeps the books reflecting the same for a fiscal year not based on the calendar year, he may, with the consent of the city clerk-treasurer, obtain his license for the period of his current fiscal year, which shall be deemed his tax year, and pay the fee or tax computed upon his gross income made during his fiscal year next proceeding his tax year covering his accounting period as shown by his method of keeping the books of the business. (Ord. 459 § 4, 1947).


5.12.060 Applications and returns not public – Inspection authorized when.

The applications or returns made to the city clerk-treasurer, pursuant to this chapter, shall not be made public, nor shall they be subject to the inspection of any person except the mayor, city attorney, clerk-treasurer, or his agent and members of the city council. (Ord. 459 § 10, 1947).


5.12.070 Fee schedule.

There is hereby levied and shall be collected by the city of Burlington annual license fees or occupation taxes from the person on account of the business activities and in the amounts to be determined by the rates against gross income, as follows:

A. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on a telephone business, a fee or tax equal to six percent per annum of the total gross income from local service revenues in the city of Burlington. Such gross income shall include the revenue from intrastate toll services. Gross income shall, for the purpose of taxation under this section, not include charges which are passed on to the subscribers by a telephone company pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to compensate for the cost to the company of the tax imposed by this chapter.

B. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing electric light and power, or either, a fee or tax equal to three percent per annum of the total gross income from such business in the city of Burlington; provided, however, that in determining gross income such person may exclude from gross income any and all income received from the sale of electric light and power, or either, to manufacturers at industrial rates, and any and all income derived from the sale of merchandise in the retail trade.

C. This tax is suspended until December 31, 2019. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing water for industrial, business, residential, or other use, a fee or tax equal to two percent of the total gross income from such business in the city of Burlington. 

D. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing heat to consumers, furnished in a central heating plant or elsewhere, a fee or tax equal to three percent of the total gross income from such business in the city of Burlington.

E. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on the business of selling or furnishing natural or bottled gas or either, a fee or tax equal to three percent per annum of the total gross income from such business in the city of Burlington.

F. Upon every person engaged in or carrying on a telecommunication business, a fee or tax equal to six percent per annum of the total gross income from local service revenues in the city of Burlington. Gross income shall, for the purpose of taxation under this section, not include charges which are passed on to the subscribers by a telecommunication company pursuant to tariffs required by regulatory order to compensate for the cost to the company of the tax imposed by this chapter. See BMC 5.12.020(G) for definition of “telecommunication business” for the sole purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1864 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1847 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1834 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1826 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1807 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1772 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1446 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1423 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1411 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1243 § 1, 1993; Ord. 991 § 2, 1981; 



Ord. 657 § 1, 1965; Ord. 571 § 1, 1959; Ord. 459 § 5, 1947).


5.12.080 Deductions.

There shall be excepted and deducted from the total gross income upon which the license fee or tax is computed so much thereof as is derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce, or from business done for the United States and the state, or their officers or agents, and any amount or amounts paid by the taxpayer to the United States, the state, the city, or to any political subdivision of said state, as excise taxes levied or imposed upon the sale or distribution of property or services, or as an occupation tax. (Ord. 459 § 6, 1947).


5.12.090 Recordkeeping.

Each taxpayer shall keep books or records reflecting the amount of his gross income, and such books or records shall at reasonable times be open to the inspection of the city clerk-treasurer, or agent, for verification of the taxpayer’s return or application. (Ord. 459 § 9, 1947).


5.12.100 Right of entry for inspection.

If any taxpayer fails to apply for a license or make his return, or if the city clerk-treasurer is dissatisfied with any return, said officer, or agent, may enter the premises of such taxpayer at any reasonable time to inspect his books and records and may examine any person under oath administered by him, or his agent, touching the matters inquired into, or said officer, or agent, may fix a time for the investigation of the correctness of the return, and may issue a subpoena to the taxpayer; or any person, to attend upon such investigation and there testify under oath administered by such officer or agent in regard to the matters inquired into, and may by subpoena require him, or any person, to bring with him such books, records, and papers as may be necessary for the investigation. (Ord. 459 § 11, 1947).


5.12.110 Overpayment of tax.

Any taxpayer who has overpaid taxes due the city under this chapter may submit a petition for a refund in accordance with chapter 3.68 BMC. (Ord. 1762 § 4, 2012; Ord. 459 § 12, 1947).


5.12.120 Liability.

If any taxpayer fails to apply for a license, or make his return, or to pay the fee or tax therefor, or any part thereof, within three days after the same becomes due, the city clerk-treasurer shall ascertain the amount of the fee or tax and shall notify such taxpayer thereof, who shall be liable therefor in any suit or action by the city for the collection thereof. (Ord. 459 § 13, 1947).


5.12.125 Annexation – Copies of ordinance provided.

Whenever the boundaries of the city are extended by annexation, all persons, firms and corporations subject to this chapter will be provided copies of the annexation ordinance by the city. (Ord. 1243 § 3, 1993).


5.12.126 Referendum procedure.

This chapter shall be subject to a referendum procedure. Any referendum petition to repeal this chapter or alter the rate of the tax authorized by this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk/finance director within seven days of passage of this chapter. The city clerk/ finance director, within 10 days, shall then confer with the petitioner concerning form and style of the petition, issue an identification number for the petition, and write a ballot title for the measure. The ballot title shall be posed as a question so that an affirmative answer to the question and an affirmative vote on the measure will result in the tax or tax rate increase being imposed and a negative answer to the question and a negative vote on the measure will result in the tax or tax rate increase not being imposed. The petitioner shall be notified of the identification number and ballot title within this 10-day period.

After notification, the petitioner shall have 30 days in which to secure on petition forms the signatures of not less than 15 percent of the registered voters of the city, and to file the signed petitions with the city clerk/finance director. Each petition form shall contain the ballot title and the full text of the measure to be referred. The city clerk/finance director shall verify the sufficiency of the signatures on the petitions. If sufficient valid signatures are properly submitted, the city clerk/finance director shall submit the referendum measure to the city voters at a general or special election held on one of the dates provided in RCW 29.13.010 as determined by the city council. This election shall not take place later than 120 days after the signed petition has been filed with the city clerk/finance director. (Ord. 1243 § 4, 1993).


5.12.130 Violation – Penalty.

A. It is unlawful for any person liable to tax or fee under this chapter to fail or refuse to make application or return for a license, or to neglect or refuse to pay the fee or tax when due, or for any person to make any false or fraudulent application or return, or any false statement or representation in, or in connection with, any such application or return, or in any manner to fail to comply with the provisions hereof, or in any manner to hinder or delay the city, or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 459 §§ 14, 16, 1947).


Chapter 5.16 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS

Sections:

5.16.010    Purpose.

5.16.020    Definitions.

5.16.030    Exemptions.

5.16.040    License – Required.

5.16.050    License – Application – Contents – Fee.

5.16.060    Investigation of application – License to be issued when.

5.16.070    License – Fees.

5.16.080    Religious, charitable and nonprofit organizations.

5.16.090    Receipt or contract – Cancellation of transaction.

5.16.100    False, deceptive or misleading statements.

5.16.110    Disclosure of information – Misrepresentation prohibited.

5.16.120    Obstruction of street or sidewalk prohibited.

5.16.130    Violation – Penalty.


5.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing of peddlers and solicitors and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1022 § 1, 1983).


5.16.020 Definitions.

When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

A. “Hawker” includes every person, either as principal or agent, selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, articles, things, or personal property of whatever name, nature, or description, by peddling the same from house to house, upon any street, highway, or public place, who shall make public outcry or give any musical or other public entertainment, to make any public speech to draw customers or attract notice.

B. “Peddler” includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.

C. “Solicitor” includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares, periodicals, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders. Such definition includes any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies a building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, apartment, shop or other place within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery; provided, that those persons soliciting orders for goods to be shipped interstate are not included. (Ord. 1759 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1022 § 2, 1983).


5.16.030 Exemptions.

A. The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of:

1. Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles;

2. Newsboys;

3. Persons conducting nonprofessional garage sales;

4. Farmers, gardeners or other persons insofar as their conduct is exempted or authorized by RCW 36.71.090 or any other Washington state statute;

5. Any “mobile vendor,” as that term is defined in chapter 5.30 BMC, that is also licensed under that same chapter.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or limit any sale required by statute or any bona fide auction sale pursuant to law. (Ord. 1759 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1022 § 3, 1983).


5.16.040 License – Required.

It is unlawful for any peddler, hawker, solicitor or transient merchant, as defined in BMC 5.16.020, to engage in any business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1022 § 4, 1983).


5.16.050 License – Application – Contents – Fee.

A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the city clerk-treasurer a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk-treasurer which shall give the following information:

1. Name and physical description of the applicant;

2. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which the proposed sales will be made;

3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;

4. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;

5. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired, including dates and times of operation;

6. The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;

7. A recent photograph of the applicant which shall be approximately two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

8. The names of at least two property owners of Skagit County, Washington, who will certify as to the applicant’s good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to evaluate properly such character and business responsibility;

9. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;

10. The last cities or towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and the addresses from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.

B. At the time of filing the application, a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city clerk-treasurer to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. (Ord. 1688 § 3, 2009; Ord. 1022 § 5, 1983).


5.16.060 Investigation of application – License to be issued when.

A. The city clerk-treasurer shall institute such investigation of the application for such length of time as he deems necessary and shall be entitled to the assistance of the chief of police; provided, that the period of investigation shall not exceed seven days from the date application is made for such license.

B. If the result of such investigation is satisfactory, a license shall be issued to the applicant which must be used only by the person to whom issued.

C. Facsimile of Licenses for Employees. Each licensee which employs, hires, or engages others to act as peddlers or solicitors shall furnish as credentials to each employee, agent, independent contractor or other person peddling or soliciting for or on behalf of such licensee a facsimile copy of its license upon which shall appear the typed or printed name and address, and the signature of the person to whom such facsimile copy is issued. Such facsimile copies may be obtained from the city clerk-treasurer upon payment of the fee per copy in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. A licensee shall be responsible for the conduct and acts performed within the scope of employment or contract of any person peddling or soliciting for or on behalf of the licensee and shall maintain a list of all persons to whom facsimile copies of its license have been issued. It is unlawful for any licensee, or any person to whom such facsimile copy is required to be issued, to peddle or solicit without having in his possession such license or a facsimile copy thereof, which shall be shown to all prospective buyers, or to any police officer or licensed officer of the city upon the request of such officer. Such facsimile copies shall be nontransferable and shall at all times remain in the possession of the person to whom issued. Whenever any person to whom a facsimile copy has been issued by a licensee ceases to act as a peddler or solicitor for or on behalf of such licensee, notification thereof shall be given to the city clerk-treasurer by the licensee and the facsimile copy issued to such person shall be surrendered to the city clerk-treasurer by the licensee within two weeks of such notification. (Ord. 1688 § 4, 2009; Ord. 1022 § 6, 1983).


5.16.070 License – Fees.

The license fee for any of the licenses required under BMC 5.16.040 shall be in an amount set forth by resolution of the city council. The application fee established in BMC 5.16.050 paid to the city clerk-treasurer at the time the application is made as set out above shall be deemed to cover costs of investigation and shall in no event be returned even though the license is not granted; also, no credit shall be given on the license fee as herein set out for payment of the application fee. (Ord. 1688 § 5, 2009; Ord. 1132 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1022 § 7, 1983).


5.16.080 Religious, charitable and nonprofit organizations.

Any charitable, religious or nonprofit organization which has received tax exempt status under IRC paragraph 501(c)(3), 26 USCA 501 (c)(3), as adopted or hereafter amended shall be exempt from BMC 5.16.070 upon filing a copy of such tax exemption with the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 1022 § 8, 1983).


5.16.090 Receipt or contract – Cancellation of transaction.

A. Every sale made or order taken by a peddler or solicitor required to be licensed by this chapter shall be evidenced by a signed receipt, contract, or other signed memorandum of the transaction, which shall be given to the purchaser. Such receipt, contract, or memorandum shall state the date and terms of the transaction, the amount of any payment made, the name and address of the peddler or solicitor, and in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for the signature of the buyer, or on the front page of the receipt if a contract is not used, and in bold face type of a minimum size of 10 points, the following notice:

NOTICE TO BUYER

YOU, THE BUYER, MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO MIDNIGHT OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF THIS TRANSACTION. SEE THE ATTACHED NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS RIGHT.

The seller must furnish each buyer, at the time he signs any sales contract or otherwise buys or agrees to buy goods or services from the seller, a completed form in duplicate, captioned “NOTICE OF CANCELLATION,” which shall be attached to the contract, receipt, or memorandum and easily detachable and which shall contain in 10-point bold type the following information and statements in the same language (e.g., Spanish) as that used in such contract, receipt or memorandum:

NOTICE OF CANCELLATION (enter date of transaction)

YOU MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY PENALTY OR OBLIGATION, WITHIN THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE.

IF YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER THE CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU WILL BE RETURNED WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE SELLER OF YOUR CANCELLATION NOTICE AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE TRANSACTION WILL BE CANCELLED. IF YOU CANCEL, YOU MUST MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AT YOUR RESIDENCE, IN SUBSTANTIALLY AS GOOD CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY GOODS DELIVERED TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT OF SALE; OR YOU MAY IF YOU WISH, COMPLY WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE SELLER REGARDING THE RETURN SHIPMENT OF THE GOODS AT THE SELLER’S EXPENSE AND RISK. IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO RETURN THE GOODS TO THE SELLER OR IF THE SELLER DOES NOT PICK THEM UP WITHIN 20 DAYS OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE OF CANCELLATION, YOU MAY RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE GOODS WITHOUT ANY FURTHER OBLIGATION.

TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF THIS CANCELLATION NOTICE OR ANY OTHER WRITTEN NOTICE, OR SEND A TELEGRAM TO (Name of Seller) ______________________________

AT ___________________________ (Address of seller’s place of business) ______________________________

NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT OF ________________ (Date)

I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION

________________ (Date)

________________ (Buyer’s Signature)

B. The sending of any such notice of cancellation within the specified period shall operate to cancel the purchase made or contract entered into, and the seller shall thereupon, without request, refund to the buyer any deposit or payment made, and in accordance with such notice of cancellation may reclaim from the buyer at the place of delivery any goods received by the buyer under such purchase or contract. (Ord. 1022 § 9, 1983).


5.16.100 False, deceptive or misleading statements.

It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make or cause to be made, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of selling or procuring an order for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, services, or anything of value, any assertion, representation, or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading. (Ord. 1022 § 10, 1983).


5.16.110 Disclosure of information – Misrepresentation prohibited.

Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting for the sale of goods or services at the residence of a prospective buyer, shall at the outset disclose to the prospective buyer his name and the company or product he represents, and if requested to do so shall immediately leave the premises. It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make any assertion, representation or statement of fact which misrepresents the purposes for his call, or to use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents such purpose. (Ord. 1022 § 11, 1983).


5.16.120 Obstruction of street or sidewalk prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person, either selling, or offering for sale, any article, by peddling or soliciting in any place, to obstruct or cause to be obstructed, the passage of any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or any other public place, by causing people to congregate at or near the place where any article is being sold or offered for sale. (Ord. 1022 § 12, 1983).


5.16.130 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $500.00. Each and every person guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of Burlington is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 1022 § 13, 1983).


Chapter 5.20 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS

Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Legislative intent.

5.20.030    Exemptions.

5.20.040    Recordkeeping required.

5.20.050    Report to chief of police.

5.20.060    Inspection of records and goods required.

5.20.070    Retention of property – In pledge.

5.20.080    Retention of property – On consignment.

5.20.090    Duties upon notification that property is reported stolen.

5.20.100    License – Required when – Fee – Expiration date – Renewal.

5.20.110    Revocation of license.

5.20.115    License – Display.

5.20.120    Criminal convictions.

5.20.130    Violations deemed gross misdemeanors – Designated.

5.20.140    Violations – Penalty.


5.20.010 Definitions.

The definitions set forth in this section shall apply throughout this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

A. “Loan period” means the period of time from the date the loan is made until the date the loan is paid off, the loan is in default, or the loan is refinanced and new loan documents are issued, including all grace or extenuation periods.

B. “Melted metals” means metals derived from metal junk or precious metals that have been reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots which are produced from ore that has not previously been processed.

C. “Metal junk” means any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious metals.

D. “Nonmetal junk” means any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has outlasted its usefulness as intended in its original form except nonmetal junk does not include an item made in a former period which has enhanced value because of its age.

E. “Pawnbroker” means every person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of loaning money on the security of pledges, of personal property, or deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of personal property.

F. “Precious metals” means gold, silver, and platinum.

G. “Secondhand dealer” means every person engaged in whole or in part in the business of purchasing, selling, trading, consignment selling, or otherwise transferring for value, secondhand property including metal junk, melted metals, and precious metals, whether or not the person maintains a fixed place of business within the state. “Secondhand dealer” also includes persons or entities conducting business at flea markets or swap meets more than three times per year.

H. “Secondhand property” means any item of personal property offered for sale which is not new, including metals in any form, except postage stamps, coins that are legal tender, bullion in the form of fabricated hallmarked bars, used books and clothing of a resale value of $75.00 or less, except furs.

I. “Transaction” means a pledge, or the purchase of, or consignment of, or the trade of any item of personal property by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer from a member of the general public. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.020 Legislative intent.

The city council intends to enact this chapter to provide restrictions that are supplemental to those set forth in chapter 19.60 RCW. The provisions of this chapter are intended to address circumstances unique to the city of Burlington. It is not the intent of this chapter to reduce or otherwise abrogate the requirements of any applicable state law. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.030 Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to transactions conducted by the following:

A. Motor vehicle dealers licensed under chapter 46.70 RCW;

B. Vehicle wreckers or hulk haulers licensed under chapter 46.79 or 46.80 RCW;

C. Persons giving an allowance for the trade-in or exchange of secondhand property on the purchase of other merchandise of the same kind of greater value; and

D. Persons in the business of buying or selling empty food and beverage containers or metal or nonmetal junk. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.040 Recordkeeping required.

A. Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer doing business in the city shall maintain, wherever that business is conducted, a record which shall be legibly written in the English language, at the time of each transaction, containing the following:

1. The signature of the person with whom the transaction is made;

2. The date of the transaction;

3. The name of the person or employee conducting the transaction;

4. The name, date of birth, gender, height, weight, race, address, and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;

5. A complete description of the property pledged, bought, or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials or engravings, size, patterns and color, or stone or stones, and in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether it is a pistol, rifle, or shotgun;

6. The price paid or the amount loaned;

7. The type and identifying number of identification used by the person with whom the transaction is made, which shall consist of a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state or two pieces of identification issued by a governmental agency, one of which shall be descriptive of the person identified. At all times, one piece of current government-issued picture identification will be required; and

8. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the store identification as designated by the applicable law enforcement agency, or the name and address of the business, the name of the person or employee of the business conducting the transaction, and the location of the property.

B. The record shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business, or at reasonable times if ordinary hours of business are not kept, be open to the inspection of any commissioned law enforcement officer of the state or any of its political subdivisions, and shall be maintained wherever that business is conducted for three years following the date of the transaction. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.050 Report to chief of police.

A. Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer in the city of Burlington shall, before 5:00 p.m. on each working day, furnish to the chief of police, on such forms as may be provided and in such format as may be required by the chief of police, a full, true, and correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted on the preceding working day. This information shall be transmitted to the chief of police or his designee by electronic transmission through a modem or similar device, for identifying and tracing lost, stolen, and sought-after property, subject to the requirements of and approval by the chief of police.

1. Pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers shall report their transactions electronically to the chief of police as required by BMC 5.20.040(A) commencing on a date 30 days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

2. The police chief may, for good cause shown, grant a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer an extension of the otherwise applicable deadline set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section to a date not later than January 1, 2008. An extension may only be granted upon application by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, upon a showing that the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer is making satisfactory progress toward acquiring computer programs and equipment to make the necessary transmission, and upon agreement by the pawnbroker to pay the city a fee adopted by city council resolution reported after the otherwise applicable deadline to offset the Burlington police department’s costs in converting the data from paper format into electronic form.

The chief of police shall establish the format and requirements for the transmission of data and may restrict the scope of items that are to be electronically reported. A transaction that is reported by electronic transmission under subsection (A) of this section should not be reported on paper forms unless the chief of police so requests.

B. If, after establishing the format and requirements for the transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the chief of police alters the required format, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall be given at least 30 days to comply with the new format requirements.

C. If a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer has good cause to believe that any property in his or her possession has been previously lost or stolen, the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall promptly report that fact to the Burlington police, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom it was received. (Ord. 1799 § 7, 2014; Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.060 Inspection of records and goods required.

Pawnbrokers’ and secondhand dealers’ records, and all goods received, shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business be open to inspection by a commissioned law enforcement officer of the city. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.070 Retention of property – In pledge.

Property bought or received on consignment by any pawnbroker secondhand shall not be removed from the pawnbroker’s or secondhand dealer’s place of business within 30 days after the receipt of the property, except when redeemed by the owner. Property shall at all times during the ordinary hours of business be open to inspection to any commissioned law enforcement officer of the City. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.080 Retention of property – On consignment.

Property bought or received on consignment by a secondhand dealer with a permanent place of business in the city shall not be removed from that place of business, except consigned property returned to the owner, within 30 days after the receipt of the property. 

Property bought or received on consignment by a secondhand dealer without a permanent place of business in the state shall be held within the city, except consigned property returned to the owner, for 30 days after receipt of the property. The property shall be available within the appropriate jurisdiction for inspection at reasonable times by any commissioned law enforcement officer of the city. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.090 Duties upon notification that property is reported stolen.

A. Following notification from a law enforcement agency that an item of property has been reported as stolen, the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall hold that property intact and safe from alteration, damage, or commingling, and release such property to law enforcement officers for use in the investigation of a crime. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall place an identifying tag or other suitable identification upon the property so held. Property held shall not be released for 120 days from the date of police notification unless released by written consent of the applicable law enforcement agency or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. In cases where the applicable law enforcement agency has placed a verbal hold on an item, that agency must then give written notice within 10 business days. If such written notice is not received within that period of time, then the hold order will cease. The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall give 20 days’ notice before the expiration of the 120-day holding period to the applicable law enforcement agency about the stolen property. If notice is not given within 20 days, then the hold on the property shall continue for an additional 120 days. The applicable law enforcement agency may renew the holding period for an additional 120-day period, as necessary. After the receipt of notification from a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, if an additional holding period is required, the applicable law enforcement agency shall give the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer written notice, prior to the expiration of the existing hold order. A law enforcement agency shall not place on hold any item of personal property unless that agency suspects that the item of personal property is a lost or stolen item. Any hold that is placed on an item will be removed as soon as practicable after the item on hold is determined by the law enforcement agency not to be stolen or lost.

B. Property seized by a law enforcement agency from a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer and used in the investigation and/or prosecution of a crime shall be returned to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer at such time as the property is no longer needed in the investigation and/or prosecution of the crime; provided, that such property deemed by the law enforcement agency to be stolen shall be returned to the owner of such property; provided, that before such property is returned to the owner thereof, the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be notified of the superior claim of an owner and provided 10 business days’ notice to contest the release of the property in a hearing to be held by the chief law enforcement officer of the law enforcement agency. In such event, the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer hearing shall request such hearing in writing. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.100 License – Required when – Fee – Expiration date – Renewal.

Any person, firm, or corporation engaging in the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the corporate limits of the city of Burlington shall procure from the city finance director a city business license pursuant to chapter 5.04 BMC with a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker endorsement. “Secondhand dealer” includes any business that buys used goods for resale or recycling. Each employee handling such transactions is required to have a background check in order to have a license issued under this code. Such license shall be obtained annually. The fee for such license shall be in an amount determined by resolution of the city council, regardless of the date on which the license is issued. The license shall expire at midnight on the thirty-first day of December of each year and must be renewed prior to expiration. (Ord. 1688 § 6, 2009; Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.110 Revocation of license.

A. The finance director may deny a license to any applicant or may suspend all licenses of any holder when such person, or any person with an interest in the application for or holder of such license:

1. Has obtained a pawnbroker’s or secondhand dealer’s endorsement license by fraud, misrepresentation, concealment, or through inadvertence or mistake;

2. Has failed to pay its pawnbroker or secondhand dealer endorsement license fee pursuant to this chapter; or

3. Has violated any conditions of this chapter, or of chapter 19.60 RCW.

A licensee shall have their license suspended for 30 days for the first violation; 90 days for the second violation; and upon the third violation in a 12-month period, the pawnbroker and/or secondhand dealer endorsement license shall be revoked.

B. Any licensee requesting an appeal of the denial, suspension or revocation of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer endorsement license may do so in writing, specifying their objections, and filing such appeal with the finance director of the city of Burlington. The finance director will, within 14 days of receiving such notice of appeal, conduct an administrative hearing on the matter appealed. The licensee shall be given at least five days’ notice prior to the hearing, excluding weekends and holidays. The finance director is hereby authorized to adopt reasonable rules by which the appeal hearing may be conducted. All decisions of the finance director are final, and appeal from there may be taken to superior court. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.115 License – Display.1

A person holding a pawnbroker’s or secondhand dealer’s license from the city of Burlington shall prominently display the license at the place of business of the licensee. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.120 Criminal convictions.

No person, firm, or corporation shall be eligible to receive a license as provided in BMC 5.20.100 if such person, or any employee of such firm or corporation, has been convicted of any violation of RCW 9A.52.020 through 9A.52.060 (burglary); any violation of chapter 9A.56 RCW (robbery, theft, possession of, or receiving, stolen property, trafficking in stolen property, vehicle prowl); any violation of chapter 9A.60 RCW (fraud); any violation of chapter 9A.68 RCW (bribery and corrupt influence); any violation of chapter 9A.72 RCW (perjury); any violation of chapter 9A.82 RCW (criminal profiteering); any violation of chapter 9A.83 RCW (money laundering); or any violation of chapter 69.50 RCW constituting a felony (drug violations) within the preceding 10 years, whether such person was acting on his or her own behalf or as the agent of another. For the purposes of this section, offenses committed in states other than Washington that are substantially similar to those offenses identified herein shall be construed as being identical to violations of Washington law and shall render the individual committing the offense ineligible to receive a license as if the offense had been committed in Washington. The license of any pawnbroker shall be immediately revoked upon receipt of information by the city that such person, or any employee of any such firm or corporation, licensed as a pawnbroker has been convicted of any of the offenses identified in this section within the preceding 10 years, whether such person was acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another. In the event of a revocation of a license under the provisions of this section, there shall be no rebate of any license fee, or portion of any license fee. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.130 Violations deemed gross misdemeanors – Designated.

It is a gross misdemeanor for:

A. Any person to remove, alter, or obliterate any manufacturer’s make, model or serial number, personal identification number or identifying marks engraved or etched upon an item of personal property that is purchased, consigned, or received in pledge;

B. Any person to knowingly make, cause, or allow to be made any false entry or misstatement of any material matter, or to knowingly fail to make entry of any material matter, in any book, record, or writing required to be kept under this chapter;

C. Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to receive any property from any person under the age of 18 years, any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or any person known to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer as having been convicted of any violation of RCW 9A.52.020 through 9A.52.060 (burglary); any violation of chapter 9A.56 RCW (robbery, theft, possession of, or receiving, stolen property, trafficking in stolen property, vehicle prowl); any violation of chapter 9A.60 RCW (fraud); any violation of chapter 9A.68 RCW (bribery and corrupt influence); and violation of chapter 9A.72 RCW (perjury); any violation of chapter 9A.82 RCW (criminal profiteering); any violation of chapter 9A.83 RCW (money laundering); or any violation of chapter 69.50 RCW (drug violations) constituting a felony within the last 10 years whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another;

D. Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to refuse to allow any prosecuting authority or any peace office or officer of the city to inspect his or her records, or any goods received and in his or her possession during the ordinary hours of business;

E. Any person to fail to immediately notify the chief of police of the possession of any property which he or she may have good cause to believe has been lost or stolen, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom the same was received by him or her;

F. Any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without first having procured a current annual license;

G. Any pawnbroker to engage in the business of cashing or selling checks, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose unless the pawnbroker complies with the provisions of chapter 31.45 RCW; or

H. Any person to knowingly violate any other provision of this chapter or chapter 19.60 RCW. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).


5.20.140 Violations – Penalty.

A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter, other than those violations set forth in BMC 5.20.130, shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B. Any violation of any provision set forth in this chapter that is specifically identified as a gross misdemeanor, including those violations set forth in BMC 5.20.130, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or imprisonment of less than one year, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1621 § 1, 2007).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1621 adds the provisions of this section as Section 5.20.110. The section has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering. 


Chapter 5.24 AMUSEMENT CENTERS

Sections:

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    License – Required.

5.24.030    License – Conditions.

5.24.040    Repealed.

5.24.050    License – Application.

5.24.060    License – Fees.

5.24.070    Inspection of premises.

5.24.080    Repealed.

5.24.090    Repealed.

5.24.100    Repealed.

5.24.110    Operator and licensee requirements.

5.24.120    Visibility and access requirements.

5.24.130    Compliance with federal and state laws.

5.24.140    Conduct on premises.

5.24.150    License – Denial.

5.24.160    License – Revocation.

5.24.170    Violation – Penalty.


5.24.010 Definitions.

The following terms, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

A. “Mechanical or electronic amusement devices” means any machine, device or game which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, permits a person or operator of the same to use the device as a game, contest of skill or amusement, whether or not registering a score, which may cause a person or operator of the same to secure some amusement, enjoyment or entertainment, and which is not a gambling device or a device which tends to encourage gambling. It shall include, but not be limited to, pinball machines, skill ball, bowling machines, or any other mechanical or electronic games or operations similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.

B. “Operator” means any owner or lessee of such mechanical or electronic games who installs or maintains the same in any place of business which is not his own or under his direct control where the same can be played or operated by persons in the same place.

C. “Proprietor” means the person in whose place of business any such mechanical or electronic amusement device is placed for the use, amusement, patronage or recreating of the public or of persons in or about such place.

D. “Person” means any corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership, club, society or individual.

E. “School” means any educational institution, public, private, secular, or parochial which offers instruction of high school grade or below.

F. “Street” means any street, alley, way, boulevard, or road, either public or private, that is used or to be used for ingress or egress.

G. “Amusement center” means any establishment operated for profit which houses mechanical or electronic amusement devices. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 1, 1988).


5.24.020 License – Required.

It is unlawful for any person to maintain or display, for public patronage, or otherwise keep for operation by the public, any mechanical or electronic amusement device without first obtaining a license issued under the terms and conditions of this chapter. The license shall be issued to a specific person, firm or corporation for a specific location. (Ord. 1337 § 3, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 2, 1988).


5.24.030 License – Conditions.

A license issued under this chapter:

A. Is an annual license which expires December 31st of each year unless it is suspended or revoked earlier;

B. Is effective for a single place of business only;

C. Vests no property right in the licensee except to maintain or display for public patronage, and license the use of skill or pleasure devices in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter;

D. Is not assignable or transferable;

E. Is to be displayed on the business premises and such display shall be permanent and conspicuous. (Ord. 1337 § 4, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 3, 1988).


5.24.040 License – Maximum number allowed.

Repealed by Ord. 1337. (Ord. 1124 § 4, 1988).


5.24.050 License – Application.

The application for a license shall be made to the clerk/finance director on such forms as the clerk/finance director may require. (Ord. 1337 § 6, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 5, 1988).


5.24.060 License – Fees.

A. At the time of filing the application for a license, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council for each mechanical or electronic amusement device employed.

B. Any device employed after the date of the initial application which has not paid the fee shall be reported immediately by the proprietor to the clerk/finance director and the fee paid. The nonpayment of fees shall cause the license to be revoked.

C. The license fee shall not be prorated nor shall it be refundable. (Ord. 1688 § 7, 2009; Ord. 1337 § 7, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 6, 1988).


5.24.070 Inspection of premises.

Before any license shall be issued, an investigation of the applicant and an inspection of the premises shall be made by the proper departments of the city and such other agencies as the city may deem necessary to determine whether the applicant and the premises fully comply with applicable ordinances, codes and regulations. Before a license is approved, the city planning/building departments shall determine whether the applicant is providing sufficient off-street parking and sufficient aids and regulations whereby vehicular traffic shall not constitute a nuisance or danger. The standard for such determination, minimum off-street parking facilities, shall be the same as required by the zoning ordinance of the city, with additional facilities for general peak load parking requirements of the business being operated. The building official shall determine whether the premises and the location of the devices permit safe ingress and egress. (Ord. 1337 § 8, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 7, 1988).


5.24.080 Parking facilities.

Repealed by Ord. 1337. (Ord. 1124 § 8, 1988).


5.24.090 Bicycle storage racks.

Repealed by Ord. 1337. (Ord. 1124 § 9, 1988).


5.24.100 Location restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 1337. (Ord. 1124 § 10, 1988).


5.24.110 Operator and licensee requirements.

Each operator or licensee shall:

A. At all times, open each and every portion of the licensed premises for inspection by the police department and/or any other city department for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this chapter.

B. At all times, display the license granted hereunder in a conspicuous place at the licensed establishment.

C. Have present on the premises a responsible employee or owner on duty for the purpose of supervising activities at all times that the premises are open to the public. Said employee shall not have been convicted of a crime involving alcoholic beverages, controlled substances or moral turpitude within the last three years. (Ord. 1337 § 12, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 11, 1988).


5.24.120 Visibility and access requirements.

All mechanical and electronic amusement devices must be visible and the entrance must be unlocked during all times that the premises are open for business. (Ord. 1337 § 13, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 12, 1988).


5.24.130 Compliance with federal and state laws.

Neither this chapter nor any provision herein contained shall include or apply to any act which is made a public offense by the Revised Code of Washington, or by any other law of the state of Washington or of the United States Government; nor shall this chapter or any provision herein contained authorize or permit or be construed as authorizing or permitting the keeping, maintaining, using or operating in the city of any contrivance or device otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 1124 § 13, 1988).


5.24.140 Conduct on premises.

No amusement center operator or licensee, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee shall:

A. Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral or disorderly conduct;

B. Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly persons of any type;

C. Permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises;

D. Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic beverage on the premises unless licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages;

E. Permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including marijuana, on the premises. (Ord. 1337 § 14, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 14, 1988).


5.24.150 License – Denial.

No license shall be issued:

A. Where the individual operator, managing agent of a corporation or active partner or employee has been convicted of a felony involving a controlled substance, alcohol, minors or moral turpitude;

B. For any premises, unless all terms and conditions of this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances are complied with;

C. For any premises that have living quarters with direct entry to the premises;

D. Whenever it is determined that the denial of such license is necessary for the protection, conservation of the character and social and economic stability of the surrounding area. (Ord. 1124 § 15, 1988).


5.24.160 License – Revocation.

The city council shall have the right to revoke any license or deny the annual renewal thereof when it appears to its satisfaction that any operator or licensee has violated this chapter, any other ordinance of the city of Burlington, or statute of the state of Washington, or of the United States, involving controlled substances, alcohol, minors, or any offense involving moral turpitude. The revocation of any license or the denial of a renewal thereof shall not be made without a hearing. The licensee shall be given 30 days’ written notice of the city’s intent to revoke. If during said 30-day period, the licensee addresses the violations to the city’s satisfaction, the city shall not revoke the license. The licensee shall be given prior written notice of the hearing which shall set forth the time and place of the hearing and the reasons for such revocation or denial of renewal of said license. (Ord. 1337 § 16, 1997; Ord. 1124 § 16, 1988).


5.24.170 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. (Ord. 1124 § 17, 1988).


Chapter 5.30 MOBILE VENDORS

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Mobile vendor business – License required – Exemptions.

5.30.030    Display of license.

5.30.040    Restrictions applicable to all mobile vendors.

5.30.050    Mobile food vendor – Restrictions.

5.30.060    Director’s rules.

5.30.070    License application – Contents.

5.30.080    License fee.

5.30.090    Compliance with regulations.

5.30.100    Violation – Penalty.


5.30.010 Definitions.

A. “Cart” means a mobile, nonmotorized vehicle or conveyance which is intended to be pushed, pulled or otherwise used by a mobile vendor for the transport of any food, goods, wares or merchandise of any name, nature or description.

B. “City” means the city of Burlington.

C. “Food” shall have its usual and ordinary meaning, and shall include all items designed for human consumption, including, but not by way of limitation, candy, popcorn, hot dogs, tacos, sandwiches, peanuts, soft drinks, ice cream and dairy products.

D. “Mobile food preparation van” means a commercially manufactured motorized vehicle in which ready-to-eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for service, sale or distribution.

E. “Mobile food vendor” means a seller of foods from a mobile food preparation van, cart or other conveyance, whether upon the public streets, alleys or public property or on private property.

F. “Mobile vendor” means a transient business selling or delivering food or goods in the city.

G. “Technical committee” means representatives of public works, police, planning, building, and fire departments who conduct a preliminary review meeting on permit applications to ensure code compliance.

H. “Vending unit” means a mobile food preparation van, cart, or other conveyance, or any facility that is not on a permanent foundation that complies with the International Building Code, and which is used for the sale or delivery of food or goods. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.020 Mobile vendor business – License required – Exemptions.

No person, firm or corporation shall engage in a mobile vendor business without having first obtained a business license from the city clerk; provided, however, that no license shall be required of the following:

A. Persons who conduct a casual or isolated sale and who are not engaged in the business of selling the type of food or goods involved;

B. Associations, corporations or organizations not organized for profit, and any community fund or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, scientific, public or charitable purposes, no part of the earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder, owner, member or individual, and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable, educational or recreational purposes.

C. Seasonal fresh fruits and vegetables that are unprepared and similar agricultural products, as exempted by RCW 36.71.090.

D. Any “hawker” or “peddler,” as those terms are defined in chapter 5.16 BMC, that is also licensed under that same chapter.

E. Any mobile vending conducted within a public park as part of a street fair, carnival, athletic activity, or other public event authorized by and in accordance with a permit issued by the city for that purpose. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.030 Display of license.

All mobile vendor licenses shall be prominently displayed upon all carts, vehicles or locations from which a mobile vendor sells products. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.040 Restrictions applicable to all mobile vendors.

A. Mobile vending on the public streets and public rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city shall not be permitted, except for persons selling frozen prepackaged/individually wrapped food items regulated by chapter 5.16 BMC such as ice cream, as long as such vendors are present at one location no more than 10 minutes at a given time; or authorized participants in a city-approved event, festival, sports tournament or similar activity.

B. Mobile vending to serve local businesses’ employees at the local businesses’ location shall be permitted when authorized by the business, such as manufacturers located at the Burlington Hill Business Park, for the period of time that it takes to set up, serve, and close up.

C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any mobile vendor to obstruct or cause to be obstructed the passage of any pedestrian or vehicle on any public sidewalk, street, or any other public right-of-way, including customer queues or customers consuming any food sold by the mobile vendor at or near the place where any items are being sold or offered for sale. Except as explicitly allowed herein or in chapter 5.16 BMC, no items may be offered or sold, and no customers served, in any traveled portion of a public roadway.

D. No mobile vendor shall sell or deliver any food or goods from the mobile vendor’s vending unit, cart, or other vehicle or conveyance if the conveyance is within 100 feet of the entrance of any business establishment which is open for business and offers for sale similar food or goods for sale, without the consent of said business.

E. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the director of planning is authorized to adopt rules relating to the time, place, and manner in which a nonprofit organization may vend merchandise in which the organization’s political, religious, sociological, or ideological message is inextricably intertwined if the sale exercises the permittee’s rights guaranteed by the United States or the Washington Constitution. Such rules may address the issuance and duration of permits, the size and placement of tables and other equipment used, their siting and location on public property, the type of merchandise offered for sale, advertising and posting of prices, the display of licenses, the exclusion of ineligible merchandise, the documentation to accompany applications for registration, among other subjects. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.050 Mobile food vendor – Restrictions.

Temporary use permits for mobile food vendors may be issued by the planning commission for up to 12 months on private property meeting the following conditions:

A. In addition to the application materials set out in BMC 5.30.070, the submittal requirements for technical committee and planning commission include providing a site plan, a simple sketch of the site layout, depicting the following:

1. Ingress and egress.

2. Location of the vending unit.

3. Location of at least three spaces for customer parking and one space for handicapped parking.

4. If needed to provide a suitable surface, a layer of crushed rock may be required for the public area.

5. A photograph of the mobile unit, proposed signs, and any equipment.

6. Written approval by the Skagit County Health Department that the food preparation and service complies with health regulations.

7. Evidence of a current state of Washington vehicle registration.

8. Provide a written plan documenting appropriate disposal of wastewater generated by the vending unit.

9. Documentation that the vending unit has been approved by the state of Washington Department of Labor and Industries.

10. Evidence of necessary approvals from the Burlington fire department in the event combustible fuels will be used.

B. The technical committee shall review and approve the site plan before it is submitted to the planning commission for access, parking, signage, handling of wastewater, garbage disposal and other safety issues.

C. Comply with the standards of the state of Washington Department of Labor and Industries for electrical service to the mobile food preparation van. In no event shall the permittee locate electric lines overhead or on the ground surface in any location in which the public has access.

D. The site shall be left clean and vacant each day, including picking up trash and litter, whether or not generated by the customers.

E. The use of any portion of the vending unit as living or sleeping quarters is prohibited.

F. All attachments to the vending unit, including but not limited to signs, lights, overhangs, and awnings, shall be maintained in such a manner as to not create a hazard to pedestrians, customers or vehicles. Flashing lights and similar displays are prohibited.

G. All exterior trash receptacles not intended for customer use shall be screened from public view and securely covered.

H. Written permission from the property owner. This includes written permission for staff to use their restrooms. No portable restrooms are allowed on the site, provided that a portable restroom may be approved for interim use if there are no permanent restrooms available from an on-site business, as long as it is located at least 120 feet from an arterial street and screened.

I. Applicant may wish to consider adding landscaping to the site for longer term use. Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition.

J. Wastewater.

1. Food vans shall be required to install an appropriate grease trap and maintain it.

2. Grease shall be dumped in the garbage and wastewater in the sanitary sewer.

3. There shall be no portable restrooms allowed on site.

K. One portable pop-up 10-foot-by-12-foot tent canopy or umbrella may be used for cover for patrons, or up to three tables with beach type umbrellas. Umbrellas and canopies must be removed at the end of each day.

L. Cooking with wood or other smoke-producing devices is strictly limited to residential size barbecues not located near residences with the concurrence of the neighbors and no complaints with approval of the planning department.

M. The hours of operation for mobile vending are limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m.

N. Mobile vendors shall not use amplification or noise-making devices and the permittee shall comply with chapter 8.14 BMC, Noise Abatement and Control.

O. Mobile vendors shall be responsible for ensuring that customer queues do not encroach into any abutting roadway when the street is open for vehicular traffic.

P. The owner of real property on which a mobile vendor is located shall be responsible for overall site maintenance such as added landscaping, provision of a picnic shelter with a building permit on an interim basis, and making sure that the mobile vendor complies with the permit conditions.

Q. Mobile food vendors may not serve alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.060 Director’s rules.

The planning director may promulgate rules to implement this chapter. The rules may address the subjects identified in this chapter and other subjects the director believes may aid in the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.070 License application – Contents.

A. In addition to the application materials set out in BMC 5.30.050, any person, firm, or corporation desiring to secure a license as a mobile vendor shall make application to the finance director, on forms to be provided by the finance director.

B. The application for a mobile vendor business license shall state the name and address of the applicant; the vehicle license numbers of all motor vehicles from which the applicant proposes to conduct business; a description of the general type of food or goods proposed to be sold by the applicant; and the address or addresses where the applicant proposes to engage in business as a transient business.

C. Such application shall be accompanied with the license fee as provided for in this chapter, and evidence of a Washington State Department of Revenue business registration number. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.080 License fee.

Business license fees shall be as fixed in an amount determined by council resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.090 Compliance with regulations.

All food vendors engaged in the sale of food shall comply with all laws, rules and regulations regarding food handling, and all mobile food preparation vans and motor vehicles used by mobile vendors shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations respecting such vehicles as established by the Skagit County Health Department, the Washington State Motor Vehicle Code, and the Burlington Municipal Code. All mobile vendors and food vendors shall further be responsible for cleaning up each day all litter originating from their business and within a 150-foot radius of the location where any sales occur. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


5.30.100 Violation – Penalty.

Failure to perform any act required by this chapter, or the performance of any act prohibited by this chapter, is designated as a civil infraction and may not be classified as a criminal offense. Any person, firm or corporation found to have committed an infraction under this chapter shall be assessed a monetary penalty. No penalty assessed for infractions under this chapter may exceed $500.00 for each separate infraction. (Ord. 1759 § 1, 2012).


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.05    Animal Control

6.06    Dangerous Dogs and Potentially Dangerous Dogs

6.10    Commercial Kennels, Grooming Parlors, Pet Shops, Shelters

6.12    Exotic Animals


Chapter 6.05 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.05.010    Title.

6.05.020    Purpose.

6.05.030    Definitions.

6.05.040    Mandatory licensing of dogs.

6.05.050    Dog license – Fees.

6.05.060    Free dog license – Eligibility requirements.

6.05.070    License – Registration – Transferability.

6.05.080    Dog licensing registration – Record.

6.05.090    Dog licensing and pet registration – Agents.

6.05.100    Household pets – Maximum number kept.

6.05.110    Guard dogs – Special requirements.

6.05.120    Presumption of ownership.

6.05.130    Owner responsibility – Control of dogs – Leash requirements.

6.05.140    Nuisance – Noise.

6.05.150    Nuisance or destructive behavior.

6.05.160    Nuisance – Abatement procedures.

6.05.170    Confining dogs.

6.05.180    Noncanine animals running at large.

6.05.190    Impoundment.

6.05.200    Disposition of fees.

6.05.210    Animal waste.

6.05.220    Destruction of animals.

6.05.230    Trapping of strays (RCW 77.36.030).

6.05.240    Sanctuary.

6.05.250    Poisoning of animals.

6.05.260    Biting animals – Duty to report – Confinement – Penalty.

6.05.270    Rabies – Report required.

6.05.280    Rabies vaccination.

6.05.290    Rabies carrier.

6.05.300    Duty when striking domestic animal with motor vehicle.

6.05.310    Found stray dog.

6.05.320    Scientific experimentation.

6.05.330    Police dogs – Exemption.

6.05.340    Designated animal control officer.

6.05.350    Designated animal control officer – Powers and duties.

6.05.360    Designated animal control officer – Obstruction.

6.05.370    Enforcement.

6.05.380    Complaints – Adjudication of grievances.

6.05.390    Cruelty to animals.

6.05.400    Violation – Penalty.

6.05.410    Severability.


6.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be designated and may be cited as the city of Burlington animal care, control, and protection ordinance. The provisions of RCW Title 16 as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.020 Purpose.

It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city of Burlington to provide for the general welfare of the residents and visitors to the city of Burlington through the adoption and enforcement of these animal control measures deemed necessary for the protection of the health, welfare and safety for residents, visitors and animals within the city of Burlington and to prevent injury to property and cruelty to animals. To this end, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide a means of licensing animals; to register animals and to regulate animal behavior so that it will not constitute a nuisance; to prevent or curtail inhumane treatment of animals; and to prevent or curtail domestic animal overpopulation. The city council expresses no intent to create a class of person/s who are specially benefited by this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Adult dog” means any domestic canine over the age of six months.

“Agency” means any public or private entity authorized by the city of Burlington to issue pet licenses.

“Altered” means an animal that has been medically determined to be incapable of reproduction. 

“Animal” means any nonhuman member of the classes of mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian. 

“Animal control authority” means the Burlington police department or its designee, acting alone or in concert with other local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control laws of the city, county, and state.

“Animal control officer” means any individual employed, contracted with or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other law or ordinance in the city of Burlington relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include the seizure and impoundment of any animal. This term shall have the same meaning as in RCW 16.08.070.

“Animal shelter” means any agency, or boarding facility such as a veterinarian office, animal rescue center or foster home, designated and used as a place to temporarily house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals including the impounding of animals that have been designated running at large or a stray by the city of Burlington.

“At large” means to be off the premises of the owner or caretaker and not under the immediate control of such owner or caretaker, or the owner’s or caretaker’s agent (including members of the immediate family), either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. An animal within a vehicle of its owner shall be deemed to be upon the owner’s premises.

“Barking dog” means any dog which unreasonably annoys or disturbs other persons in the vicinity by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, or barking.

“Boarding” means the act of providing regular food, water, shelter, exercise, and care for animals in the absence of the owner or caretaker who would normally provide these things.

“Commercial kennel” means any premises used to conduct a for-profit business involving the breeding, buying, selling, or boarding of dogs, but excluding animal hospitals and clinics where animals are kept only for treatment by licensed veterinarians and nonprofit animal shelters where animals are kept for care and treatment pending redemption, adoption or euthanasia. This will include animal day care centers.

“Dangerous dog” means any dog that according to the records of any governmental entity: (A) inflicts severe injury upon a human being without provocation on public or private property, (B) kills a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner’s property, or (C) has been previously found to be dangerous because of an injury inflicted on a human, the owner having received notice, and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals; provided, a dog shall not be considered or declared dangerous solely on the basis of inflicting bites on a person or by chasing or approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack toward any person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 

“Domestic animal” means any animals that are tamed and bred for the use of humans other than livestock. For the purpose of this chapter, this generally refers to dogs, cats and some birds.

“EAID” means electronic animal identification device.

“Feral” means any animal, normally classified as domestic, that has escaped domestication and become wild, or the offspring of outdoor intact domestic animals, either owned or abandoned.

“Grooming parlor” means any place of business (stationary or mobile) where animals are bathed, clipped, dipped or combed, or otherwise serviced for a valuable consideration for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value.

“Guard dog” means any type of dog used for the purpose of defending, patrolling, or protecting property or life. The term “guard dog” shall exclude police dogs and dogs used primarily for handling and controlling livestock or farm animals. A “dangerous dog” or “potentially dangerous dog” as defined by this chapter is not a guard dog. 

“Guide dog” means a properly trained dog certified by a licensed training facility that has expertise in training dogs for physically impaired persons.

“Harboring” means providing food and care for an animal such that the animal remains or customarily returns over a period of five days results in a rebuttable presumption that the person providing the food or care is keeping the animal.

“Kennel” shall hold the same meaning as “commercial kennel”; however, it will include anyone who has ownership of more than four dogs and follows a land use permit pursuant to BMC Title 14A.

“License” or “tag” means a pre-numbered identification tag acquired by the owner from an authorized agent for a specific animal. Rabies identification or other identification is not a license. “License” also refers to a city of Burlington business license.

“Licensing official” means any employee or agent of the city of Burlington designated to issue licenses.

“Livestock” means animals usually found on farms, including but not limited to horses, cattle, mules, donkeys, llamas, alpacas, ostriches, and bovine animals. 

“Microchip” means an EAID.

“Neutered” shall hold the same meaning as “altered.”

“Owner” shall have the same meaning as defined in RCW 16.08.070.

“Person” includes individuals, corporations, departments, firms, partnerships, trusts, associations, or other legal entities, and agents of those entities.

“Pet” shall have the same meaning as “domestic animal.”

“Pet shop” means any business or commercial establishment wherein animals commonly referred to or considered to be pets are kept or displayed for sale to any persons or organizations for either private or commercial purposes.

“Police dog” means a dog used by law enforcement agencies and specially trained for law enforcement work.

“Potentially dangerous dog” means any dog that when unprovoked: (A) inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal either on public or private property, or (B) chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, cause injury, or otherwise threaten safety of humans or domestic animals. A dog shall not be considered or declared potentially dangerous solely on the basis of inflicting bites on a person or by chasing or approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack toward any person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or tort upon premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

“Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog” means a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent entry of individuals and other domesticated animals and designed to prevent the dangerous dog from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and top. If the pen or structure does not have a concrete floor secured to the sides, then the structure must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot. The pen or structure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal.

“Proper enclosure of a potentially dangerous dog” means a secured fenced yard suitable to prevent entry of individuals and domesticated animals and designed to prevent a potentially dangerous dog from escaping. The fence must meet all setbacks and height restrictions per chapter 17.45 BMC. 

“Quarantine” means keeping a biting animal or a suspected biting animal separate and apart from other animals and people for a period of at least 10 days.

“Service animal” means an animal of any type that has been trained at a recognized school or training facility for the purpose of assisting or accommodating a disabled person’s sensory, mental, or physical disability. 

“Severe injury” means any physical injury resulting in broken bones, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. The term has the same meaning as defined in RCW 16.08.070. 

“Shelter” means governmental or private entities that provide temporary homes for stray or surrendered animals, most often dogs and cats, until the animals are reclaimed by the owners, adopted, placed with another entity, or euthanized.

“Sterilized” shall hold the same meaning as “altered.”

“Stray dog” or “stray animal” means any domestic animal wandering or roaming or remaining in a neighborhood or public place without an apparent home.

“Veterinarian” means any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state of Washington. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.040 Mandatory licensing of dogs.

It is unlawful for any person residing in the city of Burlington to own, keep, or harbor a dog over three months of age within the corporate limits of the city of Burlington unless the dog has been registered and a license tag procured for the dog from the city of Burlington. Any dog brought into the corporate city limits shall be registered within 30 days. 

Application and registration for license shall be made upon forms provided by a licensing official, and shall be charged a fee as set forth in this chapter. 

A. Anyone applying for a license for a dog shall submit the following information:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the dog. The owner of the dog must be at least 18 years old;

2. The name, address and telephone number of the person having custody of the dog, if other than the owner;

3. The breed, color, age, and sex of the dog(s);

4. The address of the property where the dog is ordinarily kept or maintained if different from the owner;

5. A certificate of a veterinarian indicating the dog has a current rabies immunization;

6. A certificate of a veterinarian indicating the dog has been altered, if the owner claims so;

7. A new license for each dog must be obtained every year.

B. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly make false statements or representations when making application for a license. There shall be issued and furnished at time of licensing a license tag to be worn by the dog on a suitable collar or harness at all times the dog is outside the home of the owner or caretaker. It is unlawful for any person other than the owner, the owner’s agent, or a city official to remove the license tag from the dog. 

C. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, pet shops, dog day care/boarding facilities, and dogs and puppies for sale at a commercial kennel licensed by the city of Burlington are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.050 Dog license – Fees.

The annual license fee for each dog shall be adopted by city council resolution in the following categories:

A. For altered dogs: Proof of alteration must be evident, by the submission of a certificate of a veterinarian, or other positive proof satisfactory to the licensing authority. In lieu thereof, the licensing official may, at his/her discretion, accept an affidavit that a dog has been altered.

B. For dogs not altered.

C. Replacement tag.

D. Potentially dangerous dog: initial registration payable within 10 days of declaration, annually thereafter payable by the last day of December for each subsequent calendar year.

E. Dangerous dog: initial registration payable within 10 days of declaration, annually thereafter payable by the last day of December for each subsequent calendar year.

F. Service animals: Dogs that are serving as a service animal must be licensed but are exempt from licensing fees. (Ord. 1799 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.060 Free dog license – Eligibility requirements.

City residents 68 years of age or older shall be issued a license for no fee as referenced in the city council resolution adopting fees for each dog, up to four dogs for which they are the registered owner, when the dog(s) are maintained at the owner’s registered address within the city limits of Burlington. A new license for each dog must be obtained every year. (Ord. 1799 § 9, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.070 License – Registration – Transferability.

A license shall be issued only to the owner of an animal, and may not be issued to a minor. No license/registration may be transferred to any other person. Parents or guardians are responsible for control of animals which are in their care or custody and control of children who reside with the parent or guardian, and such parent or guardian is deemed to be the owner of the animal. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.080 Dog licensing registration – Record.

A record of all licenses shall be maintained by the Burlington police department. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.090 Dog licensing and pet registration – Agents.

In addition to city employees, the city council may designate an authorized agent or agents to make issuance of city animal licenses and tags and registration of other animals. The agent or agents may be a designated animal shelter operator, veterinarian, pet shop, commercial kennel operator, or grooming parlor operator with whom the city has entered into an agreement for such service. In the case of licensing by agents other than city employees, an agent’s fee of $2.00 may be collected and retained by the agent. Agents shall within five days of receipt transmit the animal licensing information to the city.

A. Upon proper application and payment of applicable fees by the owner or person having custody and control of a dog, the licensing official shall issue a license and a serial numbered identification tag for the dog, which shall be securely affixed to a substantial collar or harness worn by the dog, except when the dog is securely confined within a residence or being displayed in an exhibition. An electronic animal identification device may be implanted in addition to, but not in place of, the serial numbered tag issued by the city or their agent.

B. Each license shall be valid for no more than a one-year period and shall expire each December 31st of each calendar year. Replacement licenses for the following year must be obtained by the last day of December. Any lost license tag must immediately be replaced by a new tag issued by the licensing official. Every potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog shall have an additional registration, license tag, insurance, and fee requirements as defined and set forth herein. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.100 Household pets – Maximum number kept.

No person shall own or keep within the city limits of Burlington more than four dogs of licensing age or a total of six domestic animals. This limit shall not include birds, fish, or suckling young.

Any person intending to keep more than four dogs of licensing age as referred to in this chapter shall do so only as a properly licensed commercial kennel or veterinary clinic.

In addition to pet limitations outlined in this section, any persons due to unforeseen or emergency circumstances may temporarily shelter a total of two additional cats/dogs in any combination for a period not to exceed six months. Such animals shall be disclosed to the animal control officer. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.110 Guard dogs – Special requirements.

Guard dog owners and guard dog services shall register all guard dogs used within the city of Burlington, regardless of owner’s address. In addition to information required by BMC 6.05.040, registration shall include:

A. EAID type and EAID number; and

B. Proof of ownership (bill of sale, veterinarian affidavit, etc.).

C. Guard dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies and registered with the city no later than 10 days from acquisition and in no case shall the animal be placed into service prior to vaccination.

D. Each guard dog shall be registered annually with the city of Burlington.

E. Each guard dog shall have an implanted EAID readable by the city’s equipment.

F. The escape or disappearance of a guard dog shall be reported immediately to the Burlington police department.

G. Any vehicle of every guard dog service transporting any guard dog must be clearly marked, showing it is transporting an aggressive dog. A compartment separate from the driver is required and shall be arranged to ensure maximum ventilation for the animal. No guard dog shall be transported in the trunk of a car or in an open bed of a truck.

H. Each business which hires or uses a guard dog to patrol the premises after business hours shall provide a confining structure to keep the dog contained in and/or a fence that is at least six feet high and sufficiently sturdy to prevent the dog from escaping or reaching persons off the property. 

I. Each business which hires or uses a guard dog that is present during business hours shall have the dog confined in a manner as not to pose a danger to the public. Confinement shall, at a minimum, prevent deliberate or inadvertent physical contact by the public.

J. At each entry point and at each 50-foot interval along the fence perimeter, if applicable, a sign shall be posted including the words “guard dog” in three-inch letters. All entry points shall be double gated.

K. All entry points shall have a sign posted with the telephone number of the dog’s handler and/or owner in case of an emergency.

L. Dogs used for guarding a business shall be given a humane existence, including adequate shelter, food, water, and exercise. Dogs confined to a kennel or cage shall be able to stand freely and turn without restriction and shall be permitted daily exercise for an appropriate length of time, as determined by size and age, in a yard or other area suitable for that purpose.

M. No dog which has been declared a dangerous dog by the city shall be used as a guard dog. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.120 Presumption of ownership.

A presumption of ownership shall exist if an otherwise stray dog is kept, sheltered, fed, or harbored for more than five consecutive days. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.130 Owner responsibility – Control of dogs – Leash requirements.

A. It is unlawful for the owner or caretaker in charge of a dog to:

1. Permit the dog within the corporate limits of the city of Burlington to run at large, roam, stray, or be away from the premises of the owner or caretaker, or be in or on any public property, or private property of another except with the permission of the owner or custodian of the private property, unless the dog is physically controlled by the owner or caretaker or other competent and authorized person capable of handling and physically controlling the dog by means of a physical control device, such as a leash or carrying cage.

2. Any dog that has already been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous that is caught running at large shall be considered a separate violation and will be subject to the provisions of chapter 6.06 BMC. 

3. It is unlawful for a dog to enter park areas that are specifically posted to prohibit dogs, regardless of whether or not the dog is restrained by a leash. 

Notwithstanding the foregoing, no physical control device is required for a dog within the boundaries of a city owned or sanctioned off-leash dog park, or while participating in an organized exhibition that has received a permit from the city.

4. Control device requirements shall not apply to police dogs while in performance of law enforcement duties.

5. It is unlawful for a dog to enter or remain on any public park property unless such dog is restrained by a leash or other similar physical restraint.

B. Any person who violates this section shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be assessed a monetary fine as follows:

1. First offense – $50.00.

2. Second offense – $75.00.

3. Third offense – $100.00.

4. Fourth and subsequent offenses – $150.00 and the animal control officer may declare the dog a public nuisance and may require abatement of the animal per BMC 6.05.160. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.140 Nuisance – Noise.

Burlington Municipal Code has repealed chapter 17.58 BMC in its entirety, and has added a new section under chapter 8.14 BMC.

It shall be unlawful for an owner or caretaker to allow an animal to:

A. Unreasonably annoy or disturb others by frequent or habitual howls, barks, or other loud noises. 

Exception: Such sounds made in animal shelters or in commercial kennels duly licensed shall be exempt.

B. Make noise in violation of this chapter in the presence of any law enforcement officer. The animal may be declared a public nuisance and may be immediately impounded; provided, however, that no animal shall be impounded if it is contained within a house or other structure. In the event of such an impoundment, the seizing officer shall schedule an administrative hearing before the city’s chief law enforcement officer, which hearing shall take place within two business days of the seizure. The seizing officer shall provide written and telephonic notice to the owner, advising of the hearing.

It is an affirmative defense under this section that the animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other noise by the injured person or any other person; provided, that the enactment of this provision shall in no way nullify any other provision of the Municipal Code concerning animal noise. 

In addition, violations of this section shall be deemed to be a nontraffic infraction and subject to a penalty in the amount of $100.00 for each offense. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.150 Nuisance or destructive behavior.

Every owner or caretaker of an animal shall exercise care and control of their animal to prevent the animal from becoming a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for an owner or caretaker to allow the animal to:

A. Trespass on private property so as to damage or destroy any lawn, garden, property, or thing of value.

B. Chase, run after, or jump at vehicles lawfully using the public streets, avenues, alleys, and ways.

C. Keep or harbor any animal that frequently or habitually disturbs the peace by snapping, biting, and jumping upon persons lawfully on the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, or public places. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.160 Nuisance – Abatement procedures.

A. Any person that keeps an animal that has been declared a public nuisance and the animal continues to violate any provisions of this chapter, in addition to the fine or imprisonment, or both, may be ordered by the court to remove such nuisance. If the removal is not done by owner or caretaker within 24 hours of the notification, the animal shall be removed. The order of abatement shall be entered upon the court docket and made a part of the judgment in the case. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the last address of record or served upon the animal owner. The owner shall be liable for all costs and expenses of abating the nuisance. 

B. In addition to any other remedies available under the provisions of this chapter, an animal control officer may order in writing to be delivered by regular mail to the last known address of the owner or caretaker of the animal, or by personal service to the owner or caretaker of the animal which is the subject of four criminal citations, notice of the civil infractions, or any combination of the same within a 12-month period, to abate and remove the animal from the city limits within seven days from the date of service of the order, or the tenth day from the date of mailing the order. Such order to abate the habitual violator shall:

1. State that a hearing in the Burlington municipal court may be requested appealing the order;

2. State that if no hearing is requested within 10 days of the date of mailing or date of service of the order, the owner or caretaker must abate and remove the animal from the city;

3. Bear the notation that any appeal must be filed before closure of the tenth day following the date of mailing or service of the order;

4. Clearly state and identify the grounds of which the animal has been declared a habitual violator;

5. Clearly identify the animal which has been declared a habitual violator identifying the animal by species and breed, coloring and markings, approximate age, gender and name when the information is available.

If the owner of the animal has failed to comply with the court order, or 10 days have elapsed from the date of service, the animal control officer may abate the animal and remove it for impound. The animal may not be returned to the property from which it was impounded. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.170 Confining dogs.

The owner or caretaker of any unspayed dog shall confine such dog in a well-ventilated and adequately sized closed structure so that the dog cannot come into contact with an intact male dog except for planned breeding. Any person who violates this section shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be assessed a monetary fine in the amount of $50.00 for each offense. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.180 Noncanine animals running at large.

No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, allow any horse, mule, cattle, pig, sheep, donkey, chicken, or other domestic farm animal (excluding cats) to run at large on city streets or on private property other than the property belonging to the owner of such domestic farm animal. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a nontraffic infraction and subject to a penalty in the amount of $50.00 per offense. In addition, violations of this section may be declared a public nuisance per BMC 6.05.150. Horses, beef cattle or other domestic farm animals are permitted on the condition that the numbers of animals not exceed a ratio of one per one-half acre of fenced pasture area. The keeping of mink, goats, foxes, or hogs is prohibited per BMC 17.15.050(E). (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.190 Impoundment.

A. Unregistered and Stray Dogs. Any dog, not registered or not wearing the city of Burlington issued license tag, off the private property of the owner or caretaker is presumed to have no lawful or legal owner and is declared to be running at large and a public nuisance. The dog/s may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer or designee.

B. Registered Dogs. All dogs registered and wearing the city of Burlington issued license tag and off the private property of the owner or caretaker shall be declared to be running at large and a public nuisance. Such dog/s may be seized and impounded by the animal control officer or designated city officer.

C. Notification – Redemption or Disposal. An animal control officer may impound any dog committing or involved in acts which violate this chapter, or any other city ordinance, or impound any dog which is being subjected to cruel treatment as defined in this chapter. After the dog is impounded, the animal control officer or designee shall determine if the dog is licensed, registered, or otherwise identifiable, and may return the dog to its owner, or if the animal control officer finds it necessary for the protection of the dog or the public to keep the dog in custody, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the dog within a reasonable time as set forth below:

Any dog seized and impounded for any reason by the animal control officer may be held at the Burlington police department or delivered to a boarding facility which the city of Burlington contracts with, or another boarding facility which is available. The animal control officer may at his/her discretion place the dog in foster care with a volunteer known to the department during the redemption period. The volunteer is responsible for costs incurred while caring for the dog during this period. The city of Burlington shall pay the contracted boarding facility the fee required for the impoundment of the dog.

If any dog is impounded for any reason pursuant to this chapter, the owner, if known, shall be timely notified of the impounding of the dog, the date of the impounding, the reason thereof by telephone or regular mail or by leaving written notice at the address contained in the license application, and whether release of the dog may be authorized by the animal control officer or other designee, and if so, the terms and conditions upon which the dog may be redeemed. The dog will be held for its owner for at least 120 hours commencing with impoundment. 

Upon impounding of any dog, the animal control officer shall record within 24 hours of impounding the dog by documenting the breed, color, sex, and other identifying characteristics including the date and place of apprehension. Such information shall be kept in a database at the Burlington police department and is available upon request.

All impound periods shall continue to run during nonbusiness hours, weekends and holidays.

D. The animal control officer or the staff of a city-designated animal shelter or boarding facility may provide necessary vaccinations against contagious diseases to any impounded dog/s.

E. If redemption of any impounded dog is authorized, the animal control officer may fix terms and conditions for redemption and shall require payment of actual expenses for the dog, including reasonable charges of the boarding facility, reasonable veterinarian costs if health care was deemed necessary, actual costs of quarantine if applicable, plus a distraining fee of $75.00. If no license tag has been issued for the current year, the owner shall pay the annual license fee required, or if the tag is lost, the replacement fee.

F. Payment of redemption fees shall be exclusive of fine or penalties imposed upon the owner for a violation of any provision of this chapter.

G. Any dog which has been impounded must be redeemed by the owner within the time set forth above provided the redemption is authorized. A dog may be redeemed by the owner or the owner’s agent by obtaining a validated dog impound release at the Burlington police department. The release will be validated upon submitting proof of ownership and payment of fees and costs as set forth by the animal control officer. If a dog is not redeemed, the dog shall be subject to being humanely destroyed by a boarding facility, or may be kept and offered for adoption following the guidelines set by the boarding facility.

H. Any dog impounded by the animal control officer or designee and made available for adoption by the city, or designated boarding facility, shall be spayed or neutered prior to adoption. Except, that a dog deemed by a licensed veterinarian to be suffering any condition making it unsuitable for alteration may be stayed the procedure until conditions improve. Expenses for alteration shall not be borne by the city.

I. No live dog impounded by the city shall be used, donated, or sold for experimentation purposes.

J. Redemption of an impounded dog may be denied to an owner who has cruelly treated a dog as defined by this chapter or to an owner of a dog that has engaged in a nuisance or destructive behavior as defined in this chapter. 

Should an owner be denied redemption, that owner may file an appeal with the Burlington municipal court within seven business days following service of the notice of denial. If service is made by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon which the notice is placed in the mail.

K. Dogs delivered for impoundment by animal control officers or police officers that have been removed from the possession of persons detained or incarcerated for a crime shall be held not less than 120 hours. An impoundment notice shall be delivered to the detained person along with instructions for redemption. The impound notice shall serve as notice to the owner required by this chapter. An officer shall make a reasonable attempt to place the dog with a responsible person, family member of the detained person, or animal rescue service; however, failure to successfully place the dog shall not relieve the dog owner from the responsibility for all reasonable fees associated with impoundment.

L. Impounded Dogs – Redemption Fees. Any dog impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances may be redeemed upon payment by its owner of all redemption fees as set out below and upon evidence satisfactory to the animal control officer that the violation has been corrected or by the order of the court following an appeal and hearing as set out in this chapter. Redemption fees include the following as applicable:

1. Actual boarding costs for the dog by facility;

2. Actual cost of quarantine;

3. Emergency medical expenses due to illness, disease, or injury;

4. Distrain fee of $75.00, or fee charged by contracted shelter;

5. Licensing fee.

All redemption fees are the obligation of the owner even if the dog is implicitly abandoned or expressly relinquished. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.200 Disposition of fees.

All monies collected as license fees pursuant to this chapter shall be remitted to the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.210 Animal waste.

A. It is unlawful for the owner or caretaker of any dog or other animal, either willfully, or by failure to exercise due care, to permit the animal to commit a public nuisance by defecating upon private property without permission of the owner or custodian thereof, upon the public sidewalk, in or upon any public street, or any other public place. Every person who owns or who has under his or her control or care any animal shall be responsible for immediately picking up and removing any waste or manure left by the animal.

B. It is unlawful for an owner or caretaker to allow animal waste to accumulate on the owner’s or caretaker’s property so as to cause a nuisance.

C. Any person who violates this section of this chapter shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be assessed a monetary penalty in the amount of $50.00 for each offense. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.220 Destruction of animals.

A. Any animal suffering from serious injury or disease may be humanely destroyed by the impounding authority with the assistance of a licensed veterinarian, when practicable; provided, that the impounding authority shall immediately notify the owner, if the owner is known, and if the owner is unknown, the agency shall make a reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner prior to destroying the animal.

B. Dangerous Animals. If any dangerous, vicious, or depredatory animal or any animal known to have rabies cannot be safely impounded, the animal may be destroyed by an animal control officer, or other official from the Burlington police department. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.230 Trapping of strays (RCW 77.36.030).

The practice of trapping dogs or cats for the purpose of euthanizing the animal shall be unlawful except in cases of disease or injury, or where attempts to place the healthy animal(s) in a home, colony, or sanctuary have been unsuccessful or options do not exist locally. Further, it shall be unlawful to employ or be employed for the express purpose of trapping and killing free-roaming dogs or cats as a means to eliminate a nuisance. This section shall not prohibit an animal control officer or police officer from carrying out their lawful duties as otherwise specifically permitted under this chapter. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to use inhumane methods to capture stray dogs or cats. Traps and the trapping of stray dogs or cats shall conform to RCW 77.36.030 and the following:

A. Traps shall be covered with breathable material that prevents the trapped animal from viewing its surroundings.

B. Traps shall not be left unattended for more than two hours during periods of weather involving precipitation or abnormal heat, cold, wind, or any other condition that would amount to cruel treatment as defined in this chapter.

C. Traps near streams or ponds shall be secured to prevent movement.

D. Traps unprotected from weather or predators shall not be left set overnight. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.240 Sanctuary.

It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain a sanctuary for feral, stray or abandoned animals within the city limits, except if and where allowed by BMC Title 17. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.250 Poisoning of animals.

No person shall place or expose or cause to be placed or exposed any poisonous substance which, if taken internally by a human or animal may cause death or injury; provided, that the placement of poison bait solely for the purpose of controlling rats, mice, and similar vermin shall not be made unlawful by this section. The provision of this chapter shall not apply to the killing by poison of any animal in a lawful and humane manner by its owner or by a duly authorized agent of the owner or by a person acting pursuant to instructions from a duly constituted public authority. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.260 Biting animals – Duty to report – Confinement – Penalty.

A. When any animal has bitten or attacked any person or is suspected of having rabies, it shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of such facts to immediately report the same to the police department. Bites occurring in a veterinary clinic or hospital, grooming parlor, or shelter are not subject to mandatory reporting; however, this does not relieve the owner or caretaker of the reporting requirements of the Skagit County health department.

B. It is unlawful for the owner of any animal, when notified that the animal has bitten any person or has injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away the animal or permit the animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city of Burlington except to a veterinary hospital. It shall be the duty of the owner upon receiving notice of the animal’s rabies, or injurious acts, to immediately place the animal in a duly licensed veterinary hospital for confinement for a period of at least 10 days, or to deliver the animal to the animal control officer for placement or similar confinement. No person shall release or remove any animal from its place of confinement to another place without the consent of and conditions imposed by the animal control officer. Upon authorization of a licensed veterinarian, an animal may be released from confinement to the custody of the owner upon the owner’s undertaking to keep the animal securely confined to the premises of the owner and segregated from other animals during the observation period. The confinement of any animal shall be at the expense of the owner and/or caretaker and no person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine when a demand is made by the animal control officer.

C. The suspect animal, which is known to have bitten or injured any person as to cause an abrasion to the skin, may also be placed on an in-home quarantine at the approval of the animal control officer, and shall not be destroyed until at least 10 days after onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies. The animal control officer or another officer of the Burlington police department may inspect the site at which the animal will be kept during the quarantine period. The animal must be kept secured in the house or area approved by the animal control officer during the quarantine period and must be on a leash controlled by a responsible person when taken outside for bathroom purposes. Should the animal be found running at large during the quarantine period, it will be immediately impounded and placed in confinement at an approved facility or shelter for the duration of the quarantine, and will be at the sole expense of the owner. 

D. Any animal which is known to have bitten another animal leaving puncture wounds, or caused the death of another animal, and does not have current rabies vaccinations, or proof of such, may be at the discretion and direction of the animal control officer placed in quarantine for a period of 10 days, and shall not be destroyed until the 10-day period has passed. The suspect animal may be placed on an in-home quarantine with the approval of the animal control officer. The suspect animal must be kept secured in the house or area approved by the animal control officer and is subject to inspection during the time of quarantine by the animal control officer or any other officer of the Burlington police department. Should the animal be found running at large during the quarantine period, it will be impounded and placed in confinement at an approved facility or shelter for the duration of the quarantine, and at the sole expense of the owner.

E. In the event that the animal control officer has reason to suspect that an animal is rabid, the appropriate officials of Skagit County health department shall be notified, and the officer shall coordinate any further activities with the health department. The Skagit County health department shall have jurisdiction over any matter possibly involving rabies. WAC 246-100-191(3), together with amendments thereto, are incorporated in this chapter by reference and prevail over any conflicting provision of this chapter in any suspected rabies matter.

F. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or caretaker to whom an order of rabies quarantine is issued, to knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence permit the order of rabies quarantine to be broken. The animal may be impounded and held by the city at the owner’s and/or caretaker’s expense for the remainder of the quarantine.

G. No person shall refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine to the animal control officer when a demand has been made by the animal control officer, or any other officer of the Burlington police department.

H. Redemption of the animal is subject to payment of fees allowable under this chapter.

I. A publicly owned police dog with a current rabies vaccination shall be exempt from quarantine unless ordered by the Skagit County health officer.

J. Any person refusing or failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with the order or directives of the animal control officer relating thereto shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and up to 90 days’ confinement. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.270 Rabies – Report required.

Anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the facts immediately to the animal control officer or Burlington police department. The animal control officer or Burlington police department shall likewise be notified of any person or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal. It shall also be the duty of any physician upon treatment of any person bitten by any animal to immediately report the name and address of the person to the city of Burlington or Burlington police department. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.280 Rabies vaccination.

All persons owning or keeping an animal over the age of six months inside the city limits shall be required to maintain current rabies vaccinations from a licensed veterinarian. All persons seeking to register an animal shall be required to show proof of current rabies vaccination from a licensed veterinarian within 30 days prior to obtaining a registration/license tag. A durable and traceable rabies tag provided by the veterinarian shall be securely affixed to a collar and worn by the animal when outside or away from the owner’s home or other enclosure. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.290 Rabies carrier.

It is unlawful to own, keep or harbor within the city bats or any species of animals designated as unlawful by the Washington State Department of Health pursuant to WAC 246-100-191 by reason of the species being a transmitter of rabies to humans, including any bat, skunk, fox, coyote or raccoon, except under circumstances permitted by WAC 246-100-191, which is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.300 Duty when striking domestic animal with motor vehicle.

If any person while operating a motor vehicle strikes a domestic animal, that person shall stop at once, render reasonable assistance, and shall immediately report the injury or death to the animal control officer or police officer. 

This section shall not be construed as requiring the person striking the animal with a motor vehicle to be financially responsible for the injury or death of the animal. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.310 Found stray dog.

It is the duty of any person who takes a stray dog into his/her possession to notify the city animal control officer or police officer at once, and to release the dog to the officer upon demand and without charge. The intent of this section shall be satisfied by the person providing a telephonic or electronic message when notification occurs after business hours. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.320 Scientific experimentation.

It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, offer, or give any animal for scientific experimentation which involves any cruel or inhumane treatment. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct scientific experimentation on any animal which involves cruel or inhumane treatment. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.330 Police dogs – Exemption.

All police dogs owned by a public law enforcement agency and being used for duty or training shall be exempt from all provisions of the Burlington Municipal Code relating to animal control. If a police dog is required in BMC 6.05.260(I) to be quarantined, the dog will be remanded to the control of its agency. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.340 Designated animal control officer.

Any officer performing the functions of an animal control officer shall not be personally liable for damages resulting from enforcement of this chapter. It shall be the jurisdiction of the police department to enforce provisions of this chapter or of another city ordinance, or state RCW relating to animal welfare, cruelty, and animal control by any lawful means including, but not limited to, arrest, the issuance of criminal citations, notice of civil infractions, orders to abate, or issuance of warnings. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.350 Designated animal control officer – Powers and duties.

The animal control officer is authorized to take such lawful actions as may be required to enforce provisions of this chapter, state RCW, and other city ordinances relating to animal welfare, control, and cruelty prevention. The animal control officer, while in hot pursuit of any animal observed by the officer to be in violation of this chapter, or being treated cruelly in violation of this chapter, may enter onto public or private property, for the purposes of enforcing the code provision violated; provided, that the entry into a building designated for and used for private purposes may be accomplished only with the consent of the owner or lawful occupant of the premises, or upon the issuance of a proper search or arrest warrant. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.360 Designated animal control officer – Obstruction.

It is unlawful for any person, without lawful reason, to knowingly hinder, resist, delay or obstruct any animal control officer or police officer in the performance of his/her duties under this chapter. Obstruction of an animal control officer or police officer is a misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in RCW 9A.76.020. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.370 Enforcement.

A. It is the express purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter. It is the specific intent of this chapter that neither provision nor any term used in this chapter be intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city for any of its officers, employees, agents, or volunteers, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

B. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees, volunteers, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees, volunteers or agents. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from any official performing the functions of an animal control officer and enforcement of this chapter is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.380 Complaints – Adjudication of grievances.

Any owner or caretaker aggrieved as the result of an impoundment, conditions for redemption, or deprivation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may request a hearing before the Burlington municipal court judge to determine the justification of such classification, or the requirements imposed as a condition of redeeming the animal, per impoundment, or any determination, that the animal has been cruelly treated, neglected or abandoned. In the event the court confirms the classification and/or requirements, or determination that the animal has been cruelly treated, neglected or abandoned, the owner or caretaker shall pay the costs of such hearing including filing fee and the fees for witnesses called in support of the official action if applicable. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.390 Cruelty to animals.

It is unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly, or with criminal negligence to commit, singly or together, any of the following acts or omissions, or to aid or abet another person in the commission of such acts or omissions, which are deemed to constitute cruel treatment of animals:

A. To cause or allow any animal to endure pain, suffering, injury or to fail or neglect to aid or attempt to alleviate pain, suffering or injury which the person has caused to any animal. Such aid shall include the provision of needed veterinary care;

B. To fail to provide minimum care to any animal within the person’s care, custody or control; for the purpose of this section, “minimum care” means care sufficient to preserve the health and well-being of an animal and except for emergencies or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the owner or caretaker, includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements:

1. In each period of 24 consecutive hours, to provide food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or maintenance of body weight;

2. In each period of 24 consecutive hours, to provide open or adequate access to potable water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the animal’s needs. Neither ice or snow is an adequate water source;

3. In the case of domestic animals, to provide a barn, doghouse, or other enclosed structure sufficient to protect the animal from the wind, rain, snow, or sun, and which has adequate bedding to protect against cold or dampness;

4. To provide veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to relieve distress from injury, neglect, or disease;

5. No domestic animal shall be confined to an area with inadequate space for exercise necessary for the health of the animal or which does not allow access to a dry place for the animal to rest, or adequate ventilation. Confinement areas must be kept reasonably clean and free from excess mud, waste, or other contaminants which could affect the animal’s health;

6. Grooming as necessary to preserve the animal’s health and well-being;

C. To tether, confine or restrain any animal in a way as to permit the animal to become frequently entangled in the tether, or to render the animal incapable of consuming food or water, or of using the shelter provided for it, while at the same time allowing adequate space for freedom of movement. For the purposes of this section it shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tether of no less than 12 feet shall provide adequate space;

D. To abandon any animal by leaving the animal in a public place, on private property or property of another;

E. To confine an animal within or on a motor vehicle or other structure or enclosure at any location when unattended and under such circumstances as may endanger the health and well-being of the animal. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, dangerous temperature, lack of food or water, or confinement with a vicious animal;

F. To transport or confine any living animal on the outside part of a motor vehicle except where attached to the vehicle by a suitable harness, leash, cage, or other enclosure that protects the animal from falling or being thrown therefrom and which prevents the animal from leaving the vehicle while unattended. The outer part of the vehicle includes the running board, fender, hood of any motor vehicle or the flat bed of a truck and/or open portion (bed) of a pickup truck;

G. To place any food, drink, or other substance of any description containing poisonous or other injurious ingredients in any area reasonably likely to be accessible to domestic animals. Care shall be taken to avoid open containers or spills of antifreeze or other toxic substances;

H. To knowingly and intentionally, whether for amusement of self or others, or for financial gain, cause any animal to fight or injure another animal, cause the animal to be fought or injured by another animal or to train or keep for the purpose of training any animal with the intent that the animal shall be exhibited combatively with any other animal. Any person who permits such conduct on premises under that person’s control, and any person present as a spectator at that exhibition, shall be considered a violator of this subsection; provided, that this section shall not be construed to address any actions properly characterized as a felony under state law RCW 16.52.117;

I. To sell, offer for sale, or to give away any living baby rabbits, chicks, ducklings or other fowl which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to have an artificial color; provided, that this shall not prohibit the sale or display of natural baby rabbits, chicks, ducklings or other fowl in proper breeder facilities or stores engaged in selling them for commercial purposes;

J. To abandon or to transfer to another person by gift, sale or exchange for consideration, any animal in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, park, or other public property except when the transfer takes place at a sale conducted by a public body or public officer, when the transfer takes place at an animal show or exhibition conducted by or for persons who regularly engage in the practice of breeding animals for show or exhibition, or when one of the parties to the transfer is a member of an animal welfare organization and is acting on its behalf.

Violation of any of the provisions of this section under circumstances not amounting to animal cruelty in the first or second degree per RCW 16.52.205 and 16.52.207 shall constitute a misdemeanor, and may be punished in accordance with BMC 1.24.020. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.400 Violation – Penalty.

A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by the laws of the state and BMC 1.24.020.

B. In addition to any civil penalty or criminal sentence as provided by this chapter, the owner of the animal, whether licensed or not, shall be liable for actual expenses for boarding the animal, including reasonable charges by the contracted or approved shelter or approved facility used by the Burlington police department, and if necessary, for the cost of its medical care if needed, and/or destruction. 

C. The provisions of chapter 46.63 RCW for the disposition of traffic infractions apply to the disposition of all civil infractions set forth in this section except as follows:

1. The provisions of chapter 46.63 RCW relating to the provision of records to the Department of Licensing in accordance with RCW 46.20.270 are not applicable to this section;

2. The provisions in chapter 46.63 RCW relating the imposition of sanctions against a person’s driver’s license or vehicle license are not applicable to this section.

D. Any person who commits a civil infraction as defined in this chapter shall be subject to penalty as follows:

1. Upon the first violation in a 12-month period, a fine of $50.00;

2. Upon a second violation in a 12-month period, a fine of $75.00;

3. Upon a third violation in a 12-month period, a fine of $100.00;

4. Upon a fourth violation in a 12-month period, a fine of $150.00. (Animal may be abated per BMC 6.05.160.)

E. Any person violating provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth.

Any owner who fails to respond to a notice of a civil infraction as promised or appear at a requested hearing shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and confinement not to exceed 90 days. Any person who receives four infractions for violations of this chapter within one year and who subsequently violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may, upon conviction, be punished by confinement not to exceed 90 days and a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


6.05.410 Severability.

In the event any term or condition of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other terms, conditions, or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid term, condition, or application. To this end, the terms and conditions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 1667 § 2, 2009).


Chapter 6.06 DANGEROUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS

Sections:

6.06.010    Purpose.

6.06.020    Definitions.

6.06.030    Adoption by reference.

6.06.040    Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

6.06.050    Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs registration.

6.06.060    Liability insurance – Bond or insurance – Required for animals declared.

6.06.070    Hearings.

6.06.080    Immunity.

6.06.090    Enforcement.

6.06.100    Violation – Nondeclaration no defense.

6.06.110    Penalties.

6.06.120    Nonliability.

6.06.130    Severability.


6.06.010 Purpose.

It is the public policy of the city of Burlington to secure and maintain levels of animal control as will protect human health and safety, and to the greatest degree practicable to prevent injury to property and cruelty to animals. To this end, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide a means of controlling errant dog behavior so that it shall not become a public nuisance. This chapter shall be construed so as to be consistent with chapter 16.08 RCW. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any provision of chapter 16.08 RCW, then the applicable provision of chapter 16.08 RCW shall prevail. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.020 Definitions.

Within the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Animal control authority” means the Burlington police department or its designee, acting alone or in concert with other local governmental units for enforcement of the animal control laws of the city, county, and state.

“Animal control officer” means any individual employed, contracted with or appointed by the animal control authority for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of this chapter or any other law or city ordinance relating to the licensure of animals, control of animals, or seizure and impoundment of animals, and includes any state or local law enforcement officer or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include the seizure and impoundment of any animal. This definition shall have the same meaning as in RCW 16.08.070.

“At large” means to be off the premises of the owner or caretaker and not under the immediate control of the owner or caretaker, or the owner’s or caretaker’s agent (including members of the immediate family), either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. An animal within a vehicle of its owner shall be deemed to be upon the owner’s premises.

“Dangerous dog” means any dog that according to the records of any governmental entity: (A) inflicts severe injury upon a human being without provocation on public or private property, (B) kills a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner’s property, or (C) has been previously found to be dangerous because of an injury inflicted on a human, the owner having received notice, and the dog again aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals; provided, a dog shall not be considered or declared dangerous solely on the basis of inflicting bites on a person or by chasing or approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack toward any person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 

“License” or “tag” means a prenumbered identification tag acquired by the owner from an authorized agent for a specific animal. Rabies identification or other identification is not a license. “License” also refers to a city of Burlington business license.

“Owner” shall have the same meaning as defined in RCW 16.08.070.

“Person” includes individuals, corporations, departments, firms, partnerships, trusts or associations, or other legal entities, and agents of those entities.

“Potentially dangerous dog” means any dog that when unprovoked: (A) inflicts bites on a human or domestic animal either on public or private property, or (B) chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, cause injury, or otherwise threaten safety of humans or domestic animals. A dog shall not be considered or declared potentially dangerous solely on the basis of inflicting bites on a person or by chasing or approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack toward any person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or tort upon premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

“Proper enclosure of a dangerous dog” means, while on the owner’s property, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of individuals and other domesticated animals, and designed to prevent the declared dog from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure does not have a concrete floor secured to the sides, then the structure must be embedded in the ground no less than one foot. The pen or structure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 

“Proper enclosure of a potentially dangerous dog” means, while on owner’s or caretaker’s property, a dog which has been declared potentially dangerous shall be confined indoors, or kept in a secured fenced yard suitable to prevent the entry of individuals and other domesticated animals and designed to prevent declared animal/s from escaping. The fence must meet all setbacks and height restrictions per chapter 17.45 BMC. 

“Severe injury” means any physical injury that results in broken bones, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or cosmetic surgery, and has the same meaning as defined in RCW 16.08.070. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.030 Adoption by reference.

The following provisions of the Revised Code of Washington as presently constituted or hereinafter amended are adopted by reference:

RCW

16.08.080    Dangerous dogs – Certificate of registration required – Prerequisites.

16.08.090    Dangerous dogs – Requirements for restraint – Potentially dangerous dogs – Dogs not declared dangerous.

16.08.100    Relating to dangerous dogs.

(Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.040 Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs.

A. It is unlawful for any owner to have, maintain, or bring into the city any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog unless the owner has obtained a certificate of registration for the dog from the city and is in compliance with all of the provisions made applicable to the keeping of these dogs by this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement for police work.

B. It is unlawful for the owner, custodian, or caretaker of any dog to:

1. Permit a dog which has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous which remains on the owner’s property to be outside of a proper enclosure of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog as appropriate.

C. The animal control officer may find and declare a dog dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal control officer has probable cause to believe that the dog falls within the definition set forth in BMC 6.06.020. The finding must be based upon:

1. The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the dog has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition in this chapter; or

2. Dog bite reports filed with any animal control officer as required by this chapter or state law; or

3. Actions of the dog witnessed by any animal control officer or law enforcement officer; or

4. Other substantial admissible evidence.

D. The declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall be in writing, and shall be served on the owner in one of the following methods:

1. Certified mail to the owner’s or caretaker’s last known address, if known; or

2. Personally; or

3. If the owner cannot be located by one of the first two methods, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

E. The declaration shall include:

1. A description of the dog;

2. The name and address of the owner or caretaker of the dog, if known;

3. The whereabouts of the dog if it is not in the custody of the owner;

4. The facts upon which the declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog is based;

5. The availability of a hearing as provided in BMC 6.06.070;

6. The restrictions placed on the dog as a result of the declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog.

F. If the owner of the dog wishes to object to the declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog:

1. The owner may, within 10 days of receipt of the declaration, or within 10 days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to this section, request a hearing before the Burlington municipal court by submitting a written request to the clerk of the court.

2. If the court finds that there is insufficient evidence to support the declaration, it shall be rescinded, and the restrictions imposed thereby annulled.

3. If the court finds sufficient evidence to support the declaration, it may impose court costs on the appellant, and may impose additional restrictions on the dog.

4. In the event the court finds that the dog is not a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, no court costs shall be assessed against the city of Burlington or the animal control office or police officer.

G. Following service of a declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, and pending appeals under this chapter or to any other court with jurisdiction, the animal control officer may, if circumstances require, impound the dog at the owner’s expense, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, until a court orders either its redemption or destruction.

H. The owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall obtain a license for such dog from the animal control officer, and shall be required to pay the fee for such license in the amount set forth in this chapter, or as hereafter amended, within 10 days of the service or posting of the declaration unless a court date is requested. In addition, the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall pay an annual renewal fee for such license in the amount set forth in this chapter, comply with confinement requirements as outlined, and file proof of insurance as outlined in this chapter or as amended after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.050 Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs registration.

A. The animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog if the owner presents to the animal control officer sufficient evidence of:

1. A proper enclosure as defined to confine a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog and the posting on the premises with a clearly visible warning sign that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property. In addition, the owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog;

2. Payment of the registration fee as outlined in this chapter;

3. Proof of insurance as outlined under BMC 6.06.060.

B. A certificate of registration as used in this chapter shall be obtained from the animal control officer. The owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall obtain a certificate of registration from the animal control officer, and shall be required to pay the fee for the certificate of registration in the amount set forth in this chapter. In addition, the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall pay an annual renewal fee for each potentially dangerous or dangerous dog licensed in the amount set forth this chapter, and shall submit proof of compliance with this chapter.

C. The license fee for each potentially dangerous dog to be licensed under this chapter is adopted by city council resolution. The annual renewal fee for each potentially dangerous dog licensed under this chapter is adopted by city council resolution. 

D. The license fee for each dangerous dog to be licensed under this chapter is adopted by city council resolution. The annual renewal fee for each dangerous dog licensed is adopted by city council resolution. 

E. The owner of any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog for which a certification of registration has been issued by the city shall notify the animal control officer in writing whenever the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog has been permanently removed from the city, or becomes deceased. (Ord. 1799 § 10, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.060 Liability insurance – Bond or insurance – Required for animals declared.

A. An owner of a dog declared dangerous must either (1) secure a surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under chapter 48.28 RCW in a form acceptable to the city of Burlington in the sum adopted by city council resolution, payable to any person injured by the dangerous dog; or (2) secure a policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance issued by an insurer qualified under RCW Title 48 in an amount adopted by city council resolution, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog. See RCW 16.08.080.

B. An owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous must either (1) secure a surety bond issued by a surety insurer qualified under chapter 48.28 RCW in a form acceptable to the city of Burlington in the sum adopted by city council resolution, payable to any person injured by the potentially dangerous dog; or (2) secure a policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner’s insurance issued by an insurer qualified under RCW Title 48 in an amount adopted by city council resolution, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous dog. (Ord. 1799 § 11, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.070 Hearings.

A. Any owner against whom costs have been assessed under this chapter may contest the costs by requesting a hearing in the Burlington municipal court within 10 days of notification of the costs by the animal control officer.

B. Where an owner has requested a hearing pursuant to this chapter, no potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog which is in the possession of the animal control officer shall be destroyed until the resolution of such hearing; provided, however, that additional costs in the amount per day adopted by city council resolution shall be assessed against any owner whose potentially dangerous or dangerous dog remains in the custody of the animal control officer during any hearings requested under this chapter where resolution of the hearing is that all or any part of the costs against the owner is found properly assessed.

C. Following resolution of any contested hearing regarding costs as provided herein, the owner of any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the possession of the animal control officer shall pay all costs which may have been assessed as authorized above within 10 days of the final resolution of any hearing regarding costs.

D. Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog which has not been picked up from the animal control authority by its owner within 10 days of the final resolution of any hearing regarding costs under this chapter shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; however, additional costs in the amount adopted by city council resolution for the cost of destroying the dog shall be assessed against the owner, and may be collected as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1799 § 12, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.080 Immunity.

The city of Burlington, the animal control officer, and any police officer, city official, employee, or agent of the city shall be immune from any and all civil liability for any actions taken pursuant to this title, or for failure to take action to enforce provisions of this title. It is not the purpose or intent of this chapter to create on the part of Burlington or its agents any special duties or relationships with specific individuals. This chapter has been enacted for the welfare of the public as a whole. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.090 Enforcement.

A. All costs required to be paid by owners pursuant to fees adopted by city council resolution shall be paid to the city of Burlington.

B. No potentially dangerous or dangerous dog confiscated by the animal control officer shall be returned to any owner until the owner has paid all costs or fees which have been assessed against the owner under this chapter. (Ord. 1799 § 13, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.100 Violation – Nondeclaration no defense.

The fact that a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog has not been declared as such under this chapter or similar laws in other jurisdictions shall not excuse noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter or provide a defense in any prosecution hereunder where the owner or caretaker knew or should have known the dog was a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.110 Penalties.

A. Any owner of a potentially dangerous dog who fails to obtain a license or renewal for the dog as described in this chapter shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be assessed costs in the amount of $250.00; provided, however, that no costs be assessed until five days have elapsed from the date the owner is notified by the animal control officer that a license or renewal for the potentially dangerous dog is required, or until any appeal brought under that section has been completed, whichever is later.

B. Any owner of a dangerous dog who fails to obtain a certificate of registration or renewal for a dog as set forth in this chapter shall have committed a civil infraction and shall be assessed costs in the amount of $500.00; provided, however, that no costs be assessed until five days have elapsed from the date the owner is notified by the animal control officer that a license or renewal for the dangerous dog is required.

C. Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog for which a license or certificate of registration (or renewal) has not been obtained by its owner, is subject to being impounded by the animal control officer. The owner of any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog impounded shall be subject to costs in the amount of $15.00 per day for each day the dog remains impounded. Any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog impounded due to the failure of the owner to obtain the required license or certificate of registration, and which remains impounded for a period of at least 20 days due to the failure of the owner to obtain a license or certificate of registration (or renewal), may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner by the animal control officer.

D. It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside the proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but it shall prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. Any owner who violates this provision shall be assessed costs of $250.00 for each violation thereof.

E. Any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer if: (1) the dog is not validly registered under this chapter; (2) the owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage required under this chapter; (3) the dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; (4) the dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner, or outside of the proper enclosure and not under the physical restraint of a responsible person. In addition, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with BMC 1.24.020. 

The owner of any dog confiscated under this chapter may recover the dog from the animal control officer upon the payment of costs which shall be in the amount of $250.00 plus $15.00 per day for each day the dog has been in the control of the animal control officer; provided, however, that in the event the owner has not picked up the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog within 10 days of being notified by the animal control officer that the dog is under the control of the officer, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner shall be assessed an additional cost in the amount of $65.00 for the cost of destroying the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.

F. If an owner of a dangerous dog with a prior conviction under this chapter attacks and/or bites a person or another domestic animal causing significant injury or death, the dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner of any dangerous dog confiscated and destroyed shall be assessed costs in the amount of $15.00 per day for each day the dangerous dog is quarantined with the animal control authority and the owner shall be assessed an additional cost in the amount of $65.00 for the cost of destroying the dangerous dog. 

G. Any dog that has already been declared as potentially dangerous or dangerous that is caught running at large shall be in violation. The owner shall be assessed additional costs in the amount of $250.00.

H. The owner of any dog that aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or death of any human, regardless of whether there has been any previous determination of whether the dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous, shall be reported to the animal control officer. In addition, the dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer, placed in quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner of any potentially dangerous or dangerous dog confiscated and destroyed shall be assessed costs in the amount of $15.00 per day for each day the dog is quarantined with the animal control authority and assessed costs in the amount of $65.00 for destroying the dog. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.120 Nonliability.

Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, or shall be, construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the city of Burlington, its officers, employees or agents, or by reason or in consequence of any omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this section on the part of the city of Burlington by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


6.06.130 Severability.

In the event any term or condition of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other terms, conditions, or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid term, condition, or application. To this end, the terms and conditions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 1667 § 4, 2009).


Chapter 6.10 COMMERCIAL KENNELS, GROOMING PARLORS, PET SHOPS, SHELTERS

Sections:

6.10.010    Purpose.

6.10.020    Definitions.

6.10.030    License requirements – Commercial kennels – Grooming parlors – Pet shops – Shelters.

6.10.040    Application.

6.10.050    Inspection at processing.

6.10.060    Display.

6.10.070    Revocation, denial or refusal to renew.

6.10.080    Appeal of revocation or denial of license.

6.10.090    Inspections.

6.10.100    Records required.

6.10.110    Commercial kennels, pet shops and shelters – General conditions.

6.10.120    Indoor facilities – Specific conditions.

6.10.130    Outdoor facilities – Specific conditions.

6.10.140    Grooming parlors – Specific conditions.

6.10.150    Violation – Penalty.

6.10.160    Severability.


6.10.010 Purpose.

It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city of Burlington to provide for the general welfare of the residents and visitors to the city of Burlington through the adoption and enforcement of these animal control measures deemed necessary for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of residents, visitors and animals within the city of Burlington and to prevent injury to property and cruelty to animals. To this end, it is the purpose of the ordinance codified herein to provide a means of licensing commercial kennels, grooming parlors, pet shops, and shelters. The city council expresses no intent to create a class of person who are specially benefited by this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.020 Definitions.

Within the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Boarding” means the act of providing regular food, meals, shelter, exercise, and care for animals in the absence of the owner or caretaker who would normally provide these things.

“Commercial” means having profit as a primary purpose of operations.

“Commercial cattery” means any premises used to conduct a commercial business involving the breeding, buying, selling, or boarding of cats, but excluding animal hospitals and clinics where animals are kept only for treatment by licensed veterinarians and nonprofit animal shelters where animals are kept for care and treatment pending redemption, adoption or euthanasia.

“Commercial kennel” shall hold the same meaning as a “commercial cattery” except involving dogs. This will include animal day care centers.

“Grooming parlor” means any place of business (stationary or mobile) where animals are bathed, clipped, dipped or combed, or otherwise serviced for a valuable consideration for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value.

“Kennel” shall hold the same meaning as “commercial kennel”; however, it will include anyone who has ownership of more than four dogs and follows a land use permit pursuant to chapter 17.68 BMC.

“License” means a license issued by the city of Burlington.

“Pet shop” means any business or commercial establishment wherein animals commonly referred to or considered to be pets are kept or displayed for sale to any persons or organizations for either private or commercial purposes.

“Shelter” means governmental or private entities that provide temporary homes for stray or surrendered animals, most often dogs and cats, until the animals are reclaimed by the owners, adopted, placed with another entity, or euthanized. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.030 License requirements – Commercial kennels – Grooming parlors – Pet shops – Shelters.

It is unlawful for any person to own, maintain or operate a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter within the city unless such person has first obtained the applicable license as required by chapter 5.04 BMC and a land use permit pursuant to chapter 17.68 BMC and this title. Such license shall be nontransferable. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.040 Application.

In addition to licensing requirements, any person making application for a license for a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, or animal shelter shall submit the following information to the planning department: 

A. Name, address, and phone number of the owner of such business;

B. Name, address, and phone number of the persons having primary supervision of such business;

C. The street address, mailing address, and phone number of such business;

D. A statement giving permission for the inspection of the business at any reasonable time. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.050 Inspection at processing.

This chapter sets forth conditions for any commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, or shelter license in order to provide for safe and humane treatment of animals. Upon application for a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, or shelter license, the designated animal control officer shall inspect the proposed facilities to determine whether the facilities comply with the required conditions set forth in this chapter. If it is found they do not, the license shall not issue and the applicant shall be advised in writing of the reasons for denial. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.060 Display.

In addition to the requirements, the license issued for a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or shelter shall be posted on the premises in a location easily observed by the public. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.070 Revocation, denial or refusal to renew.

A license for any commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, or shelter may be revoked, denied, or not renewed by the city for failure to comply with provisions of this chapter.

Such action shall be final and conclusive unless within 10 days of written notification thereof an appeal is filed in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.080 Appeal of revocation or denial of license.

Any person having an application, seeking renewal, or having a license to do business as a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop or animal shelter issued which is revoked or denied, may request a hearing before the city council appealing the administrative decision to revoke or deny, or impose requirements as a condition of issuance of the license. The request shall be in writing and filed with the city finance director within 10 days of written notification of revocation or denial. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.090 Inspections.

The designated animal control officer shall have the authority to enter and inspect the premises of a commercial kennel, grooming parlor, pet shop, or licensed shelter pursuant to this chapter at reasonable times to determine whether the facility is being operated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.100 Records required.

Each commercial kennel, pet shop, and shelter shall prepare, maintain, and make available to the designated animal control officer a current record of all dogs and other animals sold, auctioned, or otherwise disposed of and a current record of all dogs and other animals born within the facility or acquired from other sources. The records shall include the origin, age, and type of dog, or other animal, and the name and address of the transferee and transferor. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.110 Commercial kennels, pet shops and shelters – General conditions.

Commercial kennels, pet shops, and shelters shall meet the following conditions:

A. Appropriate animal housing facilities shall be provided for all animals, shall be structurally sound, shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be designed to protect the animals from injury and restrict the entry of other animals.

B. Each animal shall be provided with adequate floor space to allow the animal to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position.

C. Any electrical power shall be supplied in conformance with applicable electrical codes adequate to supply heating and lighting as may be required by this chapter.

D. Water shall be supplied at sufficient pressure and quantity to clean indoor housing facilities and/or enclosures of debris and excreta.

E. Suitable food and bedding shall be provided and stored in facilities adequate to provide protection against infestation or contamination by insects or rodents.

F. Refrigeration shall be provided for the protection of perishable foods.

G. Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals, and debris. Disposal facilities shall be provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and disease hazards.

H. Washroom facilities, including sinks and toilets, with hot and cold water, shall be conveniently available to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers and for the purpose of washing utensils and equipment.

I. Sick, diseased, or injured animals shall be separated from those appearing healthy and normal, and, if for sale, shall be removed from display and sale or adoption, and kept in isolation quarters with adequate ventilation to keep from contaminating healthy animals.

J. There shall be an employee or caretaker on duty at all times during business hours whose responsibility shall be the care and supervision of the animals in that shop or department responsible for the sale, adoption, or display of these animals.

K. An employee, caretaker, or owner shall make provisions to feed, water and do the necessary cleaning of animals. In each period of 24 consecutive hours, to provide food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or maintenance of body weight; in each period of 24 consecutive hours, to provide open or adequate access to potable water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the animals’ needs. Neither ice or snow is an adequate water source.

L. No person shall misrepresent an animal to a consumer in any way.

M. No person shall knowingly give an animal for adoption or sell a sick or injured animal without disclosing the sickness or injury to the adopter or purchaser.

N. Animals which are caged, closely confined, or restrained shall be permitted daily exercise for an appropriate length of time, as determined by their size, age, and species, in a yard or area suitable for that purpose. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.120 Indoor facilities – Specific conditions.

Commercial kennels, pet shops and shelters which have indoor facilities for animals shall:

A. Be sufficiently heated or cooled when necessary to protect the animals from temperatures to which they are not accustomed, taking into consideration their age, size and species;

B. Be adequately ventilated to provide for the health of the animals and to remove foul odors therefrom;

C. Have ample light, either natural or artificial, or both, of good quality and well distributed to provide for illumination as necessary to inspect and clean;

D. Have interior walls, ceiling and floor surfaces constructed of materials which are resistant to the absorption of moisture and odors, or such surfaces shall be treated with sealant or paint;

E. Contain a suitable method of drainage to facilitate the rapid elimination of excess water under any weather or temperature condition from indoor housing facilities; provided, this requirement shall not apply to display areas of pet shops;

F. Be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, with the use of safe and effective disinfectants. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.130 Outdoor facilities – Specific conditions.

Commercial kennels, pet shops, and shelters having outdoor facilities for animals shall:

A. Be constructed to provide shelter from excessive sunlight, rain, snow, wind, heat, cold or other elements;

B. Be constructed to provide sufficient space for the proper exercise and movement of each animal contained therein;

C. Contain a suitable system of drainage to be constructed to prevent an accumulation of water, mud, debris, excreta or other material and capable of being kept clean and sanitary and shall be so kept;

D. Be enclosed by walls or fences sufficient to keep animals within and to prevent entry of other animals. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.140 Grooming parlors – Specific conditions.

Grooming parlors shall:

A. Not board animals, but keep said animals for a reasonable time in order to perform the business of grooming;

B. Keep each animal in an individual cage;

C. Not permit animals kept for the purpose of grooming to have contact with other animals kept therein;

D. Sanitize all equipment after each animal has been groomed;

E. Not prescribe treatment or medicine that is the province of a licensed veterinarian as provided in RCW 18.92.010;

F. Not leave animals unattended during the drying process;

G. Take reasonable precautions to prevent injury from occurring to any animal while in the custody of the parlor. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.150 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in BMC 1.24.020. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


6.10.160 Severability.

In the event any term or condition of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other terms, conditions, or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid term, condition, or application. To this end, the terms and conditions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 1667 § 6, 2009).


Chapter 6.12 EXOTIC ANIMALS

Sections:

6.12.010    Purpose.

6.12.020    Definitions.

6.12.030    Prohibited species.

6.12.040    Exotic animals – Regulations.

6.12.050    Severability.


6.12.010 Purpose.

It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city of Burlington to provide for the general welfare of the residents and visitors to the city of Burlington through the adoption and enforcement of these animal control measures deemed necessary for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of animals within the city of Burlington and to prevent injury to property and cruelty to animals. To this end, it is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public and to regulate the animals so that it will not constitute a nuisance. The city council expresses no intent to create a class of person/s who are specially benefited by this chapter. (Ord. 1667 § 5, 2009).


6.12.020 Definitions.

“Boarding” means the act of providing regular food, water, shelter, exercise, and care for animals in the absence of the owner or caretaker who would normally provide these things.

“Exotic animal” means any member of the animal kingdom which is not commonly domesticated, or which is not common to North America, or which irrespective of geographic origin is of a wild or predatory nature, or any animal except livestock and domesticated animals which due to size, habits, natural propensities, instinct, handling or training presents a danger or potential danger to human beings, animals or property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner. 

“Wild animal” shall hold the same meaning as “exotic animal.” 

Unless some other meaning and intent is apparent from the context, the present tense includes the past and future tense and the future includes the present. Each gender includes all other genders and the singular includes the plural or vice versa. (Ord. 1667 § 5, 2009).


6.12.030 Prohibited species.

A. All nonhuman primates;

B. All wild cats of the family Felidae and their hybrid, except for the domestic cat, Felis catus;

C. All species of bear;

D. All wild carnivores of the family Canidae and their hybrid, except for the domestic dog, Canis familiaris;

E. Venomous reptiles and amphibians;

F. All reticulated pythons, Burmese pythons and snakes which may reach 10 feet or more in length; and

G. All members of the alligator (Alligator), crocodile (Crocodylus) and caiman (Crocodylus) families. (Ord. 1667 § 5, 2009).


6.12.040 Exotic animals – Regulations.

A. Prior to any exotic or wild animal coming into the city, the proper registration form must be filled out, and the animal control officer shall inspect the quarters where the animal is intended to be contained. Registration shall not be allowed and the animal shall not be brought into the city if, in the judgment of the animal control officer, the quarters intended are inadequate to safely and humanely contain the animal. If registration is allowed the following conditions shall be met prior to the animal being allowed into the city, excluding avian species:

1. A fee adopted by city council resolution per animal shall be paid at the time of registration;

2. A current photograph of the animal shall be filed with the registration application;

3. The quarters where the animal will be contained are subject to inspection and approval by the animal control officer prior to the animal coming into the city and further inspections may be done at any reasonable time by the animal control officer or police officer;

4. The possessor of an exotic or wild animal shall provide a written plan for capture should the animal escape and shall also provide names of two additional people who will assist in the capture of the exotic or wild animal;

5. The possessor of an exotic or wild animal shall provide a copy of a policy for liability insurance, such as a homeowner’s insurance or surety bond qualified under chapter 48.28 RCW in the amount adopted by city council resolution payable to a person injured by the exotic or wild animal to the police department on an annual basis;

6. The possessor of an exotic or wild animal shall have continuously posted and displayed at each possible entrance onto the premises where an exotic or wild animal is kept a conspicuous sign, clearly legible, and easily readable by the public, warning there is an exotic or wild animal on the premises. In addition, the letters shall be no smaller than six inches in height.

B. If any exotic animal unintentionally escapes, the possessor of the exotic animal shall immediately contact a law enforcement office of the city where the possessor resides to report the escape or release. The possessor is liable for all expenses associated with efforts to recapture the exotic animal. No person may intentionally release an exotic or wild animal. If an exotic or wild animal is intentionally released, the possessor is liable for all expenses associated with efforts to recapture the animal. If an exotic animal escapes, or if it appears from such inspection or otherwise, that an exotic animal might escape, an order may be given by the animal control officer or police officer that such quarters be immediately repaired or improved, and, if this is not done, the exotic animal may be impounded and held at the owner’s expense until the repairs or improvements are made. The city may move to humanely destroy or adopt the animal if not claimed within 72 hours.

C. The possessor shall not bring any exotic or wild animal to any public property or a commercial or retail establishment unless the possessor is bringing the animal to a licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian clinic. An exotic animal registration is nontransferable. 

D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to wild or exotic animals listed in subsection (A) of this section when such animals are safely and continuously contained during uninterrupted transport through the city or to a veterinary hospital within the city.

E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to raptors possessed under official state or federal authorization.

F. No person shall own any wild animal unless that person has obtained a permit from the State Game Department and/or Federal Fish and Wildlife Service. Persons who obtain a permit for temporary care of injured or orphaned infant wild animals must comply with the provisions of exotic animals. 

G. All persons who possess any of the animals listed in subsection (A) of this section as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall register said animals with the police department within 10 days. The animal control officer shall specify the conditions under which the animal must be kept while the owners arrange to remove the animal from the city. Removal must occur within 30 days of registration. Failure to timely comply with the conditions of registration or remove an exotic or wild animal listed in subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

H. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may, upon conviction, be punished by confinement not to exceed 90 days and/or not to exceed a $1,000 fine. (Ord. 1799 § 14, 2014; Ord. 1667 § 5, 2009).


6.12.050 Severability.

In the event any term or condition of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other terms, conditions, or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid term, condition, or application. To this end, the terms and conditions of this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 1667 § 5, 2009).


Title 7 (Reserved) 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Garbage Collection and Disposal

8.06    Special Garbage Collection Services and Charges for Certain Persons

8.08    Weed Control

8.12    Nuisances

8.14    Noise Abatement and Control

8.16    False Alarms

8.20    Camping

8.24    Ambulance Service


Chapter 8.04 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL

Sections:

8.04.010    Purpose.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    System – Use required.

8.04.040    System – Administration.

8.04.050    Carts – Materials, construction, use and maintenance.

8.04.060    Carts – Weight limitation – Garbage, recycling and yard waste carts.

8.04.070    Bulk collection containers permitted when.

8.04.080    Certain materials prohibited.

8.04.090    Burning, dumping or collection prohibited.

8.04.100    Times designated.

8.04.110    Repealed.

8.04.120    Access and use of contractor-owned bins restricted.

8.04.130    Separation of garbage – Recycling and yard waste.

8.04.140    Yard waste – Collection stations established.

8.04.150    Yard waste – Restrictions on disposal.

8.04.160    Dumpster standards.

8.04.162    Location.

8.04.164    Pad size requirements.

8.04.166    Construction standards.

8.04.168    Enclosure requirements.

8.04.170    Charges – Fee schedule – Payment delinquent when.

8.04.180    Disposal or accumulation prohibited when.

8.04.185    Damages.

8.04.190    Violation – Penalty.


8.04.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for health and sanitation within the city by providing for and regulating the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and refuse, establishing charges for garbage collection and disposal, the manner and time for payment of said charges, establishing a lien against the property for which the garbage collection service is rendered, and providing penalties for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 2, 1997).


8.04.020 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are applicable:

A. “Alley” means any public or private way giving access to the rear of lots or buildings.

B. “Bulky waste” means large items of waste, such as furniture and other oversized wastes that would typically not fit into garbage carts.

C. “City” means the city of Burlington, Skagit County, Washington.

D. “City service area” means the portion of the city subject to the contract for collection services. The city service area will be the corporate limits of the city.

E. “Collection fee component” means the portion of the monthly service fee for a particular level of service that is related to the capital, operating and management costs of operating the contractor’s fleet, but not disposal costs.

F. “Commercial customer” means any business, institution or industrial site within the city. Multifamily residences are considered commercial customers for the purpose of this contract.

G. “Contract” means the city of Burlington agreement for solid waste collection services.

H. “Contractor” means current contracted provider.

I. “Curbside” means the area on residential property, within five feet of the public street without blocking sidewalks, driveways or on-street parking. For residential property currently receiving garbage pickup in an alley accessible by collection vehicles, “curbside” may be considered to be in the current alley location and within five feet of the edge of the alley. If extraordinary circumstances preclude such a location, “curbside” will be considered a placement suitable to the residential property and convenient to the contractor’s equipment and approved by the city public works director, or designee.

J. “Disposal site” will mean the area designated by the city for the disposal of garbage.

K. “Drop-box container” means an all-metal container with a 10-cubic-yard or more capacity that is loaded onto a collection vehicle, transported to a disposal site, emptied and transported back to the customer’s site.

L. “Garbage” means all mixed putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including, but not limited to: mixed discards, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, swill and sewer plant screenings; provided, however, that “garbage” does not include industrial by-products, source-separated recyclable materials that have been separated from other wastes by the generator, sewage sludge, septage, abandoned vehicles or appliances.

M. “Garbage cart” means a city public works director approved, contractor-owned and contractor-provided container for the purpose of collecting garbage.

N. “Hazardous waste” means any waste material included in the State of Washington Department of Ecology Dangerous Waste Regulations, chapter 173-300 WAC.

O. “High density units” means a residential structure containing six or more dwelling units.

P. “Multiple-family or multifamily unit” means a residential structure containing two to five dwelling units. Each dwelling within a multifamily unit will be charged as a “single-family unit.”

Q. “Person” means every person, firm, partnership, association, institution or corporation in the city accumulating garbage requiring disposal. The work will also mean the occupant and/or the owner of the premises for which services herein mentioned is rendered.

R. “Public works director” means an official of the city holding that office, or its designated representative.

S. “Recycling contract” means city of Burlington contract No. 2003-28 to provide residential collection, processing and marketing of curbside recyclables and curbside yard waste from April 1, 2003, to March 31, 2009.

T. “Recycling coordinator” means the public works director for the city of Burlington, Skagit County, Washington.

U. “Service fee” means the sum of the collection fee component and disposal fee component charged to the customer for a particular level of service, including applicable taxes and fees.

V. “Single-family” means a residential structure containing not more than one dwelling unit.

W. “Solid waste coordinator” means the public works director for the city of Burlington, Skagit County, Washington. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 3, 1997).


8.04.030 System – Use required.

It is compulsory that all property owners and occupants of premises shall use the garbage collection and disposal system as provided or contracted by the city and shall dispose of their garbage and refuse as provided in this chapter and the charges to be made therefor shall be universal and compulsory. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 4, 1997).


8.04.040 System – Administration.

The city shall provide for and administer the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and refuse within the city either through direct services or contractual agreement and said system shall be administered by the public works department, subject to the approval and direction of the city council. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1493 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 5, 1997).


8.04.050 Carts – Materials, construction, use and maintenance.

A. The carts required to be kept and utilized pursuant to this chapter shall be watertight carts with attached lids and will be provided by the contracted solid waste and recycling collection provider as defined by the city.

B. Carts shall be kept in a sanitary condition with the outside thereof clean and free from accumulating grease and decomposing materials. Each cart shall be kept in a place accessible to the collector of garbage and refuse. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 6, 1997).


8.04.060 Carts – Weight limitation – Garbage, recycling and yard waste carts.

For garbage and recycling carts one 20-gallon cart with 20-gallon insert shall not weigh more than 45 pounds; one 35-gallon cart shall not weigh more than 65 pounds; one 64-gallon cart shall not weigh more than 130 pounds; and one 96-gallon cart shall not weigh more than 195 pounds. One 96-gallon yard waste cart shall not weigh more than 195 pounds. Contractural provider employees may refuse to collect any carts which exceed these weight limits.

A. Any customer using more than their allotted number of carts, or where garbage is not adequately contained, may, at the discretion of the contracted sanitation supervisor, be required to utilize a bin for garbage disposal and shall be charged at the commercial rate established through private provider bid approved by the city.

B. High density dwelling units or apartment buildings consisting of six or more units shall be required to use commercial bins for disposal of garbage.

C. The city acknowledges the right by contractor to charge extra dump and collection fees by the private contractor for approved carts or bins that are overfilled and overweight. Extra dumps, larger bins, or roll-off bins may be required for overweight disposal within the city and said system shall be administered by the garbage private contractor. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 7, 1997).


8.04.070 Bulk collection containers permitted when.

Large suitable containers for bulk collection of garbage and refuse may, with the approval of the contracted service provider, be used by hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, eating places, apartment houses, schools and hospitals and in the business districts. Waste paper or office supplies may be deposited in waste paper baskets or other suitable receptacles. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 8, 1997).


8.04.080 Certain materials prohibited.

It is unlawful to set out for collection any material likely to produce dust, fumes or vapors or any material likely to be carried by the wind unless such material is securely bagged and tied and contained within the garbage or recycle carts in such a manner as to prevent it from being so carried by the wind or giving off such dust, fumes or vapors during the process of garbage and recycling collection. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 9, 1997).


8.04.090 Burning, dumping or collection prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to burn garbage, refuse or yard waste; to dump or deposit any garbage and refuse upon any street or alley or private property in the city; or to collect, remove or dispose of the same except as in this chapter provided. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 10, 1997).


8.04.100 Times designated.

Garbage shall be collected, removed and disposed of in the residential sections of the city at least once each week, and from hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, eating places, apartment houses, schools and in the business section of the city not less than once a week or, in the discretion of the public works department, more often as may be required. Recycling materials shall be collected, removed and disposed of from residential and commercial areas a minimum of every other week. Collections in the business sections of the city shall be made before the hour of 7:00 a.m. Residential sections of the city shall include all portions thereof not otherwise designated. Collection in the residential sections of the city shall be made after the hour of 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1493 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 11, 1997).


8.04.110 Stickers required for collection.

Repealed by Ord. 1539. (Ord. 1346 § 12, 1997).


8.04.120 Access and use of contractor-owned bins restricted.

Use of contractor-owned bins shall be restricted to use by the owner or employees of the business/commercial establishment to which the bin has been provided and solely for the purpose of depositing garbage and refuse for collection by the city’s designated and contracted garbage, refuse and recycling collector. Any unauthorized use of such bins shall be unlawful. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 13, 1997).


8.04.130 Separation of garbage – Recycling and yard waste.

City-approved carts will be provided by the contractor for mandatory solid waste and recycling collection. A yard waste cart will be provided by the contractor at the request of the customer and at an additional fee. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 14, 1997).


8.04.140 Yard waste – Collection stations established.

The city shall establish and maintain one collection station for yard waste. Such station shall be available to the citizens of the city for the disposal of yard wastes. Days and hours of operation and charges shall be established by the public works department and approved by the city council as needed. The public works department shall cause notice to be made to the public by such means as the public works department shall deem most appropriate, describing the availability of such station, its purpose, location or locations and days and hours of operation. The city also recognizes the collection of yard waste using curbside carts as provided by the city-designated solid waste contractor. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1493 § 3, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 15, 1997).


8.04.150 Yard waste – Restrictions on disposal.

Unless a yard waste cart is secured from the designated solid waste collector, it is unlawful to set out for collection any grass, yard clippings, tree trimmings, weeds or any other yard wastes and the same shall not be collected by the garbage collectors. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 16, 1997).


8.04.160 Dumpster standards.

All commercial, industrial and multifamily residential that use dumpsters and/or recycling containers shall follow the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 17, 1997).


8.04.162 Location.

All dumpster and recycling container locations, including roll-out areas, shall provide for direct and unobstructed access by sanitation equipment and personnel; further provided, all dumpsters and recycle containers with an individual capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more shall not be located within five feet of combustible walls, openings, or combustible roof eave lines. All locations and pad improvements shall be approved by the sanitation and fire departments prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 18, 1997).


8.04.164 Pad size requirements.

A. Pad Size Requirements – Minimum Opening and Depth for Garbage Dumpster Only.

	Dumpster Size	Minimum Opening	Minimum Depth



	4 cubic yards	12 feet	 10 feet

	2 cubic yards	12 feet	 10 feet

	1-1/2 cubic yards	12 feet	 10 feet

B. Pad Size Requirements – Minimum Opening and Depth for Garbage Dumpster and Recycling Containers.

	Dumpster Size	Minimum Opening	Minimum Depth



	4 cubic yards	18 feet	 10 feet

	2 cubic yards	18 feet	 10 feet

	1-1/2 cubic yards	18 feet	 10 feet

(Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1493 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 19, 1997).


8.04.166 Construction standards.

All pad and roll-out areas shall be constructed of concrete with the thickness to be not less than four inches. All pads shall be level. All pads’ top surface elevation shall be even with parking lot or driveway top surface elevation. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 20, 1997).


8.04.168 Enclosure requirements.

A. All dumpster and recycling container pads shall be enclosed by a minimum of a six-foot sight-obscuring fence to screen and retain the dumpster/container on the pad site as well as contain and control blowing debris. A 50-foot area in front of enclosures is required sufficient to maneuver garbage trucks.

B. For the health and safety of sanitation employees, all garbage must be contained within the dumpsters. Any garbage not contained and piled around the dumpster will not be picked up. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1493 § 5, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 21, 1997).


8.04.170 Charges – Fee schedule – Payment delinquent when.

A. All charges for privatized garbage services as identified in the current solid waste contract shall be approved by the council. All charges shall be paid on or before 30 days after the date of billing as shown upon the billing statement and if not so paid shall bear interest at a rate of 12 percent per annum until paid, and said charge may become a lien against the property which is serviced by the private solid waste collector.

B. Manufacturing, restaurants and food handling businesses: the required size of the dumpster shall be approved by the solid waste contractor. The amount and/or weight of garbage will determine the size of the dumpster and the number of dumps per week.

C. Hotels, motels, apartment buildings and senior assisted-living facilities: the required size of the dumpster shall be approved by the contracted solid waste supervisor. The amount and/or weight of garbage and refuse will determine the size of the dumpster and the number of dumps per week.

D. Hotels, motels, apartment houses and trailer courts are classified as business establishments and all carts or bins will be placed at one location and charged as one business establishment. Failure to place carts or bins at one location will result in classification of each unit as a dwelling and pickups at each unit will be charged as individual dwellings.

E. In the event any person shall make an unreasonable or unusually large use of the refuse collection and disposal facilities, the person shall contact the solid waste provider and pay the stipulated rate for excess solid waste.

F. Residents subject to garbage and recycling collection charges shall enroll for the desired level of service by applying to the contracted solid waste provider in the form and manner provided by their office. Fees are payable regardless of whether or not garbage is actually set out for collection. Where no service level has been designated by the current owner it shall be assumed that service level will be at the base rate of a 64-gallon cart.

G. There shall be no credit given for fees charged to residences or other buildings on the basis that such residence or building is, has been, or may be vacant. No credit will be granted for after-the-fact notification. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1507 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1493 § 6, 2002; Ord. 1346 § 22, 1997).


8.04.180 Disposal or accumulation prohibited when.

It is unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage or refuse on any public place or to allow garbage or refuse to collect or be stored in an unsanitary manner within the city. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 23, 1997).


8.04.185 Damages.

The city is not responsible for damages to buildings and other objects during the handling of garbage bins by a contracted private solid waste collector. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1496 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1493 § 7, 2002).


8.04.190 Violation – Penalty.

Any person(s) violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 1539 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1346 § 24, 1997).


Chapter 8.06 SPECIAL GARBAGE COLLECTION SERVICES AND CHARGES FOR CERTAIN PERSONS

Sections:

8.06.010    Purpose – Special residential collection services.

8.06.020    Discounts.

8.06.030    Application requirements.

8.06.040    City clerk-treasurer – Duties pertaining to affidavits and application forms.

8.06.050    Violation – Penalty.


8.06.010 Purpose – Special residential collection services.

Special pickup service will be provided, as requested by the city public works director, to those single-family residences where there are handicapped or elderly people who cannot move their garbage carts to the curbside. Single-family residences that are geographically located so as to make moving containers to the curbside an unreasonable physical hardship must apply to the city for the special collection services and submit documentation to justify their application. Single-family residences that qualify for this service will be determined solely by the city, based on submitted documentation.

Collection from single-family residences with elderly or handicapped persons who have received a waiver from the city will receive collection services from a location of their convenience as approved by the city and the contractor without additional cost. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 2004).


8.06.020 Discounts.

Discounts for services provided to residents 62 years of age or older and permanently disabled persons must be applied for at the city. Sufficient documentation must be submitted to justify the application. Single-family residences that qualify for this service will be determined solely by the city, based on submitted documentation. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 2004).


8.06.030 Application requirements.

A. No person, however qualified, shall be entitled to reduced garbage collection rates provided in this chapter until such person has made official application for the same with the clerk-treasurer of the city.

B. Reductions of rates made pursuant to this chapter shall be effective only for the billing period during which application is made in accordance with this chapter, and for those billing periods occurring thereafter during which time the applicant remains eligible to receive reduced garbage collection rates. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 2004; Ord. 978 § 3, 1981).


8.06.040 City clerk-treasurer – Duties pertaining to affidavits and application forms.

The city clerk-treasurer is directed to maintain a supply of affidavits and application forms establishing qualifications of applicants for reduced collection rates, in a form to be approved by the city council. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 2004; Ord. 978 § 4, 1981).


8.06.050 Violation – Penalty.

Any person making false representations in order to secure reduced garbage collection rates pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to $500.00 or 30 days in jail, or both. (Ord. 1540 § 1, 2004; Ord. 978 § 5, 1981).


Chapter 8.08 WEED CONTROL

Sections:

8.08.010    Undesirable growth prohibited.

8.08.020    Repealed.

8.08.030    Exemptions to chapter applicability.

8.08.040    Violations – Duties of owners and occupants.

8.08.050    Duty to enforce.

8.08.060    —

8.08.115    Repealed.

8.08.120    Civil penalty.

8.08.140    Repealed.


8.08.010 Undesirable growth prohibited.

A. Vegetation left uncut and/or in an unkempt stage may cause safety hazards, fire hazards, and/or pest harborages, and may interfere with, annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, or unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage, street or highway; or in any way render other persons insecure in life, or in the use and enjoyment of property, thus constituting a public nuisance. The following conditions are hereby declared to be nuisances within the city of Burlington:

1. Vegetation, or parts thereof, which obscures or conceals any traffic control sign, signals or other device so as to interfere with the full and effective use and visibility of the same to the motoring or pedestrian public;

2. Vegetation, or parts thereof, which obscures the visibility of the motoring or pedestrian public as such persons approach a street intersection for a distance of greater than 50 feet in any direction from the intersecting existing rights-of-way lines upon which the property abuts;

3. Overhanging limbs, branches, or other vegetation that are less than eight feet above a public walkway or sidewalk, or less than 14 feet above a public street;

4. Grass, weeds, bushes, trees or vegetation which has died and which constitutes a fire hazard or a harborage for rats, vermin, and/or pests;

5. A dead, diseased, infested or dying tree or trees that constitute a danger to health or safety;

6. Any vines or climbing plants growing into or over utility pole or transformer, or the existence of any shrub, vine or plant growing on, around or in front of any hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes in such a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair access thereto;

7. Grass, weeds, or other similar vegetation, exclusive of flowers or plants within a flower bed or container, trees and shrubs, exceeding an average height of 12 inches; and

8. Any poison oak or poison ivy, Russian thistle or other noxious weeds, whether growing or otherwise; however nothing in this chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of such weeds in approved covered receptacles.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(7) of this section, any parcel of land or contiguous segregated parcels of land which, when combined, represents an area larger than one acre in size, may comply with these requirements by providing a firebreak along that portion of the perimeter of the parcel which abuts developed property or an improved street. The firebreak shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width, within which all weeds and vegetation, except established trees, shall not exceed 12 inches in height measured above the ground. (Ord. 1761 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1626 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1321 § 1, 1996; Ord. 533 § 1, 1955).


8.08.020 Removal – City to perform work when – Costs.

Repealed by Ord. 1321. (Ord. 533 § 2, 1955).


8.08.030 Exemptions to chapter applicability.

This chapter shall not apply to any property in the city which is characterized as a wetland, critical area, or natural resource lands designated or to be designated for protection under the Burlington Municipal Code pursuant to the Growth Management Act, chapter 36.70A RCW. (Ord. 1761 § 3, 2012; Ord. 533 § 3, 1955).


8.08.040 Violations – Duties of owners and occupants.

It is the duty of the owner of property and of any occupant of the property wherein or whereon any nuisance exists to abate the nuisance by destroying, removing or trimming vegetation, and removing or destroying any health, safety or fire hazard, and removing all shrubs, bushes, trees or vegetation growing or which has grown and died which is a fire hazard or is infested with caterpillars or other horticultural pests, or which otherwise constitutes a menace to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1761 § 4, 2012; Ord. 1321 § 3, 1996).


8.08.050 Duty to enforce.

A. The planning director shall enforce this chapter. The planning director or the planning director’s duly authorized representative may call upon the police, fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.

B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the planning director or duly authorized representative may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by this chapter.

C. This chapter shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

D. It is the intent of the Burlington city council to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter upon the owner and/or occupant of the land and buildings subject to the provisions of this chapter.

E. No provisions of or term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in civil action.

F. It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry on or do any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1761 § 5, 2012; Ord. 1321 § 4, 1996).


8.08.060 Investigation and notice of violation.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 5, 1996).


8.08.070 Time to comply.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 6, 1996).


8.08.080 Extension of compliance date.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 7, 1996).


8.08.100 Emergency order.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 8, 1996).


8.08.110 Summary abatement.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 9, 1996).


8.08.115 Abatement by owner or other responsible person.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 10, 1996).


8.08.120 Civil penalty.

Violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC. Each day shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1761 § 13, 2012; Ord. 1321 § 11, 1996).


8.08.140 Additional relief.

Repealed by Ord. 1761. (Ord. 1321 § 12, 1996).


Chapter 8.12  NUISANCES1

Sections:

8.12.010    Definitions.

8.12.020    Types of nuisances.

8.12.030    Violations.

8.12.040    Duty to enforce.

8.12.050    Disposal of diseased animal carcass.

8.12.055    Graffiti removal fund and graffiti removal.

8.12.060    Compliance, authority and administration.


8.12.010 Definitions.

A. “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer, in his or her judgment, determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

B. “Building materials” means and includes lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint and similar materials.

C. “Enforcement officer” means the code enforcement officer in the Burlington police department or any alternate designated by the chief of police.

D. “Garbage” means all discarded putrescible waste matter, including small dead animals weighing not over 15 pounds, but not including sewage or human or animal excrement.

E. “Graffiti” means the defacing, damaging or destroying by spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public or private buildings, structures, vehicles and places.

F. “Graffiti abatement” means the abatement procedure which identifies graffiti, issues notices to the property owner to abate the graffiti, and cures in the absence of response.

G. “Litter” means refuse such as, but not limited to, disposable packages and containers susceptible of being dropped, discarded or otherwise disposed of upon any property.

H. “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

I. “Refuse” means either garbage or rubbish or both garbage and rubbish, and includes litter.

J. “Responsible person” means any agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises, except the owner.

K. “Rubbish” means all discarded nonputrescible waste matter. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.020 Types of nuisances.

Each of the following conditions, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the enforcement officer determines that any of these conditions exist upon any premises, whether residential, commercial or industrial, or in any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetlands, the officer may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter:

A. The existence of any weeds, trash, dirt, filth, the carcass of any animal, waste, shrubs, accumulation of lawn or yard trimmings or other offensive matter.

B. The existence of any dead, diseased, infested or dying tree that may constitute a danger to street trees, streets or portions thereof.

C. The existence of any tree, shrub or foliage, unless by consent of the city, which is apt to destroy, impair, interfere or restrict:

1. Streets, sidewalks, sewers, utilities or other public improvements; and

2. Visibility on or free use of or access to such improvements.

D. The planting, setting, placing or installation of any shrub, bush or tree in any public parking strip or other public place except on approval of the city supervisor. The following trees are prohibited in any public parking strip: poplar, willow, cottonwood, fruit woods (except ornamental type), nut trees, ailanthus, mountain ash and Oregon or big leaf maple.

E. The existence of any vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street tree, or any public hydrant, pole or transformer, or the existence of any shrub, vine or plant growing on, around or in front of any hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or any other appliance or facility provided for fire protection purposes in such a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto.

F. The existence of any accumulation of materials or objects in a location when the same endangers property, safety or constitutes a fire hazard.

G. The existence of a sidewalk or portion of a sidewalk adjacent to any premises which is out of repair, and in a condition to endanger persons or property, or in a condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use of such sidewalk.

H. The burning or disposal of refuse, sawdust or any other material without a permit.

I. The existence of any obstruction to a street, alley, crossing or sidewalk, and any excavation in or under any street, alley, crossing or sidewalk, which is by ordinance prohibited, or which is made without lawful permission, or which, having been made by lawful permission, is kept and maintained after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, and for an unreasonable length of time.

J. The erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway or other public or private place in the city, any one or more of the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, disease-causing places, conditions or things:

1. Any putrid, unhealthy or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, or waste parts of fish, vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; but nothing in this chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved covered receptacles;

2. Any privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies and rats, or which are foul or malodorous;

3. Any filthy, littered or trash-covered dwellings, cellars, house yards, barnyards, stable yards, factory yards, vacant areas in the rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings or premises;

4. Any animal manure in any quantity which is not securely protected from flies or weather conditions, or which is kept or handled in violation of any ordinance of the city;

5. Any poison oak or poison ivy, Russian thistle or other noxious weeds, whether growing or otherwise; but nothing in this chapter shall prevent the temporary retention of such weeds in approved covered receptacles;

6. Any bottles, cans, glass, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire, metal articles, bric-a-brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster and all such trash, or abandoned material, unless it is kept in approved covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles;

7. Any trash, litter, rags, accumulations of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other packing materials, lumber not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire hazard;

8. Any litter, refuse, rubbish or garbage.

K. The depositing or burning or causing to be deposited or burned in any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway or other public place which is open to travel, of any hay, straw, paper, wood, boards, boxes, leaves, manure or other rubbish or material.

L. The storage or keeping on any premises for more than 30 days of any used or unused building materials as defined in BMC 8.12.010, whose retail cost new would exceed $100.00, without a special permit from the building official; provided, that nothing herein shall:

1. Prohibit such storage without a permit when done in conjunction with a construction project for which a building permit has been issued and which is being prosecuted diligently to completion;

2. Prohibit such storage without a permit upon the premises of a bona fide lumber yard, dealer in building materials or other commercial enterprise when the same is permitted under the zoning ordinance and other applicable laws; and

3. Make lawful any such storage or keeping when it is prohibited by other ordinances or laws.

M. The existence of any fence or other structure or thing on private property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk or place which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or other dilapidated or unsafe condition.

N. The existence or maintenance on any premises of a storage area, junkyard or dumping ground for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, trailers, house trailers, boats, tractors or other vehicle or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked, inoperative or abandoned automobiles, trucks, trailers, house trailers, boats, tractors or other vehicle or machinery or any major parts thereof.

O. The existence on any premises of any abandoned or unused well, cistern or storage tank without first demolishing or removing from the city such storage tank or securely closing and barring any entrance or trapdoor thereto or without filling any well or cistern or capping the same with sufficient security to prevent access thereto by children.

P. The existence on any premises, in a place accessible to children, of any unattended and/or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other large appliance.

Q. The existence of any drainage onto or over any sidewalk or public pedestrian way.

R. The existence or maintenance of graffiti, and other defacement of public and private property, including walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences, gates, vehicles, signs, road surfaces and other structures, trees, and all other real and personal property within the city.

S. The existence of any strong or offensive odor at the property line, including but not limited to rotting or decaying fish or other dead animals, rotting garbage, animal manure, strong chemical smells, and other strong or offensive odors.

T. Any other activity which has been declared a public nuisance by ordinances of the city as they currently exist or may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.030 Violations.

A. It is a violation of this chapter for any responsible person or owner to permit, maintain, suffer, carry on or allow, upon any premises or in any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetlands, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

B. It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry out or do any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

C. It is a violation of this chapter for anyone to fail to comply with any notice, complaint or order issued in accordance with this chapter.

D. It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, or draw upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, vehicle, sign, road surface or other structure, tree, or other real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing, inscription, figure or mark of the type which is commonly known and referred to as “graffiti” within the city. Violation of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.040 Duty to enforce.

A. It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to enforce this chapter. The enforcement officer may call upon the police, fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.

B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the enforcement officer or duly authorized representative of the officer may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued inspection warrant, enter at reasonable times any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by the nuisance code.

C. The nuisance code shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

D. It is the intent of this nuisance code to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner or responsible person for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of this code.

E. No provisions of or term used in this code is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in civil action.

F. It is unlawful for any responsible person or owner to permit, maintain, suffer, carry on or allow, upon any premises or in any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetlands, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

G. It is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, carry on or do any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance.

H. It is unlawful for anyone to deposit, throw, keep or place any garbage, rubbish, refuse or litter on any property, public or private, or in any public place except in garbage cans, or detachable containers where authorized, placed on private property or placed on the street or alley for collection when necessary, authorized or required. The owner or responsible person who is responsible for the condition of private property shall be responsible for removing any unlawful garbage, rubbish, refuse and litter. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.050 Disposal of diseased animal carcass.

Every person owning or having in charge any animal that has died or been killed on account of disease shall immediately bury the carcass thereof at least three feet underground at a place approved by the city health officer, or cause the same to be consumed by fire. No person shall sell or offer to sell or give away the carcass of any animal which died or was killed on account of disease. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.055 Graffiti removal fund and graffiti removal.

A. The city hereby creates a graffiti removal fund which will accept donations or fines levied for violations of the graffiti provisions of this code. The funds shall be for supplies for the removal of graffiti.

B. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that graffiti exists on any public or private buildings, structures, vehicles and places which are visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk, or other right-of-way within the city, and when seasonable temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be issued that there is graffiti and that the graffiti must be removed within 10 days of the notice, or the city will remove the graffiti using funds donated for that purpose.

C. Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the enforcement officer approves, the enforcement officer is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by the city or by private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the city, and any paint used to obliterate or cover graffiti shall be as close as practicable to the background color(s). If the enforcement officer provides for the removal of the graffiti, the city shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than the area where the graffiti is located.

D. Property owners may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


8.12.060 Compliance, authority and administration.

In order to discourage public nuisances and otherwise promote compliance with this chapter, the director may, in response to field observations, determine that violations of this chapter have occurred or are occurring, and may utilize any of the compliance provisions contained in chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 1852 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).1

Prior legislation: Ords. 1148, 1207 and 1352. 


Chapter 8.14 NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL

Sections:

8.14.010    Purpose.

8.14.020    Definitions.

8.14.030    Identification of environments.

8.14.040    Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

8.14.050    Exemptions.

8.14.060    Sound amplification at events and activities.

8.14.070    Sounds exempt during daytime hours.

8.14.080    Motor vehicle noises – Stationary test.

8.14.090    Motor vehicle noises – Road test.

8.14.100    Mufflers.

8.14.110    Tire noise.

8.14.120    Variances.

8.14.130    Noise disturbances.

8.14.140    Citizen complaints.

8.14.150    Penalties.


8.14.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to minimize the exposure of citizens to the harmful physiological and psychological effects of excessive noise. The intent of the city council is to control the level of noise pollution in a manner which promotes commerce; the use, value, and enjoyment of property; sleep and repose; and the quality of the environment by establishing maximum environmental noise levels applicable within designated areas or zones of the city; to adopt appropriate exemptions to the provisions of this chapter to allow for the functioning of commercial business and the operation of construction and emergency equipment; and to declare certain noise-producing activities to be noise disturbances. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings. All technical terminology used in this chapter and not defined specifically herein shall be interpreted in conformance with the most recent definitions used by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.

A. “A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in decibels measured using the A-weighted network on a sound level meter as specified by the American National Standards Institute specification for sound level meters as now existing or as hereafter amended or modified. The level so read is designated dBA.

B. “Decibel (dB)” means a unit for measuring the volume of sound.

C. “District” means the land use zone to which the provisions of this chapter are applied. For the purposes of this chapter:

1. “Residential district” includes single- family (R-1), duplex (R-2) and multifamily (R-3) zones and the open space and parks (OSPA) zone;

2. “Business and commercial district” includes medium residential and neighborhood business (MR-NB), business (B-1), general commercial (C-1) zones, and the downtown zoning districts as they may be hereafter classified;

3. “Heavy commercial and industrial district” includes the heavy commercial (C-2) and industrial (M-1) zones.

D. “EDNA” means the environmental designation for noise abatement, being an area or zone (environment) within which maximum permissible noise levels are established.

1. Class A EDNA – Lands where human beings reside and sleep. Typically, Class A EDNA will be the following types of property used for human habitation, such as residential, multiple-family living accommodations, recreational and entertainment (e.g., camps, parks, camping facilities, and resorts).

 2. Class B EDNA – Lands involving uses requiring protection against noise interference with speech, such as commercial living accommodations, dining establishments, motor vehicle services, retail services, banks and office buildings, miscellaneous commercial services, and property not used for human habitation.

3. Class C EDNA – Lands involving economic activities of such a nature that higher noise levels than experienced in other areas are normally to be anticipated. Persons working in these areas are normally covered by noise control regulations of the Department of Labor and Industries. Uses typical of Class A EDNA are generally not permitted within such areas.

E. “Emergency work” means work required to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from an immediate exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities for providing or restoring immediately necessary utility services.

F. “Equipment” means any stationary or portable device or any part thereof capable of generating sound.

G. “Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)” means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle.

H. “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle which is self-propelled, used primarily for transporting persons or property. Aircraft, watercraft, and vehicles used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks are not motor vehicles as that term is used herein. It includes motorcycles unless distinction is made in the context of use. It also includes self-propelled vehicles commonly known as all-terrain vehicles.

I. “Motorcycle” means any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground; except that farm tractors and vehicles powered by engines of less than five horsepower shall not be included.

J. “Muffler” means a device consisting of a series of chambers or other mechanical designs for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and effective in reducing sound resulting therefrom.

K. “Noise” means the intensity, duration, and character of sounds, from any and all sources.

L. “Noise disturbance” means any sound which annoys, disturbs, or perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities; or any sound which unreasonably injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace, or safety of persons or animals.

M. “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any other entity, public or private.

N. “Person responsible for the violation” means any person who is required by the applicable regulation to comply therewith, or who commits any act or omission which is a violation or causes or permits a violation to occur or remain upon property in the city, and includes but is not limited to owner(s), lessor(s), tenant(s), or other person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupy property where a violation occurs.

O. “Property boundary” means the surveyed line at ground surface which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one or more persons from that owned, rented, or leased by another or others, and its vertical extension.

P. “Receiving property” means the real property within which sound originating from outside the property is received.

Q. “Race vehicle” means a motor vehicle not licensed for use on the public streets and/or which is used primarily for sanctioned or unsanctioned racing events.

R. “Sound level meter” means a device which measures sound pressure levels and conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 as specified in the American National Standards Institute Specification S1.4.1971. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.030 Identification of environments.

A. Environmental designations for noise abatement are as follows:

1. Residential land use district: Class A EDNA;

2. Business and commercial land use district: Class B EDNA;

3. Heavy commercial and industrial land use district: Class C EDNA.

B. The land use districts listed in the City of Burlington Zoning Code, BMC Title 17, are classified for the purposes of this chapter as follows:

1. Residential land use district: R-1, R-2, R-3, and OSPA;

2. Business and commercial land use district: MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and the downtown zoning districts as they may be hereafter classified;

3. Heavy commercial and industrial land use district: C-2 and M-1. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.040 Maximum permissible environmental noise levels.

A. No person shall cause or permit sound to intrude onto the real property of another person which exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels established by this chapter. The point of measurement shall be at the property boundary of the receiving property or anywhere within.

B. For sound sources located within the city, the maximum permissible sound levels are as follows:

	Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Property

	EDNA of Noise Source	EDNA of Receiving Property

	Class A	Class B	Class C

	(dBA)	(dBA)	(dBA)

	Class A	55	57	60

	Class B	57	60	65

	Class C	60	65	70

C. Modifications to maximum permissible sound levels are as follows:

1. Reduce by 10 dBA nights 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. for receiving property in Class A EDNAs; and

2. Reduce by five dBA for impulsive or pure tone sounds for any receiving property at any time; and

3. Increase for short duration for any receiving property at any time:

a. Increase by five dBA for 15 minutes in any one-hour period; or

b. Increase by 10 dBA for five minutes in any one-hour period; or

c. Increase by 15 dBA for one and one-half minutes in any one-hour period.

D. If the measurements of sound are made with a sound level meter, the instrument shall be in good operating condition and shall meet the requirements for a Type I or Type II instrument, as described in American National Standards Institute Specifications as now exist or as are hereafter amended or modified. If the measurements are made with other instruments, or assemblages of instruments, the procedure must be carried out in such manner that the overall accuracy shall be at least that called for in the National Standards Institute Specifications.

E. Where a receiving property lies within more than one EDNA, the maximum permissible sound level shall be determined by the most noise-sensitive EDNA. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.050 Exemptions.

The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, these exemptions are provisional in nature and shall be reviewed periodically for modification:

A. Noises caused by motor vehicles used for highway maintenance or noises caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health or welfare of the community or of individuals of the community, or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity;

B. Sounds created by bells, chimes, or carillons not operating for more than five minutes in any one hour;

C. Sounds originating from aircraft in flight, and from watercraft;

D. Sounds created by safety and protective devices, such as relief valves, where noise suppression would defeat the safety release purpose of the device;

E. Sounds created by fire alarms and emergency equipment operated by law enforcement, firefighters, and aid personnel;

F. Sounds created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad;

G. Sounds originating from officially sanctioned parades and other events to which the general public is solicited to attend without charge and sounds originating from league or school-sponsored athletic events;

H. Sounds caused by natural phenomena and unamplified human voices, except for noise disturbances as set forth in BMC 8.14.020(L) and BMC 8.14.130;

I. Nothing in these exemptions is intended to preclude the applicable department director through the authority of the State Environmental Policy Act from requiring installation of the best available noise abatement technology consistent with feasibility. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.060 Sound amplification at events and activities.

Sounds, including sounds created by sound amplification equipment, emanating from any event or activity after 10:00 a.m. and ending at 10:00 p.m. in a park, community center, or public place, for which a permit has been issued by the city of Burlington, shall be exempt; provided, that sound created by sound amplification equipment from such event shall be exempt only if the permit authorized the use of sound amplification equipment and such use was in compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit. Sound amplification equipment shall be allowed to operate until 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings at the Maiben Park Community Center. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.070 Sounds exempt during daytime hours.

The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.:

A. Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances including but not limited to lawn mowers, saws, hammering and gardening, but excluding sounds from race vehicles;

B. Sounds created by blasting;

C. Sounds originating from temporary construction sites as a result of construction activity in residential districts, provided this exemption shall apply only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekends and holidays, and 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekdays;

D. Sounds created by the installation or repair of essential utility service. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.080 Motor vehicle noises – Stationary test.

It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon any public highway or easement road if the vehicle exhaust system exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels for the category of vehicle as measured at a distance of 20 inches (one-half meter) from the exhaust outlet under procedures set forth in WAC 173-58-080, as amended.

	Vehicle Category	Model Year	Maximum Sound Level

	Motorcycles	Before 1986	99 dB(A)

	Automobiles, light trucks, and motor vehicles 10,000 pounds GVWR or less	Before 1986	95 dB(A)

	All motor vehicles over 10,000 pounds GVWR	Before 1986	86 dB(A)

While on real property other than highways or easement roads, motor vehicles shall not exceed the maximum permissible sounds as specified herein for other than motor vehicles. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.090 Motor vehicle noises – Road test.

It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or any combination of motor vehicles upon any public highway or easement road under any conditions of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the maximum permissible sound levels for the category of vehicle as measured at a distance of 50 feet from the center of the lane of travel within the speed limit specified under procedures set forth in WAC 173-62-030, as amended:

	Vehicle Category	45 mph or less	Over 45 mph

	Motorcycles	78 dB(A)	82 dB(A)

	Motor vehicles over 10,000 pounds GVWR	86 dB(A)	90 dB(A)

	All other motor vehicles	72 dB(A)	78 dB(A)

While on real property other than highways or easement roads, motor vehicles shall not exceed the maximum permissible sounds as specified herein for other than motor vehicles. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.100 Mufflers.

It is unlawful for any person to operate, or for any owner to permit any person to operate, any motor vehicle upon the public highways or easement roads which is not equipped with a muffler in good working order, in constant operation, and which meets the requirements established by RCW 46.37.390 as it now exists or as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.110 Tire noise.

It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow to be emitted squealing, screeching or other such sounds from the tires in contact with the ground or other roadway surface because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed around corners or other such reason; provided, that the sounds resulting from emergency braking to avoid imminent danger shall be exempt from this section. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.120 Variances.

A. Variances may be granted to any person from any requirement of BMC 8.14.040 if findings are made that immediate compliance with such requirement cannot be achieved because of special circumstances rendering immediate compliance unreasonable in light of economic or physical factors, encroachment upon an existing noise source or because of nonavailability of feasible technology or control methods.

B. Any such variance or renewal thereof shall be granted only for the minimum time period found to be necessary under the facts and circumstances.

C. Variances shall be heard and decided in the manner as set forth in the City of Burlington Municipal Code for land use variances.

D. The grant of a variance shall not relieve any person from the requirements of BMC 8.14.130 relating to noise disturbances. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.130 Noise disturbances.

All noise disturbances defined in BMC 8.14.020(L) and not exempt under BMC 8.14.050 are prohibited at all times. The content of the sound will not be considered in determining a violation. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to cause or make, or for any person in possession of property knowingly to allow originating from the property, unreasonable noise which disturbs another, and to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a police officer. The following acts are considered to be noise disturbances if the noise is clearly audible across a real property boundary, or at least 75 feet from the source:

A. Operating or playing, or permitting the operating or playing of, any audio equipment, television set, musical instrument and similar device, whether portable or stationary or mounted on or within a motor vehicle;

B. Intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any emergency warning device where an actual emergency does not exist; provided, that sounds created during maintenance or testing of such emergency warning devices do not constitute a noise disturbance;

C. Permitting any sounds to emanate from a construction site outside the hours that construction sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter or outside expanded hours authorized by the applicable department director pursuant to BMC 8.14.120;

D. Operating sound amplification equipment before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. in a park, community center, or public place subject to special event permits issued by the city of Burlington;

E. Frequent, repetitive or intermittently continuous sounds made by any animal, except that such sounds made in animal shelters or in commercial kennels duly licensed shall be exempt;

F. Frequent, repetitive or intermittently continuous sounds made by any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except such sounds that are made to warn of danger or that are specifically permitted or required by law;

G. Frequent, repetitive or intermittently continuous sounds made in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, race vehicle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine;

H. Loud and frequent, repetitive or intermittently continuous sounds made by the use of a musical instrument or instruments or other device capable of producing sound when struck by an object, or by a whistle, or by a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing, amplifying or reproducing sounds, where the noise is clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet;

I. Loud and frequent, repetitive or intermittently continuous sounds made by the unamplified human voice or voices which are plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or which can be plainly heard in any structure or building when the doors and windows are closed;

J. Sounds made for any duration or frequency from the starting and/or running of the engine of a race vehicle;

K. Operation off of any improved public highway, street or alley of any motorcycle, or any motor vehicle intended for off-road use, or any motor vehicle not licensed for use on public highways, where the noise therefrom is clearly audible in or on any residential property;

L. The foregoing enumeration of acts shall not be construed as excluding other acts which may constitute noise disturbances;

M. Sounds which do not exceed the maximum environmental noise levels set forth in BMC 8.14.040 may constitute noise disturbances. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.140 Citizen complaints.

Whenever it is stated in writing by two or more persons having separate residences in a neighborhood that any person is violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the Burlington police department shall investigate and, if appropriate, advise the person of the complaint and that such violations must cease. Failure of any person to cease any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the person shall be punished as set forth in BMC 1.24.020. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


8.14.150 Penalties.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in BMC 1.24.020. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 2008).


Chapter 8.16 FALSE ALARMS

Sections:

8.16.010    Purpose.

8.16.020    Definitions.

8.16.030    Emergency response card – Violation – Abatement.

8.16.040    Unlawful activation or report of alarm.

8.16.050    False alarms – Fees assessed.

8.16.060    Administrative decision – Notice.

8.16.070    Appeal from administrative decision – Finality.

8.16.080    Penalty.


8.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the number of false alarms occurring within the city and the resultant waste of city resources and potential dangers to citizens and public safety officers, by providing for corrective administrative action, including fees, potential disconnection and criminal penalties for violations. (Ord. 1161 § 1, 1990).


8.16.020 Definitions.

The following definitions shall be applied in construing the provisions of this chapter:

A. “Chief of police” means the Burlington police chief or his designee.

B. “False alarm” means the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm by other than a forced entry, attempted forced entry, unlawful entry, robbery or attempted robbery on the premises and at a time when no robbery, burglary or other crime involving a foreseeable risk of grievous bodily harm is being committed or attempted on the premises.

C. “Owner” means the person in custody or control of a premises having a burglary and/or robbery alarm.

D. “Person” means any natural person, partnership, corporation, joint stock company, or unincorporated association or society.

E. “Response” shall be deemed to have occurred when the Burlington police department begins to proceed towards the premises as a result of the activation of the alarm. (Ord. 1161 § 2, 1990).


8.16.030 Emergency response card – Violation – Abatement.

A. It is unlawful to have or maintain on any premises within the city a burglary and/or robbery alarm unless there is on file, with the Burlington police department, an emergency response card containing the names of persons who have consented and are authorized and given the means to enter such premises and turn off any alarms and current telephone numbers at which such persons can be reached at all times. This prohibition shall not apply to anyone who did not know of the existence of this chapter, unless the city establishes that it provided actual notice of the chapter to the violator.

B. It is unlawful for any such authorized person to fail to appear and turn off any such alarm located on a nonresidential premises within one hour after being notified by the Burlington police department that their failure to do so could result in their being fined.

C. Any alarm audible upon abutting property for a period in excess of one hour is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Burlington police department, provided one or more persons listed on an emergency response card on file with the Burlington police department, if any, has been requested to shut off the alarm and afforded a reasonable period of time not to exceed one hour to do so. (Ord. 1161 § 3, 1990).


8.16.040 Unlawful activation or report of alarm.

It is unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery or burglary alarm for the purpose of summoning police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery in progress. It is unlawful for anyone notifying the police of an activated alarm and having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system to fail at the same time to notify the police of such apparent malfunction. (Ord. 1161 § 4, 1990).


8.16.050 False alarms – Fees assessed.

For a police response to any false alarm the chief of police shall charge and collect from the person having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery alarm on premises owned or occupied by him, and such person shall pay fees as follows:

A. For a response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period, hereinafter referred to as a “first response,” no fee shall be charged, but the person having or maintaining such a burglary and/or robbery alarm shall within three working days after notice to do so make a written report to the chief of police on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service person, and such other information as the chief of police may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and corrective action necessary.

B. For a second response to premises within six months after a first response no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as in the case of a first response and the chief of police shall be authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected, at owner’s expense, the alarm system at such premises, prescribe necessary corrective action, and shall give notice to the person having or maintaining such alarm system of the conditions and requirements of this section.

C. For a third response to the premises within six months after a second response, and for all succeeding responses, a fee adopted by city council resolution shall be charged and if such third false alarm, or any such succeeding false alarm, is as a result of failure to take necessary corrective action prescribed by the chief of police, said chief of police may order the disconnection of such alarm system and it shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until after such corrective action is taken; provided, that no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. (Ord. 1799 § 15, 2014; Ord. 1446 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1412 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1161 § 5, 1990).


8.16.060 Administrative decision – Notice.

A. Notice of imposition of any administrative sanction, including the imposition of a fee and/or order of disconnection under the provisions of this chapter shall be sent by mail or delivered personally to the owner; provided that with respect to business premises, mailing or personal delivery to the manager or chief administrative agent regularly assigned or employed at the premises at the time of occurrence of a false alarm shall be deemed to be mailing or personal delivery to the owner.

B. The notice shall specify the sanctions imposed and shall advise the owner that sanctions will be imposed unless he requests a hearing with the city supervisor by filing a written request with the city supervisor within 10 days of the date of the notice. (Ord. 1161 § 6, 1990).


8.16.070 Appeal from administrative decision – Finality.

A. Any person subject to the imposition of a fee, order of disconnection or other administrative sanction under the terms of this chapter shall have a right to a hearing before the city mayor or his designee upon filing a timely written request.

B. The request for a hearing must be made in writing and filed with the city mayor or his designee within 10 days of the date of notice of administrative decision required herein. Upon receipt of a timely written request, the city mayor or his designee shall schedule a hearing date and inform the owner of the date, time and place of the hearing. The city mayor or his designee shall consider the record of past false alarms, any corrective action taken and any inspection reports on the cause of the false alarm. If the city mayor or his designee determines that the false alarms are not caused by the owner or his employees or agents and that reasonable steps have been taken to correct the problem, the fee or other sanction may be suspended, in whole or in part. The city mayor or his designee shall keep a written report of the hearing including a statement of reasons for whatever action is taken.

C. Administrative sanctions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall become final upon expiration of the period for filing an appeal when no timely appeal is filed, or upon announcement of a decision on the appeal when a timely appeal has been filed. (Ord. 1161 § 7, 1990).


8.16.080 Penalty.

Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000. (Ord. 1161 § 8, 1990).


Chapter 8.20 CAMPING

Sections:

8.20.010    Camping defined.

8.20.020    Private camping prohibited.

8.20.030    Residential occupancy or use prohibited.

8.20.040    Public camping prohibited.

8.20.050    Penalty.


8.20.010 Camping defined.

A. “Camping” means the use of any public or private property for living accommodation purposes including but not limited to any of the following:

1. Erecting any tent, tarpaulin, shelter, or other structure that would permit one to sleep overnight;

2. Using a recreational vehicle for the purposes of sleeping.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, “camping” shall not include sleeping in a public or private place during daylight hours as long as no tent, tarpaulin, shelter, or other structure has been erected.

C. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle-type portable structure without permanent foundation designed and manufactured for recreational use, which can be towed, hauled or driven. This definition includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. Recreational vehicles designed as temporary living units are prohibited as permanent dwelling units. “Permanent” for the purpose of this section is defined as occupancy by a person(s) for more than a 30-day period in one consecutive 12-month period. (Ord. 1618 § 1, 2007).


8.20.020 Private camping prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to engage in camping in the city of Burlington on any private property within the zoned areas designated as OSP, B-1, C-1, C-2, M-1 and the business park district except in camping or trailer parks approved by the city with necessary water, sanitary facilities and electrical connections.

B. Exception. The occupants of each single-family residence in the city, regardless of zoning district, may camp in no more than one recreational vehicle for up to seven days without a permit issued by the city, and for an extended period not to exceed 30 days upon issuance of a temporary use permit by the city planning director.

1. The permit issued must be affixed to the recreational vehicle in such a manner that it is prominently displayed and visible, to the extent possible, from the public right-of-way.

2. Recreational vehicles meeting the requirements of this subsection may be parked in a front yard, need not be sight-screened and need not comply with accessory structure setback requirements for the effective period of the permit.

3. Each residence will be limited to one temporary use permit within any six-month period. (Ord. 1618 § 1, 2007).


8.20.030 Residential occupancy or use prohibited.

A. Recreation vehicles as defined in BMC 8.20.010(C) shall not have connections to residential sewer systems or any permanent connections to other residential utilities. Recreational vehicles shall not be used as a residence and shall not be occupied for temporary use for more than 30 days in a consecutive 12-month period, except as may be provided in designated trailer and RV parks.

B. No recreational vehicle or manufactured home shall be used as an accessory structure to a residence, nor to accommodate a residential accessory use. (Ord. 1618 § 1, 2007).


8.20.040 Public camping prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in camping in any park or playfield owned by the city, or on any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, or under any bridge or viaduct, or in any other public place to which the general public has access, except in park areas explicitly designated by the city director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1618 § 1, 2007).


8.20.050 Penalty.

Violation of BMC 8.20.020, 8.20.030 or 8.20.040 shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1618 § 1, 2007).


Chapter 8.24 AMBULANCE SERVICE

Sections:

8.24.010    Findings.

8.24.020    Definition of terms.

8.24.030    Title – Gender.

8.24.040    Purpose.

Article I. Authority and Administration

8.24.050    Authority.

8.24.060    Operation and administration.

8.24.070    Medical program director.

8.24.080    Fire chief – Duties.

8.24.090    Finance director – Duties.

Article II. Operation and Funding

8.24.100    Additions, betterments, purchases – Compliance with capital facilities plan.

8.24.110    Additions, betterments, purchases – Financing.

8.24.120    Ambulance service fund.

8.24.130    Ambulance service fees.

8.24.140    Use of ambulance service fees.

8.24.150    Billing of ambulance service fees.

8.24.160    Civil enforcement.

8.24.170    Fee determination criteria.

8.24.180    Amendment of ambulance service fees.

8.24.190    Compliance with Medicare and Medicaid requirements.

8.24.200    Additional funding.

8.24.210    Countywide ambulance service.

Article III. Licensing

8.24.220    Applicability.

8.24.230    License required – Application – Fee.

8.24.240    Standards for license.

8.24.250    License not transferable.

8.24.260    Ambulance personnel.

8.24.270    Ambulances and equipment.

8.24.280    Performance standards – Compliance – Records.

8.24.290    Emergency notification.

8.24.300    Response to calls.

8.24.310    Mutual aid.

8.24.320    Ambulance service agreement.

8.24.330    Denial, revocation or suspension of license.

8.24.340    Penalty for violation.

8.24.350    Severability.

8.24.360    Effective date.


8.24.010 Findings.

The city of Burlington (“city”) makes the following findings:

The city is an optional municipal code city, organized under RCW Title 35A, with all powers possible for a city or town to have under the Constitution and laws of the state.

The city has been required over its history to provide a complete range of municipal services to city residents, as well as providing services to its neighboring community. The services long provided by the city include fire, emergency medical services, and other emergency responses. As part of its services to the community, the city has, pursuant to RCW 35.21.766 and other authority, established and maintained a system of basic life support services. The provision of emergency medical services is a basic governmental program, necessary to meet the objective of providing for the public health and safety.

The city is not adequately served by existing private ambulance service(s), and has not been for many years. During the past year, significant concerns have arisen regarding the delivery of emergency medical services in Skagit County, and more particularly in Burlington. To maintain quality service to the community, it is necessary to establish the city’s ambulance service, as a governmental function of the city, which shall be operated as a utility of the city. In order to achieve the economy of scale to justify a standing force of trained emergency medical personnel, it is further necessary to establish the city ambulance service as the emergency medical service provider to provide service for all emergencies occurring within the city. Further, it is necessary to establish regulatory standards for the provision of ALS and BLS ambulance service.

The city has, in the past, supported county-wide efforts for EMS funding. Current EMS funding for ambulance service is derived from fees and charges, as well as contracts for receipt of proceeds of an EMS levy paid by city and county residents. The source of EMS funding may vary from year to year, and a stable and secure financial structure is necessary for ambulance services to be maintained. Following recent actions of the county, it appears that, for the near term, funding will be stable. However, the provision of emergency medical services cannot be continued without adequate funding. Moreover, there are no assurances regarding funding sources and the city may in the future increase rates, provide for fees (including taxes), and take other means to support the ambulance service. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.020 Definition of terms.

The words and phrases set forth herein shall have the respective meanings ascribed to such words and phrases in the findings hereto and in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A. “Advanced life support” or “ALS” means invasive emergency medical services.

B. “Ambulance” means a ground, air, or water vehicle designed and used to transport patients and to provide personnel, facilities, and equipment to treat patients before and during transportation.

C. “Basic life support” or “BLS” means noninvasive emergency medical services     requiring basic medical treatment skills as defined in chapter 18.73 RCW.

D. “City” means the city of Burlington, Washington.

E. “City ambulance service” means the BLS, ILS, and/or ALS ambulance transport service operated by, or under contract with, the city of Burlington.

F. “County” means Skagit County, Washington.

G. “Emergency” means a situation or patient condition (1) in which either of the following procedures is performed: administration of a drug (except oxygen) or initiation of an intravenous line; (2) which a person requesting ambulance assistance indicates requires immediate response by medically trained personnel; or (3) which an EMT would assess, in the interest of good patient care, as requiring the assistance of at least a paramedic certified pursuant to chapter 18.71 RCW and regulations promulgated thereunder.

H. “Emergency medical service” or “EMS” means medical treatment and care that may be rendered at the scene of any medical emergency or while transporting any patient in an ambulance to an appropriate medical facility,     including ambulance transportation between medical facilities.

I. “Emergency medical technician” or “EMT” means a person who is certified as     such by the Secretary of the Department of Health, pursuant to chapter 18.73 RCW and regulations promulgated thereunder.

J. “Finance director” means the city finance director or his/her duly authorized designee.

K. “Fire chief” means the city fire chief or his/her duly authorized designee.

L. “Fire department” means the fire department of the city of Burlington, Washington.

M. “ILS” means intermediate life support as identified in WAC 246-976-010.

N. “Medical program director” means the person who is the approved medical program director for Skagit County, as defined by RCW 18.71.205.

O. “Mutual aid” refers to situations in which a licensed basic, intermediate, or     advanced life support ambulance service is required, as determined by the fire department, to make ambulances, personnel, and equipment under the city’s direction available for basic or advanced life support response to other jurisdictions.

P. “Patient” means a person who is ill, injured, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless, and in need of, or receiving, medical treatment, including trauma care.

Q. “Person” means any individual, corporation, political subdivision of the state of Washington, municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation, company, firm, joint stock company, co-partnership, joint venture, trust, business trust, club, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit,     whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, or any 	receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, or trustee in bankruptcy.

R. “Police chief” means the city police chief or his/her duly authorized designee.

S. “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Department of Health of the State of Washington.

T. “Skagit emergency communications” means the Skagit 911 center. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.030 Title – Gender.

A. All references to the finance director, medical program director, Secretary, police chief, and/or fire chief shall include their respective designees.

B. Any reference to or use of the terms “he,” “she,” “him,” “her,” or other gender based classification, if applicable as shown by the context thereof, shall also apply to the opposite gender. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.040 Purpose.

A. The city council declares it to be in the public interest and for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and its locality to provide for the highest level of emergency medical services reasonably practicable. The city council finds it to be in the public interest to provide for the inspection, regulation, and control of emergency medical services to achieve high standards and thereby to eliminate inadequate, improper, and harmful practices that may endanger the health and safety of the people.

B. The city council hereby finds and declares that the city of Burlington is not adequately served by existing private ambulance service. Accordingly, pursuant to RCW 35.21.766, the city hereby establishes the city ambulance service for the use and for the health, safety, and welfare of all city residents and visitors to be operated as a public utility of the city.

C. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter.

D. It is the specific intent of this chapter that no provision nor any term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers, employees, agents, or volunteers, for whom the implementation and enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

E. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to create or form the basis of any liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees, volunteers, or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the enforcement of this chapter by its officers, employees, volunteers or agents. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).

Article I. Authority and Administration


8.24.050 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter constitute an exercise of the city’s police power to promote the public health, safety and welfare of all city residents and visitors, and its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.060 Operation and administration.

A. The city council shall be the governing body of the city ambulance service utility.

B. The city ambulance service shall be operated and administered by the mayor, through the fire chief, as set forth herein to ensure care is provided in the best interest of the patient. The city ambulance service shall be operated and administered in accordance with (1) state law, regulations of the State Department of Health, and procedures adopted thereunder, including, but not limited to, chapters 18.71, 18.73 and 70.168 RCW and chapter 246-976 WAC; and (2) federal law. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.070 Medical program director.

The medical program director shall be responsible for the provisions of patient care quality and treatment protocols. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.080 Fire chief – Duties.

A. The fire chief, through the fire department, shall oversee and superintend the operation and administration of the city ambulance service.

B. The fire chief shall be vested with the authority to promulgate, revise, or rescind such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to administer the provisions of this chapter, as well as the operation and administration of the city ambulance service.

C. The fire chief shall make such regular inspections as the fire chief deems necessary, and shall make such reports relative to conditions existing at such times and in such manner as the mayor may direct. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.090 Finance director – Duties.

The finance director shall keep a system of accounts of revenues and disbursements of the city ambulance service as prescribed by the State Auditor, all as required by law. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).

Article II. Operation and Funding


8.24.100 Additions, betterments, purchases – Compliance with capital facilities plan.

Additions, betterments, and purchases to and for the city ambulance service shall be made in accordance with the city’s capital facilities plan as the same now exists or as it may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.110 Additions, betterments, purchases – Financing.

The cost of making additions, betterments or purchases to and for the city ambulance service shall be paid from such sources and by such means as the city from time to time may direct, in accordance with RCW 35A.80.010 and other laws of the state as the same now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.120 Ambulance service fund.

A. There shall be created and established in the office of the finance director a special fund, to be known and designated as the “ambulance service fund.” There shall be deposited in the ambulance service fund: (1) all revenues collected pursuant to the ambulance service fees set forth in BMC 8.24.130; (2) all revenues collected pursuant to any contract and/or agreement to provide all or a portion of the ambulance service; (3) appropriations from the city, the county, state and federal government; and (4) such other funds as may be received for the use of the ambulance service. The ambulance service fund shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the state.

B. Assistance of a form other than funds shall be accounted for in accordance with state law, applicable regulations of the State Auditor, and in accordance with RCW 36.32.470. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.130 Ambulance service fees.

Fees for users of the city ambulance service (“ambulance service fees”) shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.140 Use of ambulance service fees.

All proceeds derived from the ambulance service fees in BMC 8.24.130 shall be used solely for the operation, maintenance, and capital needs of the city ambulance service. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.150 Billing of ambulance service fees.

Each patient who utilizes the city ambulance service shall be billed by the city in accordance with the ambulance service fees immediately after the provision of the ambulance service. The finance director shall establish a procedure to bill and collect city ambulance service fees for the ambulance services rendered. Under the procedure, the city may elect to bill the patient directly or bill the patient’s insurance company, and if the patient’s insurance does not cover all of the cost of the ambulance service, bill the remaining balance to the patient directly. The city may contract with a public or private entity to bill and collect the city ambulance service fees. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.160 Civil enforcement.

The city ambulance service fees imposed by this chapter may be collected by appropriate civil action instituted by the city attorney for that purpose. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.170 Fee determination criteria.

Ambulance service fees shall be set at a level to cover the actual costs incurred by the city in operating the city ambulance service. It is the intent of the city that ambulance service fees shall be charged in exchange for targeted ambulance service that alleviates the burden placed on such service by its users. In classifying customers served, or ALS, ILS or BLS ambulance service, the city may, in its discretion, consider any or all of the following factors: the difference in cost of service to various customers; the location of the various customers within the city; the difference of cost of maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the various parts of the city ambulance service; the different character of service furnished various customers; and any other criteria or matters which constitute a reasonable ground for distinction. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.180 Amendment of ambulance service fees.

The city ambulance service fees provided in BMC 8.24.130 may be amended from time to time in the discretion of the city council as financial requirements for the city ambulance service may dictate, and such amended fees shall apply to and be binding upon users of the city ambulance service; provided, that such fees shall be uniform for the same class of users of the city ambulance service. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.190 Compliance with Medicare and Medicaid requirements.

This chapter and the city ambulance service fees hereunder shall be construed and implemented in a manner consistent with applicable Medicare and Medicaid requirements. If any part of this chapter is found to conflict with Medicare and Medicaid requirements, the conflicting part of this chapter shall be inoperative to the extent of the conflict and such finding or determination shall not affect the operation of the remainder of this chapter. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.200 Additional funding.

To the extent permitted under the Washington Constitution and the laws of the state of Washington (including, but not limited to, RCW 35.21.768 and 84.52.069, as may be amended), the city may adopt ordinances for the levy and collection of taxes or other charges and/or fees for the sole purpose of paying the costs for the operation, maintenance and capital needs of the ambulance service. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.210 Countywide ambulance service.

The city may contract with the county and/or a public corporation formed pursuant to RCW 35.21.730 et seq., for the provision of all or a portion of ALS, ILS and/or BLS ambulance service within the city’s jurisdictional limits on such terms and conditions agreed upon by the city and the county and/or public corporation. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).

Article III. Licensing


8.24.220 Applicability.

All ALS, ILS, and BLS ambulance service involving the provision of emergency medical services to emergencies occurring within the city shall be provided within the city limits by the fire department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that this provision shall not be applicable to medical services provided by any public hospital district for interfacility patient transport. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.230 License required – Application – Fee.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person (other than the fire department) to:

1. Operate or cause to be operated within the city limits an ambulance service without first being issued a license by the city for that purpose.

2. Operate or cause to be operated an ambulance service within the city limits,     except as provided in BMC 8.24.310.

B. In the event the city elects to enter into a contract with an ambulance service, an ambulance service license may be obtained by applying at the finance department on forms provided. The finance director, subject to a review and approval from the fire chief, is responsible for issuing, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling ambulance licenses to operate an ambulance service within the city.

C. The fee schedule for such license shall be adopted by city council, and it shall be renewable annually. The fee shall be payable in January of each year for the ensuing year, and there shall be no proration for new applications during the year. Each ambulance service license issued by the finance director shall be valid for the period of one year. The license year shall be from January 1st to December 31st of each year.

D. The finance director shall not issue such license unless the applicant has fulfilled all requirements of this chapter.

E. No person shall operate an ambulance service within the city unless there is on file with the finance director proof that the required license/licenses have been obtained from the Secretary as required by state law, including, but not limited to, chapter 18.73 RCW and chapter 246- 976 WAC, as now or hereafter amended.

F. To the extent not inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of BMC Title 5, regarding the general issuance of city licenses, shall also be applicable to ambulance service providers. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.240 Standards for license.

A. All applicants for an ambulance service license shall be appropriately certified by the Secretary, and be in good standing pursuant to chapter 18.73 RCW and regulations promulgated thereunder. Upon receiving an application and fee, the finance director shall forward the application to the fire chief for review and recommendation for approval or denial. No license shall be issued unless the fire chief is satisfied, pursuant to policies duly adopted, that (1) the applicant is properly certified by the state; (2) the applicant’s facilities, ambulances, and equipment meet state standards; (3) employees of the applicant are certified and in good standing; (4) a record check of the applicant and its employees by the police chief shows no criminal convictions for offenses having a direct adverse relationship to custody of incapacitated persons, custody of narcotic or controlled substances, or safe driving of emergency vehicles; and (5) the applicant is otherwise in good standing and capable of performing ambulance service.

B. Upon written recommendation of approval of the application by the fire chief, the finance director is authorized to issue an ambulance service license. All equipment proposed for use shall be subjected to random inspection by the fire chief or his/her designee, who shall determine whether said records and equipment conform to all requirements of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to immediately notify the finance director in writing of any change in any of the information required on the application.

C. The applicant shall obtain and at all times maintain in full force the following insurance in amounts determined by the office of the city attorney: 

1. Comprehensive general liability;

2. Automobile liability for all vehicles; and 

3. Professional liability.

The applicant shall provide an insurance certificate to this effect, naming the city as an additional insured as to subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section. Such policies shall also provide for prompt advance notice to the city of intended cancellation of coverage. The applicant shall also agree to indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from any causes of action arising from the operation of the ambulance service. No person shall operate an ambulance service within the city unless there is on file with the finance director satisfactory proof that the required insurance is in effect as required herein. An ambulance service operated by a political subdivision of the state, or by a municipal corporation, or quasi-municipal corporation, may elect to be a self-insurer; provided, that the office of the city attorney is satisfied with the adequacy of the self-insurance. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.250 License not transferable.

No ambulance service license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.260 Ambulance personnel.

No ambulance shall be operated as such without at least two persons. Such personnel shall not have been convicted of offenses having a direct relationship to custody of incapacitated persons, custody of narcotic or controlled substances, or safe driving of emergency vehicles and shall hold a valid Washington State driver’s license. An ALS ambulance shall be staffed by at least one paramedic and one EMT-B (or higher level certification). An ILS ambulance shall be staffed by at least one ILS-certified EMT (or higher level certification), and one EMT-B (or higher level certification). A BLS ambulance shall be staffed by at least two EMTs (or higher level certification). (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.270 Ambulances and equipment.

A. Ambulances shall be maintained and inspected pursuant to requirements from time to time adopted by the Secretary. All licensees shall provide the fire department with copies of reports of inspection submitted to the Secretary pursuant to RCW 18.73.145.

B. All ambulances and equipment storage and cleaning areas are subject to inspection by the fire department, at reasonable times, to ensure that they are maintained in a clean and functional state. Disinfection or chemical sterilization of reusable equipment must meet guidelines established by the National Centers for Disease Control.

C. Licensees shall take immediate action to eliminate any unsanitary condition when becoming aware of it and shall immediately correct any situation about which the fire chief or the Secretary has delivered written notice. Failure to immediately correct any such situation may result in license suspension or revocation.

D. Ambulances shall not be used without the minimum equipment prescribed by the Secretary and fire department. In the event any variance from requirements is granted by the state, a licensee must apply for and obtain a similar such variance from the fire department. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.280 Performance standards – Compliance – Records.

A. All operations of and services provided by a licensee and representatives thereof shall, as a minimum, fully comply at all times with all applicable provisions of (1) city and county ordinances and procedures adopted thereunder; (2) state law, regulations of the State Department of Health, and procedures adopted thereunder, including, but not limited to, chapters 18.71, 18.73 and 70.168 RCW and chapter 246-976 WAC; and (3) federal law.

B. All services performed hereunder shall be in accordance with the standards and principles of the course of instruction given EMTs or paramedics, as the case may be, by the state, and pursuant to medical protocols established from time to time by the Skagit County medical program director.

C. The fire department shall be informed by the licensee of rates charged and changes in rates which may occur from time to time.

D. Records shall be logged by ambulance crews and shall include date and time of service and response times. Copies of such records shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the fire department on a weekly basis, or more often if requested for good cause. Subject to the requirements of the state Public Disclosure Act, and subject further to the provisions of the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, such records are confidential and shall be released only to proper officials of the city. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.290 Emergency notification.

In the event a call for emergency ambulance service is received by licensee or a representative thereof, the caller shall be directed to call Skagit emergency communications for response by the Burlington fire department. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.300 Response to calls.

It is unlawful for a licensee in responding to any call to use emergency lighting or siren, unless (A) responding to emergencies or transporting a patient in accordance with the mutual aid provisions herein, or (B) directed to do so by the Burlington fire department. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.310 Mutual aid.

A. A licensee is required to cooperate with any request by the fire department for mutual aid. At such times, the city will have operational control of all equipment and personnel for all purposes and may dispatch ambulances to any point within the city. However, in the event of any suit or claim arising out of activities under this section, the city and licensee shall each be responsible for, and to the extent of, their own respective liability.

B. A licensee shall equip vehicles with city fire department frequencies, which, however, shall only be used by licensees in the event of a mutual aid situation described herein. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.320 Ambulance service agreement.

In the event the city determines it to be in the best interests of the public to enter into an agreement with a public ambulance service to provide ambulance services, the city may, as authorized by the city council, enter into an interlocal agreement with such public ambulance service. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.330 Denial, revocation, or suspension of license.

A. Grounds. The finance director, upon recommendation of the fire chief, may deny a license application or license renewal, or revoke, suspend or restrict a license if the finance director has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant for or holder of the license has violated any provision or failed to meet any provision, term or standard established in this chapter.

B. Notice. If the finance director denies a license application or license renewal, or revokes, suspends or restricts a license, the applicant for or holder thereof shall be given a written notice stating: (1) the facts and conclusions upon which the decision is based; and (2) that the finance director’s decision shall be final and conclusive and that the applicant or holder shall be deemed to have waived all rights to an administrative hearing unless the applicant or holder files with the finance director a written notice of appeal pursuant to subsection (C) of this section. 

Notice of a license revocation, suspension or restriction shall be given prior to the effective date of such action; provided, that the finance director may revoke, suspend or restrict a license, without prior notice, but subject to a timely appeal, if the finance director finds that immediate action is necessary in order to protect the health, welfare or safety of the public.

C. Appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the office of the finance director within 10 business days following notice of the finance director’s decision and shall state the grounds for the appeal. Upon the filing of an appeal, the finance director shall cause to have scheduled a hearing thereon before the city council within 30 days and provide at least 10 days’ notice of the hearing to the applicant or holder. 

The decision of the finance director shall be upheld unless the city council finds that the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive unless review is sought in a court of competent jurisdiction within 10 days of the written decision of the city council. The proceeding before the city council shall be considered proceedings under RCW 42.30.140(1) and (2). (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.340 Penalty for violation.

A. In the event of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the fire department shall promptly notify the licensee thereof and, if the situation warrants it, give the licensee a reasonable opportunity to take corrective action.

B. Any licensee or employee of a licensee who violates any provision of this chapter shall subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of license pursuant to BMC 8.24.330. Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $5,000 and up to 365 days in jail. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.350 Severability.

If any of the provisions of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


8.24.360 Effective date.

This chapter shall take effect May 15, 2010. (Ord. 1713 § 1, 2010).


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:

9.02    Preliminary Article

9.04    Repealed

9.06    Principles of Liability

9.08    Repealed

9.10    Restitution

9.12    Repealed

9.14    Anticipatory Offenses

9.16    Repealed

9.18    Assault – Physical Harm

9.20    Repealed

9.22    Criminal Mistreatment

9.24    Repealed

9.26    Sex Offenses

9.28    Repealed

9.30    Harassment

9.32    Repealed

9.34    Repealed

9.35    Arson, Reckless Burning and Malicious Mischief

9.36    Failure to Appear

9.37    Burglary and Trespass

9.39    Theft and Robbery

9.40    Repealed

9.42    Fraud

9.44    Public Indecency and Prostitution

9.46    Perjury and Interference with Official Proceedings

9.48    Repealed

9.49    Obstructing Governmental Operation

9.50    Repealed

9.52    Offenses by or Against Minors

9.54    Public Disturbance

9.56    Liquor Offenses

9.60    Repealed

9.61    Indecent Exposure – Prostitution

9.63    General Provisions

9.64    Repealed

9.65    Animals, Crimes Relating To

9.68    Repealed

9.71    Fire, Crimes Relating To

9.72    Fireworks

9.76    Firearms and Dangerous Weapons

9.80    Gambling – 1973 Act

9.84    Inhaling Toxic Fumes

9.88    Malicious Mischief – Injury to Property

9.92    Obscenity and Pornography

9.96    Sexual Exploitation of Children

9.100    Duty of Witnesses

9.104    Miscellaneous Crimes

9.108    Domestic Relations

9.112    Age of Majority (Tobacco/Tattooing by Minors)

9.116    Liquor Permits (Unlawful Acts Relating to Identification or Certification Card)

9.120    Alcoholic Beverage Control – Enforcement – Penalties

9.124    Foods, Drugs, Cosmetics and Poisons

9.128    Public Health and Safety

9.132    Fish and Wildlife (Firearms in Vehicles)

9.136    Regulation of Solicitation


Chapter 9.02 PRELIMINARY ARTICLE

Sections:

9.02.010    State statutes adopted.


9.02.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9A.04.010    Title, effective date, application, severability, captions.

9A.04.020     Purposes – Principles of construction.

9A.04.040     Classes of crimes.

9A.04.060     Common law to supplement statute.

9A.04.080     Criminal procedure, limitation of actions.

9A.04.090     Application of general provisions of the code.

9A.04.100     Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.

9A.04.110     Criminal code, officer defined. 

(Ord. 1573 § 1, 2005).


Chapter 9.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.06 PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY

Sections:

9.06.010    State statutes adopted.


9.06.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9A.08.010     General requirements of culpability.

9A.08.020     Liability for conduct of another – Complicity.

(Ord. 1573 § 2, 2005).


Chapter 9.08 CULPABILITY

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.10 RESTITUTION

Sections:

9.10.010    State statutes adopted.


9.10.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9A.20.030    Alternative to a fine.

(Ord. 1573 § 3, 2005).


Chapter 9.12 COMPLICITY

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.14 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

Sections:

9.14.010    State statutes adopted.


9.14.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.28.020     Criminal attempt.

9A.28.030    Criminal solicitation.

(Ord. 1573 § 4, 2005).


Chapter 9.16 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.18 ASSAULT – PHYSICAL HARM

Sections:

9.18.010    State statutes adopted.


9.18.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.36.041     Assault in the fourth degree.

9A.36.050    Reckless endangerment.

9A.36.070    Coercion.

9A.36.150    Interfering with reporting of domestic violence.

10.14.120    Disobedience of order.

26.50.110    Violation of order.

7.21    Contempt of court.

(Ord. 1573 § 5, 2005).


Chapter 9.20 ASSAULT

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.22 CRIMINAL MISTREATMENT

Sections:

9.22.010    State statutes adopted.


9.22.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.42.035    Criminal mistreatment third degree.

9A.42.037    Criminal mistreatment fourth degree.

9A.42.110    Leaving child in care of sex offender.

(Ord. 1573 § 6, 2005).


Chapter 9.24 RECKLESS BURNING AND MALICIOUS MISCHIEF

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.26 SEX OFFENSES

Sections:

9.26.010    State statutes adopted.


9.26.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.44.096    Sexual misconduct with minor second degree.

(Ord. 1573 § 7, 2005).


Chapter 9.28 CRIMINAL TRESPASS AND VEHICLE PROWLING

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.30 HARASSMENT

Sections:

9.30.010    State statutes adopted.


9.30.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.46.020    Harassment – Definition – Penalties.

9A.46.080    Order restricting contact – Violation.

9A.46.110    Stalking.

(Ord. 1573 § 8, 2005).


Chapter 9.32 THEFT

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.34 LEASED PERSONAL PROPERTY – FAILURE TO RETURN

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.35 ARSON, RECKLESS BURNING AND MALICIOUS MISCHIEF

Sections:

9.35.010    State statutes adopted.


9.35.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.48.050    Reckless burning second degree.

9A.48.090    Malicious mischief third degree.

(Ord. 1573 § 9, 2005).


Chapter 9.36 FAILURE TO APPEAR

Sections:

9.36.010    Repealed.

9.36.020    Repealed.

9.36.030    Repealed.

9.36.040    Repealed.

9.36.050    Nonappearance after written promise.


9.36.010 Obstructing a public servant.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1053 § 10.1, 1984).


9.36.020 Refusing to summon aid for a police officer.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1053 § 10.2, 1984).


9.36.030 Resisting arrest.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1053 § 10.3, 1984).


9.36.040 Bail jumping.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1053 § 10.4, 1984).


9.36.050 Nonappearance after written promise.

A. Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of the ordinances of the city, the arresting officer may serve upon him a citation and notice to appear in court. Such citation and notice shall conform to the municipal court criminal rules of the Washington Court Rules. The arrested person, in order to secure release, and when permitted by the arresting officer, must give his written promise to appear in court as required by the citation and notice, by signing in the appropriate place and the written citation and notice served by the arresting officer.

B. A person is guilty of failing to appear if he wilfully violates his written and signed promise to appear in court, as provided for herein, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested; provided, that a written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel.

C. Failure to appear is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1053 § 10.5, 1984).


Chapter 9.37 BURGLARY AND TRESPASS

Sections:

9.37.010    State statutes adopted.


9.37.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.52.060    Making or having burglar tools.

9A.52.070    Criminal trespass in the first degree.

9A.52.080    Criminal trespass in the second degree.

9A.52.100    Vehicle prowling in the second degree.

9A.52.120    Computer trespass in the second degree.

(Ord. 1573 § 10, 2005).


Chapter 9.39 THEFT AND ROBBERY

Sections:

9.39.010    State statutes adopted.


9.39.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.56.050    Theft third degree.

9A.56.060    Unlawful issuance of bank checks.

9A.56.096    Theft of rental/leased/leased-purchased property.

9A.56.170    Possession of stolen property third degree.

9A.56.330    Possession of another’s identification.

(Ord. 1573 § 11, 2005).


Chapter 9.40 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.42 FRAUD

Sections:

9.42.010    State statutes adopted.


9.42.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.60.045    Criminal impersonation second degree.

(Ord. 1573 § 12, 2005).


Chapter 9.44 PUBLIC INDECENCY AND PROSTITUTION

Sections:

9.44.010    Repealed.

9.44.020    Repealed.

9.44.030    Location of performers providing certain forms of entertainment restricted.

9.44.040    –

9.44.110    Repealed.

9.44.120    Body studios prohibited.

9.44.130    Repealed.

9.44.140    Repealed.


9.44.010 Definitions.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.1, 1984).


9.44.020 Unlawful public exposure.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.2, 1984).


9.44.030 Location of performers providing certain forms of entertainment restricted.

No entertainer shall appear in any public place while unclothed or with any portion of the buttocks, genitals, pubic region or female breasts exposed. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.3, 1984).


9.44.040 Unlawful public exposure – Exemptions.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.4, 1984).


9.44.050 Unlawful public exposure – Affirmative defenses.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.5, 1984).


9.44.060 Prostitution – Designated.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.6, 1984).


9.44.070 Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial, no defense.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.7, 1984).


9.44.080 Prostitution – Permitting.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.8, 1984).


9.44.090 Patronizing a prostitute.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.9, 1984).


9.44.100 Public indecency.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.10, 1984).


9.44.110 Public display of sexually explicit material.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.11, 1984).


9.44.120 Body studios prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct or maintain a body studio, or to knowingly participate in any business or conduct related thereto on the premises of a body studio, or to knowingly be employed on such premises. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.12, 1984).


9.44.130 Facilitating offense.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.13, 1984).


9.44.140 Violation – Penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1060, 1985; Ord. 1053 § 12.14, 1984).


Chapter 9.46 PERJURY AND INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL PROCEEDINGS

Sections:

9.46.010    State statutes adopted.


9.46.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.72.040     False swearing.

9A.72.150    Tampering with physical evidence.

(Ord. 1573 § 13, 2005).


Chapter 9.48 MARIJUANA

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.49 OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATION

Sections:

9.49.010    State statutes adopted.


9.49.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.76.020    Obstructing a law enforcement officer.

9A.76.030    Refusing to summon aid for a peace officer.

9A.76.040    Resisting arrest.

9A.76.080    Rendering criminal assistance second degree.

9A.76.090    Rendering criminal assistance third degree.

9A.76.170    Bail jumping.

9A.76.175    Making a false/misleading statement to a public servant.

(Ord. 1573 § 14, 2005).


Chapter 9.50 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.52 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS

Sections:

9.52.010    Delinquent child defined.

9.52.020    Contributing to delinquency of minor.

9.52.030    Repealed.


9.52.010 Delinquent child defined.

“Delinquent child” includes any person under the age of 18 years who violates any law of this state, or any ordinance of any town, city or county of this state. (Ord. 1053 § 14.1, 1984).


9.52.020 Contributing to delinquency of minor.

A. Any person who, by an any act or omission, encourages, causes or contributes to the delinquency of a delinquent child as defined above shall be guilty of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.

B. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1053 § 14.2, 1984).


9.52.030 Possession of tobacco by minors.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1407 § 1, 1999).


Chapter 9.54 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE

Sections:

9.54.010    State statutes adopted.


9.54.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.84.020    Failure to disperse.

9A.84.030    Disorderly conduct.

9A.84.040    False reporting/information.

(Ord. 1573 § 15, 2005).


Chapter 9.56 LIQUOR OFFENSES

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

9.56.010    Repealed.

Article II. Minors

9.56.020    Repealed.

9.56.030    Repealed.

9.56.040    Repealed.

9.56.050    Repealed.

Article III. Malt Liquor Kegs

9.56.060    Sales restrictions.

9.56.070    Receipt form.

9.56.080    Compliance required.

9.56.090    Repealed.

9.56.100    Repealed.

9.56.110    Repealed.

Article I. General Provisions


9.56.010 Liquor defined.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1986; Ord. 1053 § 15.1, 1984).

Article II. Minors


9.56.020 Furnishing liquor prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1986; Ord. 1053 § 15.2, 1984).


9.56.030 Possession or purchase of liquor prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1986; Ord. 1053 § 15.3, 1984).


9.56.040 Frequenting taverns – Misrepresentation of age.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1986; Ord. 1053 § 15.4, 1984).


9.56.050 Transfer of identification prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1090 § 2, 1986; Ord. 1053 § 15.5, 1984).

Article III. Malt Liquor Kegs


9.56.060 Sales restrictions.

Any person who sells or offers for sale kegs or other containers containing six gallons or more of malt liquor to consumers who are not licensed under chapter 66.24 RCW shall:

A. Require the purchaser to sign a receipt for the beverage in substantially the form provided in BMC 9.56.070 and provide the following:

1. Two pieces of identification, one of which is a motor vehicle operator’s license number or Washington State identification card, or military identifications;

2. A sworn statement providing that the purchaser is of legal age to purchase, possess or use malt liquor, that the purchaser will not allow any person under the age of 21 to consume the beverage except as provided in RCW 66.44.270, and that the purchaser will not remove or obliterate the numbered label affixed to the container.

B. Record the identification of the keg or container for the purpose of tracing the item if the contents are consumed in violation of this code in the following manner:

1. Record the serial number of the keg or container on the receipt;

2. Identify the keg or container purchased by affixing a numbered label to the keg or container;

3. Record the identification number on the receipt. The original copy of the receipt shall be retained for a period of one year subject to inspection by Burlington police department. A copy of the receipt shall be provided to the purchaser.

C. Notify the Burlington police department each Monday in the event that the individual sale of malt liquor exceeds six gallons. (Ord. 1042 § 1, 1984).


9.56.070 Receipt form.

The form of the receipt required by BMC 9.56.060 shall be substantially in the following form:

RECEIPT FOR SALE OF MALT LIQUOR IN KEGS OR CONTAINERS TO UNLICENSED PERSONS

Date of Sale     _______ Invoice No. _______

Keg Identification Number (s) _______

Brand_______     Keg Capacity _______ No. of Kegs	_______ Total Gallons_______

Name of Purchaser ______________

Address ______________

Motor Vehicle Operator’s License Number ______________

Washington State Identification Card ______________

Other Identification ______________

I declare that under penalty of violation of Burlington Ordinance No. ___ that the information provided in this receipt is true and correct and that I am over the legal age to purchase, possess or use malt liquor, that I will not allow the malt liquor purchased and identified by this receipt to be consumed by any person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) except as provided by Burlington Code 9.56.030 and RCW 66.44.270, and that I will not remove or obliterate the numbered identification label affixed to the container.

__________________ Signature of Purchaser

Identity of Seller ________________

Address of Licensed Premises ________________________

NOTICE

It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to acquire in any manner, consume or have in his or her possession, any intoxicating liquor, provided that the foregoing shall not apply in the case of liquor given or permitted to be given to such person under the age of twenty-one (21) years by his parent or guardian for beverage or medicinal purposes in the home or administered to him by his physician or dentist for medicinal purposes. A person who signs this receipt with knowledge that any information in the receipt is false does so in violation of Burlington Ordinance No. ____. Violation of any of the provisions of that ordinance is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Ord. 1042 § 2, 1984).


9.56.080 Compliance required.

It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or to purchase any keg or container containing six gallons or more of malt liquor except upon compliance with BMC 9.56.060 and 9.56.070. (Ord. 1042 § 3, 1984).


9.56.090 False information – Supplying prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1042 § 4, 1984).


9.56.100 False information – Sales with knowledge prohibited.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1042 § 5, 1984).


9.56.110 Violation – Penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 1573. (Ord. 1042 § 6, 1984).


Chapter 9.60 WEAPONS

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.61 INDECENT EXPOSURE – PROSTITUTION

Sections:

9.61.010    State statutes adopted.


9.61.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9A.88.010    Indecent exposure.

9A.88.030    Prostitution.

9A.88.050    Prostitution – Sex of parties immaterial.

9A.88.090    Permitting prostitution.

9A.88.110    Patronizing a prostitute.

(Ord. 1573 § 16, 2005).


Chapter 9.63 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

9.63.010    State statutes adopted.


9.63.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.01.055     Citizen immunity if aiding officer, scope – When.

9.01.110     Omission, when not punishable.

9.01.120     Civil remedies preserved.

9.01.160     Application to existing civil rights.

(Ord. 1573 § 17, 2005).


Chapter 9.64 LITTERING

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.65 ANIMALS, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.65.010    State statutes adopted.


9.65.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.08.070    Pet animals – Taking, concealing, injury, killing, etc.

(Ord. 1573 § 18, 2005).


Chapter 9.68 RESTITUTION

(Repealed by Ord. 1573)


Chapter 9.71 FIRE, CRIMES RELATING TO

Sections:

9.71.010    State statutes adopted.


9.71.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.40.100     Tampering with fire alarm/equipment – False alarms.

(Ord. 1573 § 19, 2005).


Chapter 9.72 FIREWORKS

Sections:

9.72.010    Definitions.

9.72.020    Findings of fact.

9.72.030    Implementation of statutes.

9.72.040    Possession, use, sale, and discharge of fireworks unlawful.

9.72.050    Exceptions.

9.72.060    Permit required – Public display of fireworks.

9.72.070    Application for public display permit.

9.72.080    Permit fees.

9.72.090    Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

9.72.100    State-licensed pyrotechnician required.

9.72.110    Reinforcement of fire protection.

9.72.120    Revocation of permit.

9.72.130    Seizure of fireworks.

9.72.140    Penalty.


9.72.010 Definitions.

The following definitions set forth in chapter 70.77 RCW as now stated or hereafter amended are hereby adopted by reference:

RCW

70.77.126    Definitions – “Fireworks.”

70.77.131    Definitions – “Display fireworks.”

70.77.136    Definitions – “Consumer fireworks.”

70.77.138    Definitions – “Articles pyrotechnic.”

70.77.141    Definitions – “Agricultural and wildlife fireworks.”

70.77.146    Definitions – “Special effects.”

70.77.160    Definitions – “Public display of fireworks.”

70.77.165    Definitions – “Fire nuisance.”

70.77.170    Definitions – “License.”

70.77.175    Definitions – “Licensee.”

70.77.177    Definitions – “Local fire official.”

70.77.180    Definitions – “Permit.”

70.77.182    Definitions – “Permittee.”

70.77.190    Definitions – “Person.”

70.77.200    Definitions – “Importer.”

70.77.205    Definitions – “Manufacturer.”

70.77.210    Definitions – “Wholesaler.”

70.77.215    Definitions – “Retailer.”

70.77.230    Definitions – “Pyrotechnic operator.”

70.77.236    Definitions – “New fireworks item.”

70.77.241    Definitions – “Permanent storage” – “Temporary storage.” 

(Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.020 Findings of fact.

The city council hereby makes the following findings of fact:

A. The risks of fires and the danger to public safety and property damages are increased by the sale and use of fireworks within the city.

B. The types of fireworks involved in fires within the city include both illegal fireworks, and legal (common) fireworks as defined in RCW 70.77.136.

C. Banning the use of all fireworks within the city is rationally related to the legislative purpose of reducing and/or eliminating the risk of major property damage and risk to public safety which results from the sale, possession and use of any fireworks. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.030 Implementation of statutes.

This chapter is intended to implement chapter 70.77 RCW, and shall be construed in accordance with that statute and any and all administrative regulations issued pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.040 Possession, use, sale, and discharge of fireworks unlawful.

No person, firm, or corporation shall possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks, except as herein provided in BMC 9.72.050. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.050 Exceptions.

This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the following:

A. The sale, transportation, handling, or use of industrial pyrotechnic devices or fireworks, such as railroad torpedoes, fusees, automotive, aeronautical, and marine flares and smoke signals; or

B. The sale and use of blank cartridges for signal or ceremonial purposes; in athletics or sports; or legal power tools; or

C. The transportation, handling, or use of any pyrotechnic devices by the armed forces of the United States; or

D. The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law enforcement, or similar government agencies; or

E. In accordance with RCW 70.77.311, the use of common fireworks and such audible ground devices such as firecrackers, salutes, and chasers if:

1. Purchased from a licensed manufacturer, importer, or wholesaler;

2. For use on prescribed dates and locations;

3. For religious or specific purposes; and

4. A permit is obtained from the city; provided, that no fee shall be charged for such permit; or

F. Public fireworks displays authorized by permit issued by the city pursuant to RCW 70.77.260(2); or

G. Pursuant to RCW 70.77.405, the sale and use of trick and novelty devices as defined in WAC 212-17-030, as amended; or

H. The use of agricultural and wildlife fireworks as defined in WAC 212-17-045, as amended; or

I. The assembling, compounding, use and display of special effects of whatever nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, radio or television productions, theatricals or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of the production and such person possesses a valid permit issued by the city to purchase, possess, transport or use such fireworks. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.060 Permit required – Public display of fireworks.

It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in a public display of fireworks within the city without first having obtained and being the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.070 Application for public display permit.

A. Applications for a permit to hold, conduct or operate a public display of fireworks as defined under chapter 70.77 RCW shall be made to the fire chief. Such a permit shall also require the approval of the police chief or designee. Applications shall be made not less than 14 days prior to the display. Applicants shall meet all qualifications and requirements of state law regarding the public display of fireworks, and all requirements of Article 78 of the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by the city. Applicants for a public display permit shall hold a pyrotechnic operator license, as set forth in BMC 9.72.100.

B. Except as provided in RCW 70.77.355, the applicant for a permit for a public display of fireworks shall include with the application evidence of a bond issued by an authorized surety company. The bond shall be in the amount required by RCW 70.77.295 and shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of all damages to persons or property resulting from or caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the applicant or its agents, servants, employees, or subcontractors in the presentation of the display. Instead of a bond, the applicant may include a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of appropriate liability insurance in the amount required by RCW 70.77.295 for the benefit of the person named therein as assured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.080 Permit fees.

The fee for a public display permit for the public display of fireworks shall be adopted by city council resolution, payable in advance. (Ord. 1799 § 16, 2014; Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.090 Issuance – Nontransferable – Voiding.

Each public display permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for the specific authorized public display event only, shall be used only by the designated permittee, and shall be nontransferable. Any transfer or unauthorized use of a permit shall void the permit granted in addition to all other sanctions provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.100 State-licensed pyrotechnician required.

Applicants shall hold a pyrotechnic operator license issued by the state as defined by chapter 70.77 RCW and chapter 212-17 WAC. All public fireworks displays shall be planned, organized and discharged by a state-licensed pyrotechnician. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.110 Reinforcement of fire protection.

When, in the discretion of the fire chief, additional standby firefighting resources are necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, a public display permit may require that the permittee fund such additional firefighting resources. Firefighters shall receive a minimum compensation as per the Washington State Association of Fire Chiefs’ fee schedule. All compensation for fire department apparatus will be as per the Washington State Association of Fire Chiefs’ fee schedule and shall be designated to the general fund. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.120 Revocation of permit.

Any public display permit may be immediately revoked at any time deemed necessary by the fire chief due to any noncompliance with permit conditions, or unforeseen weather conditions such as extremely low humidity or high winds. The display may also be canceled by accidental ignition of any form of combustible or flammable material in the vicinity due to falling debris from the display. This provision shall be construed as supplementing Section 7802.4.9.5 of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city, and shall not be construed as a limitation of that section of the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.130 Seizure of fireworks.

Pursuant to RCW 70.77.435, any fireworks which are illegally sold, offered for sale, used, discharged, possessed, or transported in violation of the provisions of this chapter are subject to seizure by law enforcement officers of the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1572 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


9.72.140 Penalty.

A. This chapter is adopted for the general benefit of the public, and not for the particular benefit of any individual person or group of persons.

B. Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

C. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use fireworks in a reckless manner which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person or damage to the property of another. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor.

D. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which he or she commits or continues a violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 2004).


Chapter 9.76 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS

Sections:

9.76.010    State statutes adopted.

9.76.020    Stun guns, tasers and similar devices.


9.76.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.41.050     Carrying firearms.

9.41.098    Forfeiture of firearms – Disposition – Confiscation.

9.41.230    Aiming or discharging a firearm, dangerous weapons.

9.41.240     Possession of a pistol ages 18 – 21.

9.41.250    Dangerous weapon – Penalty.

9.41.270    Weapon capable of producing bodily harm/unlawful – Carrying.

9.41.280    Possessing dangerous weapons on school grounds.

9.41.300    Weapons prohibited in certain places.

(Ord. 1573 § 20, 2005).


9.76.020 Stun guns, tasers and similar devices.

A. Possession, Sale or Use Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, firm, corporation, or other entity to sell, give, lend, rent, or otherwise transfer to any other individual, person, firm, corporation, or similar entity an electroshock weapon within the Burlington city limits. For the purposes of this section, an “electroshock weapon” means a device that uses electrical current to disrupt voluntary control of muscles to cause neuromuscular incapacitation, and which delivers such electrical current through electrodes affixed to a dart propelled by compressed air or similar means, and shall include those devices referred to as “projectile stun gun” by RCW 9.41.280. 

B. It shall be unlawful for a person to carry onto, or to possess on, public or private elementary or secondary school premises, school-provided transportation, or areas of facilities while being used exclusively by public or private schools a stun gun, taser, or similar weapon, all in accordance with RCW 9.41.280.

C. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to any member of the Burlington police department, any other authorized law enforcement or corrections officer while in the performance of his or her official duties, any member of the armed services while in the performance of his or her official duties, or to any electronic or energy device or weapon designed solely and exclusively for animal control purposes.

D. Penalties. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1603 § 1, 2006).


Chapter 9.80 GAMBLING – 1973 ACT

Sections:

9.80.010    State statutes adopted.


9.80.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified: 

RCW

9.46.1962    Cheating in the second degree for crimes committed after 1984.

(Ord. 1573 § 21, 2005).


Chapter 9.84 INHALING TOXIC FUMES

Sections:

9.84.010    State statutes adopted.


9.84.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.47A.020    Unlawful inhalation.

9.47A.030    Possession of inhalants.

9.47A.040    Sale of inhalants.

(Ord. 1573 § 22, 2005).


Chapter 9.88 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF – INJURY TO PROPERTY

Sections:

9.88.010    State statutes adopted.


9.88.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.61.230    Telephonic harassment.

9.61.260    Cyberstalking.

(Ord. 1573 § 23, 2005).


Chapter 9.92 OBSCENITY AND PORNOGRAPHY

Sections:

9.92.010    State statutes adopted.


9.92.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.68.130    Sexually explicit material – Defined – Unlawful display.

(Ord. 1573 § 24, 2005).


Chapter 9.96 SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN

Sections:

9.96.010    State statutes adopted.


9.96.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.68A.090    Communicating with a minor for immoral purposes.

9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance.

(Ord. 1573 § 25, 2005).


Chapter 9.100 DUTY OF WITNESSES1

Sections:

9.100.010    State statutes adopted.


9.100.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.69.100    Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense.

(Ord. 1573 § 26, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.00. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.104 MISCELLANEOUS CRIMES1

Sections:

9.104.010    State statutes adopted.


9.104.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

9.91.025    Unlawful bus conduct.

9.91.060    Leaving children unattended in parked automobile.

9.91.160    Personal protection spray devices.

(Ord. 1573 § 27, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.04. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.108 DOMESTIC RELATIONS1

Sections:

9.108.010    State statutes adopted.


9.108.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

26.09.300    Restraining orders – Notice – Refusal to comply.

26.50.110    Violation of order – Penalties.

(Ord. 1573 § 28, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.08. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.112 AGE OF MAJORITY (TOBACCO/TATTOOING BY MINORS)1

Sections:

9.112.010    State statutes adopted.


9.112.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

26.28.080    Selling or giving of tobacco by minors.

26.28.085    Applying tattoo to minor.

(Ord. 1573 § 29, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.12. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.116 LIQUOR PERMITS (UNLAWFUL ACTS RELATING TO IDENTIFICATION OR CERTIFICATION CARD)1

Sections:

9.116.010    State statutes adopted.


9.116.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

66.20.200    Unlawful acts relating to ID or certification card.

(Ord. 1573 § 30, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.16. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.120 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL – ENFORCEMENT – PENALTIES1

Sections:

9.120.010    State statutes adopted.


9.120.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

66.44.100    Opening or consuming liquor in a public place.

66.44.250    Drinking in public conveyance.

66.44.270    Furnishing liquor to a minor/

(2)(a)    possession/use.

66.44.290    Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor.

66.44.310    Minor frequenting a tavern – Off limits.

66.44.325    Unlawful transfer of identification to a minor.

(Ord. 1573 § 31, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.20. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.124 FOODS, DRUGS, COSMETICS AND POISONS1

Sections:

9.124.010    State statutes adopted.


9.124.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

69.43.120    Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine.

69.50.102    Possession of drug paraphernalia.

69.50.4014    Possession of marijuana 40 grams or less.

(Ord. 1573 § 32, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.24. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.128 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY1

Sections:

9.128.010    State statutes adopted.


9.128.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

70.74.310    Gas bombs, explosives, stink bombs.

70.77.255    Fireworks – Acts prohibited without appropriate licenses/permits.

70.93.060    Littering prohibited.

(Ord. 1573 § 33, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.28. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.132 FISH AND WILDLIFE (FIREARMS IN VEHICLES)1

Sections:

9.132.010    State statutes adopted.


9.132.010 State statutes adopted.

The following statutes of the state of Washington are hereby adopted by reference as they now exist or hereafter may be modified:

RCW

77.15.460    Loaded firearm in vehicle – Unlawful use or possession.

(Ord. 1573 § 34, 2005).1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1573 adds these provisions as chapter 10.32. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to retain all criminal code provisions in Title 9. 


Chapter 9.136 REGULATION OF SOLICITATION

Sections:

9.136.010    Purpose.

9.136.020    Definitions.

9.136.030    Coercive solicitation – Prohibited.

9.136.040    Time of solicitation.

9.136.050    Place of solicitation.

9.136.060    Penalties.


9.136.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation, to promote tourism and business, and to preserve the quality of urban life while providing safe and appropriate venues for constitutionally protected activity. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


9.136.020 Definitions.

A. “Automated teller machine” means a machine, other than a telephone:

1. That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution;

2. By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution a request to withdraw, deposit, transfer funds, make payment, or otherwise conduct financial business for the customer or for another person directly from the customer’s account or from the customer’s account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the customer; and

3. The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution.

B. “Coercive” means to do the following with intent:

1. To approach, speak or gesture to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with a commission of a criminal act upon the person, another person or property in the person’s possession;

2. To approach within one foot of a person for the purpose of making a solicitation without obtaining said person’s initial consent;

3. To persist in a solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response;

4. To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a person, pedestrian traffic, a vehicle or vehicular traffic while making a solicitation;

5. To use violent or threatening gestures toward a person;

6. To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person being solicited to consent to demands;

7. To make any false or misleading representation in the course of making a solicitation, where the person knew or reasonably should have known of the falsity or misleading nature of the information;

8. To use profane, offensive, or abusive language, which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction; or

9. To solicit on private property, unless the solicitor has the written permission of the owner or occupant of the private property.

C. “Public transportation facility” means a facility or designated location that is owned, operated, or maintained by a city, county, county transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, regional transit authority, or metropolitan municipal corporation within the state.

D. “Public transportation stop” means an area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers paying fares on an individual basis.

E. “Public transportation vehicle” has the meaning given that term in RCW 46.04.355, as currently adopted or as it may be amended in the future.

F. “Self-service fuel pump” means a fuel pump:

1. From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner or operator, with or without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located; and

2. That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public.

G. “Solicitation” for the purposes of this chapter is any means of asking, begging, requesting, or pleading made in person, orally or in a written or printed manner, directed to another person, requesting an immediate donation of money, contribution, alms, financial aid, charity, gifts of items or service of value, or the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


9.136.030 Coercive solicitation – Prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for a person to make a coercive solicitation. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


9.136.040 Time of solicitation.

It shall be unlawful to make solicitation to pedestrians on public property after sunset or before sunrise. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


9.136.050 Place of solicitation.

A. Solicitation Near Designated Locations and Facilities.

1. It is unlawful for any person to solicit another person within 25 feet of:

a. An automated teller machine;

b. A self-service fuel pump;

c. A public transportation stop; or

d. Any parked vehicle as occupants of such vehicle enter or exit such vehicle;

e. In any other circumstance, it is unlawful to approach within one foot of a person for the purpose of making a solicitation without obtaining said person’s initial consent.

2. It is unlawful for a person to solicit another person:

a. While located on private property, unless the solicitor has prior written permission from the owner or occupant;

b. While in any public transportation facility or vehicle.

B. For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, measurement will be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point at which a solicitation is being conducted to whichever is applicable of the following:

1. The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated teller machine is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the automated teller machine;

2. The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump;

3. The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a public transportation stop; or

4. Any door of a parked vehicle that is being used by an occupant of such vehicle to enter or exit such vehicle.

C. It shall be unlawful to solicit at the following places:

1. The on-ramp or off-ramp to a state highway or interstate highway;

2. Within 300 feet of the following intersections and identified in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by reference:

a. Burlington Boulevard and:

i. George Hopper Road;

ii. Pease Road;

iii. Cascade Mall Drive;

iv. Gilkey Road;

v. Rio Vista Avenue;

vi. Fairhaven Avenue;

vii. Marketplace Drive; and

viii. Sakuma Bros. Avenue;

b. Goldenrod Road and:

i. McCorquedale Road; and

ii. State Route 20;

c. George Hopper Road and:

i. Marketplace Drive;

d. Marketplace Street and:

i. Sakuma Bros. Avenue. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


9.136.060 Penalties.

Violation of any section of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. (Ord. 1796 § 3, 2014).


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Model Traffic Ordinance

10.08    Speed Limits

10.12    Parking

10.16    Brakes

10.20    Trains

10.24    Motorized Foot Scooters, Bicycles and Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices


Chapter 10.04 MODEL TRAFFIC ORDINANCE

Sections:

10.04.010    Adoption by reference.

10.04.020    Sections not adopted.


10.04.010 Adoption by reference.

The “Washington Model Traffic Ordinance,” chapter 308-330 WAC, is adopted by reference as the traffic ordinance of the city as if set forth in full. In addition, Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 23 of Chapter 275, Laws of 1994 are adopted by reference. (Ord. 1262 § 1, 1994).


10.04.020 Sections not adopted.

The following sections of the Model Traffic Ordinance are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted: WAC 308-330-500 through 308-330-540. (Ord. 1262 § 2, 1994).


Chapter 10.08 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:

10.08.010    Decrease of state speed limits on state highways.


10.08.010 Decrease of state speed limits on state highways.

It is determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law on the following state highway within the corporate city limits is greater than reasonable under the conditions found to exist on said highway and it is declared that reasonable and safe speed limits for all vehicles on SR-20 are as follows:

Thirty-five mph from Milepost 59.37 (Burlington WCL/0.60 miles east of Pulver Road) to Milepost 59.85 (Junction Garl Street and Rio Vista Avenue).

Thirty mph from Milepost 59.85 (Junction Garl Street and Rio Vista Avenue) to Milepost 60.27 (Junction Garl Street and Avon Avenue).

Thirty-five mph from Milepost 60.27 (Junction Garl Street and Avon Avenue) to Milepost 61.32 (Burlington ECL/0.01 miles east of Peacock Lane). (Ord. 1037 § 1, 1984; Ord. 867 § 1, 1976).


Chapter 10.12 PARKING

Sections:

Article I. Administration

10.12.010    Administration and records.

Article II. City Property

10.12.025    Highway 20 and other city property.

Article III. General Restrictions

10.12.100    Definitions.

10.12.110    Traffic safety commission.

10.12.120    Angular parking.

10.12.130    Time limits.

10.12.140    Vehicle removal.

10.12.150    Miscellaneous parking restrictions.

10.12.160    Applicability.

10.12.170    Parking restrictions for commercial and recreational vehicles.

10.12.180    Occupation of recreational vehicle.

10.12.190    Penalties.

10.12.200    Repair on public property prohibited – Exception.

10.12.210    Parking zone regulations not applicable when.

Article IV. Fire Lanes

10.12.300    Definitions.

10.12.310    Designation by fire chief.

10.12.320    Criteria for designation.

10.12.330    Notification of designation.

10.12.340    Owner to mark fire lanes.

10.12.350    Owner to maintain fire lanes.

10.12.360    Violation – Civil infraction.

10.12.370    Impoundment.

10.12.380    Enforcement.

Exhibit I    Repealed.

Exhibit II    Repealed.

Article I. Administration


10.12.010 Administration and records.

A. The public works department coordinates the administration of this code with the police department.

B. When the public works director completes studies and determines that signage, striping or other traffic controls are needed, they shall be installed by the public works department and enforced by the police department.

C. A record of changes shall be maintained in the public works department and a copy posted at the police department. (Ord. 1556 § 1, 2004).

Article II. City Property


10.12.025 Highway 20 and other city property.

A. It is the policy of the city that no vehicles shall be parked on the highway frontage between Highway 20 and the railroad tracks from Regent Street east to Lafayette within the city and from the city limits east approximately one mile, which property is owned by the city.

B. It is the policy of the city that limits on vehicle parking may be put in place adjacent to any city property.

C. The public works director, in consultation with the police chief, is empowered to take such steps that are deemed reasonable to effectuate the policy set forth in subsections A and B of this section. The actions may include but are not limited to the following:

1. Posting the subject property with signs advising that parking is prohibited on the subject property;

2. Posting the property with signs indicating that vehicles parked on the subject property will be impounded;

3. Contracting with such firm as the public works director or police chief deems appropriate to tow any vehicles parked in violation of the city’s policy and further providing for impound of same. In making such an agreement, the city shall specify the terms for release of vehicles impounded and payment of the fees. (Ord. 1556 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1082 §§ 1, 2, 1986).

Article III. General Restrictions


10.12.100 Definitions.

A. As used in this chapter, the term “recreational vehicle” shall include all travel trailers, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, utility trailers, snowmobile trailers or any similar vehicle. The term shall also include any “motor home” or “camper” as such terms are defined in RCW 82.50.010, which definitions are hereby adopted by reference.

B. As used in this chapter, the term “commercial vehicle” shall mean all motor vehicles exceeding 20 feet in length, including trailers, and all nonmotorized vehicles or trailers designed to be or actually attached or connected to a motor vehicle which exceeds 20 feet in length measured from the front of the motor vehicle to the end of the nonmotorized vehicle or trailer, and all vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, which vehicles are used, in whole or in part, for the transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, vehicles, animals, passengers for hire, or which are used, in whole or in part, in construction or farming.

C. As used in this chapter, the term “loading and unloading” shall mean temporarily stopping for no more than 15 minutes while removing or adding goods to the vehicle. (Ord. 1201 § 8, 1992).


10.12.110 Traffic safety commission.

A traffic safety commission is established. The commission shall consist of one member of the public to be appointed by the city council, the police chief, the city engineer and a member of the city council. The function of the commission is to recommend modifications of the parking ordinance to the city council. The commission shall meet at least annually to review enforcement statistics, problems and requests for changes or clarification of the parking ordinance and shall provide an annual report and recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 1201 § 2, 1992).


10.12.120 Angular parking.

It shall be unlawful for any person to angular park on the street and highways within the city except as designated with either a painted stripe or signs posted in the block. Parking of any vehicle extending into the traffic lane is prohibited in any angular parking space. Parking in an unsafe manner which creates a traffic hazard, including obstructed vision or impeding pedestrian or traffic flow, in areas not striped or sign posted for parking is prohibited. (Ord. 1343 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1239 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1201 § 3, 1992).


10.12.130 Time limits.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle for a greater time limit than is designated and posted in a particular time limit zone.

B. Time limit zones shall be designated by  the public works director and time limit zones shall be so posted, with a minimum of one sign per block.

C. All streets are 72-hour time limit zones unless otherwise posted. (Ord. 1556 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1239 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1201 § 4, 1992).


10.12.140 Vehicle removal.

A. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon or adjacent to the street or highway in violation of this chapter, such officer shall be authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same to a position off that portion of the street or highway.

B. The charge for removal of a vehicle as authorized in subsection A of this section shall be fixed by a governmental agency having traffic law enforcement jurisdiction over the portion of street or highway where such vehicle was found. Such governmental agency may perform the removal service directly or through a private firm. A private firm providing such removal services shall post the authorized charges therefor prominently at its place of business. The costs incurred in the removal of such vehicle shall be paid by the vehicle’s owner and shall be a lien upon the vehicle until paid. (Ord. 1201 § 5, 1992).


10.12.150 Miscellaneous parking restrictions.

A. It shall be unlawful to park in the following circumstances:

1. Within 20 feet of a fire hydrant;

2. Parking in a direction opposite of vehicle travel on a street;

3. Parking in a designated “LOADING ZONE”;

4. Parking in a designated “HANDICAPPED” parking stall;

5. Parking in any yellow zone;

6. Parking on sidewalks;

7. Blocking an alley or crosswalk; and

8. Parking in “NO PARKING ZONES.”

B. Avon Avenue (State Route 20). It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicles, whether attended or unattended, upon the main traveled part of the highway, the shoulder, curb or any section of the state right-of-way on the north or south side of Avon Avenue commencing at the intersection of Burlington Boulevard and extending east to the city limits.

C. Burlington Boulevard. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicles, whether attended or unattended, upon the main traveled part of the highway, the shoulder, curb or any section of the state right-of-way on either side of Burlington Boulevard commencing at a point of intersection with the bridge to Mount Vernon and Burlington Boulevard northward on Burlington Boulevard to the point of intersection of Burlington Boulevard and Avon Avenue.

D. Goldenrod Road. It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicles, whether attended or unattended, upon the main traveled part of the highway, the shoulder, curb or any section of the state right-of-way on either side of Goldenrod Road commencing at a point of intersection with Highway 20 to the Interstate 5 Freeway access.

E. Spruce Street. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave standing, any commercial vehicle and all nonmotorized vehicles or trailers designed to be or actually attached or connected to a motor vehicle, and all vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, upon the main traveled part of the roadway, the shoulder, curb or any section of the street right-of-way on the east and west side of Spruce Street from East Fairhaven to Gilkey Street, except parking shall be allowed on the west side of the street between Greenleaf and Washington Streets.

F. Alley Way. The alley running east and west between Anacortes Street and Pine Street, and East Fairhaven and Washington Street, shall be designated one-way westbound.

G. Rio Vista Street. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or leave standing, any commercial vehicle and all nonmotorized vehicles or trailers designed to be or actually attached or connected to a motor vehicle, and all vehicles exceeding 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, upon the main traveled part of the roadway, the shoulder, curb or any section of the street right-of-way on the north and south side of Rio Vista Street from Burlington Boulevard to Spruce Street. (Ord. 1556 § 3, 2004; Ord. 1239 § 3, 1993; Ord. 1201 § 6, 1992).


10.12.160 Applicability.

BMC 10.12.150 shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the main travelled portion of the highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. In no case shall the vehicle be left on the highway for more than two hours. (Ord. 1201 § 7, 1992).


10.12.170 Parking restrictions for commercial and recreational vehicles.

A. In areas zoned residential, including multifamily areas, no recreational or commercial vehicle may be stored upon any city street or sidewalk, but may be stored in a garage or private driveway.

B. The restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to the parking of a recreational vehicle on a street or alley immediately abutting street lot line of the lot upon which the owner or operator of the vehicle resides if such parking is solely for the purpose of connection with a planned trip, outing or vacation, commencing or ending on the same day of such departure or return, including any loading or unloading of persons and personal effects, or for the preparation of the vehicle in regards to such departure or return; provided, however, that such parking may not occur on more than two consecutive days or on more than two days in any seven-day period and shall not be occupied while parked on street. (Ord. 1239 § 4, 1993; Ord. 1201 § 9, 1992).


10.12.180 Occupation of recreational vehicle.

It shall be unlawful to occupy any recreational vehicle for residence purposes anywhere in the city, except in a duly established trailer park maintained in accordance with all applicable state statutes and city ordinances; provided, however, that occupation for residence purposes for a period of not more than seven days shall not be construed to be a violation of this section. (Ord. 1201 § 10, 1992).


10.12.190 Penalties.

A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a traffic infraction, and upon a final determination of having committed such infraction, such person shall be subject to a monetary penalty as set forth in subsection E of this section.

B. There shall be a penalty of $25.00 for failure to respond to a notice of traffic infraction for violation of the provisions of this chapter or for failure to appear at any requested hearing.

C. In addition, any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to impoundment of the vehicle at the owner’s expense.

D. Erasing Chalk Marks. It is a traffic infraction, with a monetary penalty of $100.00, for any person to park a vehicle or permit a vehicle to remain parked on the streets knowing that time marks had been erased from such vehicle within the preceding 10 hours. A registered owner and/or last operator of a vehicle shall be presumed to know when and whether time marks had been erased from such vehicle.

E. Table of Fees for Parking Violations.

	Table of Fees for Parking Violations 

	Parking Violations	Monetary Penalties

	Overtime parking	$20.00

	No parking	20.00

	Yellow zone	20.00

	Parking in the wrong direction	20.00

	Within 20 feet of fire hydrant	100.00

	Within 20 feet of railroad crossing	20.00

	Improperly parked	20.00

	Obstructing fire lane	100.00

	Blocking alley	20.00

	On sidewalk	20.00

	Blocking crosswalk	20.00

	Handicap parking	250.00

F. All Other Violations. All other violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the monetary penalty for like violations as set forth in the Justice Court Traffic Infraction Rules (JTIR) promulgated by the Washington State Supreme Court, as such rules now exist or may hereafter be amended.

All $20.00 violations will be reduced to $5.00 if paid within 24 hours after being issued. (Ord. 1556 § 4, 2004; Ord. 1239 § 5, 1993; Ord. 1201 § 11, 1992).


10.12.200 Repair on public property prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful to disassemble, construct, reconstruct, repair and/or service motor vehicles of any kind in or upon any street, road, alley or other public thoroughfare in the city except for emergency service; provided, however, that the emergency service shall not extend over a period of two hours, and that the same does not interfere with or impede the flow of traffic. (Ord. 1201 § 12, 1992).


10.12.210 Parking zone regulations not applicable when.

Restrictions limiting the duration of parking in limited, free parking zones on Sundays, and on the following legal holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, and shall not be effective in designated areas within which regulatory signs have been removed or covered by the city. Temporary parking permits may be issued by the Burlington police department. (Ord. 1201 § 13, 1992).

Article IV. Fire Lanes


10.12.300 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the term “fire lane” means a parcel of land designated and maintained by the owner thereof, as a public way, as defined in Section 1001.2 Uniform Building Code, to provide access from an improved public street, for firefighting and other emergency equipment and personnel. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.310 Designation by fire chief.

The fire chief is granted authority to designate all or a portion of any roadway, driveway, alleyway, parking lot or other means of vehicular ingress or egress to business, commercial or multifamily structures, or other assembly or educational occupancies, whether such ingress is publicly or privately maintained, as a fire lane in the manner set forth in this article.

A. Driveways and/or easements serving more than one single-family residence shall be designated and maintained as fire lanes where necessary in order to, at all times, provide a minimum of a 12-foot clearance through such driveway or easement.

B. It is hereby declared a violation of this section to stop, park a vehicle or otherwise obstruct any fire station facility housing emergency response apparatus. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.320 Criteria for designation.

Selection of areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be discretionary with the fire chief and shall be based upon the requirements of the specific site for access by fire, police and other emergency equipment and also for egress from required exits. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.330 Notification of designation.

Upon determining that an area should be designated as a fire lane, the fire chief shall notify the owner, or other person or organization having control of said area, of the designation and of the action required to give notice of the designation by painting, posting of signs, symbols or other methods approved by the fire chief. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.340 Owner to mark fire lanes.

The owner or other person or organization having control of the area designated as a fire lane shall, within 90 days after being advised of the fire lane designation, give notice of said designation by painting, posting signs, symbols or such other method as directed by the fire chief. The cost of giving notice and maintaining the same shall be borne by the owner or other responsible party. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.350 Owner to maintain fire lanes.

The owner, manager or person in charge of any property upon which designated fire lanes have been established shall prevent the parking of vehicles or the placement of other obstructions in such fire lanes.

The required width of a fire apparatus access road shall not be obstructed in any manner, including parking of vehicles. Minimum required widths and clearances established under the Uniform Fire Code Section 902.2.2.1 shall be maintained at all times.

Entrances to roads, trails or other accessways which have been closed by gates and barriers in accordance with Section 902.2.4.2 of the Uniform Fire Code shall not be obstructed by parked vehicles. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.360 Violation – Civil infraction.

The owner or other person or organization having control of the area designated as a fire lane who fails to mark or maintain the marking of a designated fire lane as prescribed in this chapter, or who parks a vehicle in, allows the parking of a vehicle in, obstructs or allows the obstruction of a designated fire lane commits a civil infraction and such violation shall be punishable by a monetary penalty of $100.00. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The penalty for parking a vehicle in, allowing the parking of a vehicle in, obstructing or allowing the obstruction of a designated fire lane or for parking within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, whether on public or private property, shall be $100.00. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.370 Impoundment.

Any vehicle or object obstructing a designated fire lane or parked within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, whether on public or private property, is hereby declared a traffic and fire hazard and is considered an immediate hazard to life and property and may be abated without prior notification to its owner by impoundment pursuant to applicable state law and the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).


10.12.380 Enforcement.

In addition to enforcement by commissioned officers of the city, the fire chief, or his authorized designee, is authorized to take such lawful action, including impoundment or the writing and issuance of notices of infraction, as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 1998).

Exhibit I

Repealed by Ord. 1556. (Ord. 1328 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1317 § 1, 1996; Amendment eff. 8/16/94; Ord. 1239 § 6, 1993; Ord. 1201 Exh. I, 1992).

Exhibit II

Repealed by Ord. 1556. (Ord. 1377 § 2, 1998; Ord. 1239 § 6, 1993; Ord. 1201 Exh. II, 1992).


Chapter 10.16 BRAKES

Sections:

10.16.010    Definitions.

10.16.020    Engine compression brakes – Described – Declared nuisance when.

10.16.030    Engine compression brakes – Prohibited – Exemption.

10.16.040    Violation – Penalty.


10.16.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

A. “Brake” means any device used for slowing, halting or stopping the movement of any vehicle.

B. “Motor vehicle” means and includes automobiles, tractors, trucks, trailers and transportation equipment of all kinds and sizes, or any combination or combinations of the foregoing. (Ord. 766 § 1, 1972).


10.16.020 Engine compression brakes – Described – Declared nuisance when.

The use within the corporate limits of the city of motor vehicle brakes which are activated or worked by the compression of the engine of the motor vehicle disturbs and disrupts the public peace and quiet and disturbs the residents of the city in their rest and in the enjoyment of their property and by reason thereof the city council finds that the use of such brakes within the corporate limits of the city is a public nuisance. (Ord. 766 § 2, 1972).


10.16.030 Engine compression brakes – Prohibited – Exemption.

The use within the corporate limits of the city of any brake of a motor vehicle, which brake is in any way activated or worked by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof is prohibited; provided, however, fire engines, ambulances, aid trucks, police vehicles and other emergency vehicles shall be exempted from this prohibition. (Ord. 1293 § 1, 1995; Ord. 766 § 3, 1972).


10.16.040 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter and any person, firm or corporation who allows or permits any motor vehicle owned and/or operated by it in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of any violation hereof shall be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 766 § 5, 1972).


Chapter 10.20 TRAINS

Sections:

10.20.010    Obstructing traffic prohibited when – Penalty.


10.20.010 Obstructing traffic prohibited when – Penalty.

Every person operating a locomotive, or who has the care, custody and control of a locomotive and/or train who causes the same to obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic for more than five minutes where such railway crosses a traveled road or street within the city limits is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 912 § 1, 1978).


Chapter 10.24 MOTORIZED FOOT SCOOTERS, BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES

Sections:

10.24.010    Purpose.

10.24.020    Definitions.

10.24.030    Rules of operation – Motorized foot scooters.

10.24.040    Rules of operation – EPAMDs.

10.24.050    Rules of operation – Bicycles.

10.24.060    Removal of factory-installed braking equipment.

10.24.070    Helmets required.

10.24.080    Responsibility.

10.24.090    Violation – Enforcement authority and penalties.

10.24.100    Alternative penalty for minor children.


10.24.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the authority of the city of Burlington to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.020 Definitions.

A. “Approved helmet” means a head covering designed for safety that shall meet or exceed the requirements of safety standards adopted by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 15 USCS 6004, or Z-00.4 set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Snell Foundation, the ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials), or such subsequent nationally recognized standard for helmet performance as the city may adopt. The helmet must be equipped with either a neck- or chin-strap that shall be fastened securely while the wheeled vehicle is in motion.

B. “Bicycle” means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is 16 inches or more in diameter, or three wheels, any one of which is more than 20 inches in diameter. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.071.)

C. “Electric-assisted bicycle” means a bicycle with two or three wheels, a saddle, fully operative pedals for human propulsion, and an electric motor. The electric-assisted bicycle’s electric motor must have a power output of no more than 1,000 watts, be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground, and be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device beyond 20 miles per hour. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.169.)

D. “EPAMD” or “electric personal assistive mobility device” means an electric personal assistive mobility device, which is a self-balancing device with two wheels not in tandem, designed to transport only one person by an electric propulsion system with an average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) having a maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered solely by such a propulsion system while ridden by an operator weighing 170 pounds, of less than 20 miles per hour. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.1695.)

E. “Hours of darkness” means the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and any other time when persons or objects may not be clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.200.)

F. “Minor child” shall mean a person under the age of 16 years.

G. “Moped” means a motorized device designed to travel with not more than three 16-inch or larger diameter wheels in contact with the ground, having fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, and an electric or a liquid fuel motor with a cylinder displacement not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters which produces no more than two gross brake horsepower (developed by a prime mover, as measured by a brake applied to the driving shaft) that is capable of propelling the device at not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground. The term shall also include a vehicle which fails to meet these specific criteria, but which is essentially similar in performance and application to motorized devices which do meet these specific criteria as determined by the Washington State Patrol. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.304.)

H. “Motor-driven cycle” means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor that produces not to exceed five brake horsepower (developed by a prime mover, as measured by a brake applied to the driving shaft). A “motor-driven cycle” does not include a moped, a power wheelchair, a motorized foot scooter, or an electric personal assistive mobility device. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.332.)

I. “Motorized foot scooter” means a device with no more than two 10-inch or smaller diameter wheels that has handlebars, is designed to be stood or sat upon by the operator, and is powered by an internal combustion engine or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion. A motor-driven cycle, a moped, an electric-assisted bicycle, or a motorcycle is not a motorized foot scooter. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.336.) 

J. “Muffler” means a device consisting of a series of chambers or other mechanical designs for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and effective in reducing noise resulting therefrom. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.340.)

K. “Pedestrian” means any person who is afoot or who is using a wheelchair, a power wheelchair, or a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.400.)

L. “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk or shoulder even though such sidewalk or shoulder is used by persons riding bicycles. In the event a highway includes two or more separated roadways, the term “roadway” shall refer to any such roadway separately but shall not refer to all such roadways collectively. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.500.)

M. “Sidewalk” or “walkway” means that property between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property set aside and intended for the use of pedestrians or such portion of private property parallel and in proximity to a public highway and dedicated to use by pedestrians. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.540.) 

N. “Vehicle” includes every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, including bicycles. The term does not include power wheelchairs or devices other than bicycles moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Statutory reference: RCW 46.04.670). (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.030 Rules of operation – Motorized foot scooters.

The following rules of operation shall apply to motorized foot scooters:

A. Minimum Age of Operator. No person under 16 years of age may operate a motorized foot scooter on a roadway, shoulder or alley.

B. Speed Limit. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on roadways with a speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour, unless the motorized foot scooter is operated within a designated and marked bicycle lane.

C. Passengers. At no time shall the operator of a motorized foot scooter allow a passenger to ride on the motorized foot scooter.

D. Prohibited Areas. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated on city-owned property, within city parks, upon sidewalks, or any similar place where motor vehicles are expressly prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in this section, and subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section, motorized foot scooters may be operated on roadways, roadway shoulders, bicycle lanes, and alleys.

E. Rules of the Road. Operators of motorized foot scooters shall adhere to all rules of the road applicable to vehicles, including those set forth in chapter 46.61 RCW and excepting only those provisions of chapter 46.61 RCW which by their nature can have no application.

F. Lights and Reflectors. Every motorized foot scooter shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the State Patrol which shall be visible from all distances up to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. Such lamps shall comply with the provisions of RCW 46.37.280.

G. Negligent Operation. Motorized foot scooters shall not be operated in a negligent manner upon any roadway. For the purpose of this section, “to operate in a negligent manner” means to operate a motorized foot scooter in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of travel of any vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of any roadway, sidewalk, alley, parking area, trail or public park.

H. Engine Disengagement. Motorized foot scooters shall be equipped so that the drive motor is engaged through a switch, lever, or other mechanism that, when released, will cause the drive motor to disengage or cease to function.

I. Mufflers. Operation of a motorized foot scooter without a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, or operation with a modified muffler, is unlawful. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.040 Rules of operation – EPAMDs.

The following rules of operation shall apply to EPAMDs:

A. Minimum Age of Operator. No person under 16 years of age may operate an EPAMD on a roadway, shoulder or alley.

B. Speed Limit. EPAMDs shall not be operated on roadways with a speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour, unless the EPAMD is operated within a designated and marked bicycle lane.

C. At no times shall the operator of an EPAMD allow a passenger to ride on the EAPMD.

D. Negligent Operation. EPAMDs shall not be operated in a negligent manner upon any roadway. For the purpose of this section, “to operate in a negligent manner” means to operate an EPAMD in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of travel of any vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of any roadway, sidewalk, alley, parking area, trail or public park.

E. Rules of the Road. Operators of EPAMDs shall adhere to all rules of the road applicable to vehicles, including those set forth in chapter 46.61 RCW and excepting only those provisions of chapter 46.61 RCW which by their nature can have no application. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.050 Rules of operation – Bicycles.

The following rules of operation shall apply to bicycles:

A. Obedience to Traffic Control Devices.

1. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.

2. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the directions of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle at the right-hand curb or as close as is practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians (i.e., stop, dismount, and walk to cross the roadway or make a left-hand turn). (Reference: WAC 308-330-545.)

B. Passengers. At no time shall a bicycle rider allow a passenger to ride on the bicycle, unless such bicycle is equipped with a seat or device intended to accommodate a passenger. For the purposes of this section, freestyle pegs attached to the front or back axles of a bicycle shall not constitute a device intended to accommodate a passenger.

C. Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a highway other than:

1. Off the roadway except in designated areas;

2. Upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle;

3. Against a building; or

4. In such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Reference: WAC 308-330-550.)

D. Bicycles – Riding on Sidewalks.

1. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in a business district. For the purposes of this section, the term “business district” shall be defined as Fairhaven Avenue, north of Burlington Boulevard and south of Holly Street.

2. A person may ride a bicycle on any other sidewalk or any roadway unless restricted or prohibited by traffic control devices.

3. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Reference: WAC 308-330-555.)

E. Lights. Every bicycle when in use at any time during the hours of darkness as defined in RCW 46.37.020 shall be equipped with a lamp and reflectors as set forth in RCW 46.61.780.

F. Negligent Operation. Bicycles shall not be operated in a negligent manner upon any roadway. For the purpose of this section, “to operate in a negligent manner” means to operate a bicycle in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or to obstruct, hinder or impede the lawful course of travel of any vehicle or the lawful use by any pedestrian of any roadway, sidewalk, alley, parking area, trail or public park. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.060 Removal of factory-installed braking equipment.

It is unlawful to operate a bicycle, motorized foot scooter, or EPAMD on a public roadway, sidewalk, or on public property when the bicycle, motorized foot scooter, or EPAMD has had factory-installed brakes removed or altered to the extent that the braking device is ineffective. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.070 Helmets required.

A. Any minor child riding or otherwise operating any bicycle, electric-assisted bicycle, EPAMD, or motorized foot scooter, including any passenger thereon and/or person being towed thereby, on any public area in the city shall wear an approved helmet, and shall have either the neck- or chin-strap of the helmet fastened securely while the device is in motion.

B. Penalties – Civil Infraction. Any person violating subsection A of this section shall have committed a class 4 civil infraction and shall be liable for monetary penalties as set forth in RCW 7.80.120, as that statute now exists or may hereafter be amended.

C. The court may waive, reduce or suspend the civil penalty and clear the civil infraction as a warning for a person who has not been cited under this chapter within the previous year and provides proof that he or she has acquired an approved helmet at the time of appearance in court.

D. The city of Burlington encourages any person engaging in the business of selling bicycles, electric-assisted bicycles, EPAMDs, motorized foot scooters, skateboards, or skates to include information on helmet safety and the helmet requirements of this chapter with each bicycle or device sold.

E. The city encourages any person engaging in the business of selling helmets to include information on safe helmet usage with each helmet sold. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.080 Responsibility.

No person shall do any act forbidden by this chapter or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. The parent or guardian of any child shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.090 Violation – Enforcement authority and penalties.

The city of Burlington police department shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Upon determining that a violation of this chapter has occurred, law enforcement officers may, at their discretion, issue a civil infraction in the following amounts to any person, including a parent or guardian, violating any of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to issuing an infraction, law enforcement officers may impound motorized foot scooters in accordance with BMC 10.24.100. The following monetary penalties shall apply:

A. First offense: $90.00;

B. Second offense: $180.00;

C. Third and future offenses: $250.00. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).


10.24.100 Alternative penalty for minor children.

In lieu of the penalty described in BMC 10.24.090, any commissioned Burlington police officer may, in the officer’s discretion, utilize the following penalty provision for violations by minor children of this chapter relating to bicycles and motorized foot scooters. For purposes of this section, the city council of the city of Burlington hereby finds that there is a compelling governmental interest in imposing the following discretionary penalty section for minor children, in order to encourage parental intervention and responsibility for the violations of the minor children. The city further finds that impoundment is more likely to prevent repeat offenses by minors than the imposition of monetary penalties.

A. First Offense. On the child’s first offense in a 365-day period, the city may issue a written warning and notification of the child’s parent or guardian of the violation.

B. Second Offense. On the child’s second offense in a 365-day period, the city may issue a written notice of violation and the investigating officer may take custody of the bicycle or motorized foot scooter and hold for safekeeping until the child’s parent or guardian claims the bicycle or motorized foot scooter.

C. Third and Subsequent Offense(s). On the child’s third offense in a 365-day period, the city shall include a civil fine not to exceed $47.00. The arresting officer may take custody of the bicycle or motorized foot scooter and hold for safekeeping for 30 days.

D. Forfeiture of a Bicycle or Motorized Foot Scooter. As authorized by WAC 308-330-565 and chapter 63.32 RCW, impounded bicycles, skates or motorized foot scooters may be forfeited to the Burlington police department if unclaimed within 60 days of the impound. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 2004).

 


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.04    Sidewalk Repair and Maintenance

12.08    Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks

12.12    Excavations

12.16    Repealed

12.20    Trees

12.24    Street Use

12.26    Complete Streets

12.28    Construction of Streets, Sidewalks and Storm Drains


Chapter 12.04 SIDEWALK REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE

Sections:

12.04.010    Purpose.

12.04.020    Definitions.

12.04.030    Responsibility and duty to maintain, repair and reconstruct planting strips.

12.04.040    Responsibility and duty to maintain, repair and reconstruct transition strips.

12.04.050    Responsibility for sidewalks and procedures and methods for maintenance, repair and/or reconstruction – Apportionment of costs.

12.04.060    Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way.

12.04.070    Enforcement.


12.04.010 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to implement chapter 35.70 RCW in the city of Burlington with respect to sidewalk repairs and to clarify the responsibility of the abutting property owners for maintenance of planting strips and transition strips. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.020 Definitions.

“Maintenance” means the removal and disposal of debris, litter and vegetation which tends to impair the utilization of the right-of-way for public purposes and the removal of ice and snow from sidewalks.

“Planting strip” means that portion of the right-of-way between the outside of the curb and the inside of the sidewalk.

“Repair” means the removal and/or patching of small damaged portions of sidewalks, retaining walls or rockeries lying within the right-of-way, and planting strips and transition strips with like materials, each such damaged portions not exceeding 150 square inches in area. Larger areas shall be classified as reconstruction.

“Sidewalk” means all pedestrian structures or forms of improvement for pedestrians included in the space between the street margin, as defined by a curb or the edge of the traveled road surface, and the line where the public right-of-way meets the abutting property.

“Street” means street, boulevard, lane, avenue, way, alley, square, road, drive, place or public walkway.

“Transition strip” means that portion of the right-of-way between the outside of the curb and the property line; or where no curb or sidewalk exists, that portion of the right-of-way between the edge of the roadside ditch or the shoulder of the road, whichever is closer to the abutting property line, and the abutting property line. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.030 Responsibility and duty to maintain, repair and reconstruct planting strips.

It shall be the responsibility and duty of the abutting property owner to maintain, repair and reconstruct adjacent planting strips in an attractive and safe manner. Planting strips shall be maintained, repaired or reconstructed with an approved material and free of vegetation which tends to impair the utilization of the right-of-way for public purposes. Nonliving material shall be level with the top of the curb and the sidewalk and shall be contained within the planting strip so as not to be a hazard to the persons using the sidewalk or street or crossing the strip going to or from a vehicle. Living vegetation exclusive of street trees placed in the planting strip shall be of a height that does not interfere with the lawful and safe use of the public right-of-way and shall be maintained by weeding, spraying, fertilizing, watering and trimming. Street tree species and root barriers shall be approved by the planning department to ensure that the species will fit in the space provided. The plans for the planting strip shall be submitted to the permit center for review by the planning and public works departments. Approval of all materials and design is required prior to the installation of materials within the planting strip. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.040 Responsibility and duty to maintain, repair and reconstruct transition strips.

It shall be the responsibility and duty of the abutting property owner to maintain, repair and reconstruct adjacent transition strips in an attractive and safe manner, free of vegetation which tends to impair the utilization of the right-of-way for public purposes. Nonliving material shall be contained within the transition strip so as not to be a hazard to the persons using the sidewalk or street. Living vegetation placed in the transition strip shall be maintained by weeding, spraying, fertilizing, watering and trimming. Street tree species and root barriers shall be approved by the planning department to ensure that the species will fit in the space provided. The abutting property owner shall maintain, repair and reconstruct rockeries and retaining walls within the transition strip; provided, however, the city of Burlington shall repair and reconstruct all rockeries and retaining walls constructed under street projects which exceed an average height of six feet as measured from the base of the retaining wall or rockery. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.050 Responsibility for sidewalks and procedures and methods for maintenance, repair and/or reconstruction – Apportionment of costs.

A. The city is generally responsible for sidewalk maintenance and repair.

B. The city may construct, reconstruct or repair sidewalks and pay the costs thereof from any available funds, or the city may require the abutting property owner to construct the sidewalk improvement at his or her own cost or expense or, in the alternative, the city may assess all or any portion thereof against the abutting property owner. In the event the city requests an abutting property owner to undertake or pay for the improvement, it shall follow the procedures for resolution, notice and hearing on such improvements as set forth in applicable law.

C. Any person desiring to repair, change or relocate any sidewalk abutting their property shall make application in writing to the city permit center. Such application shall contain, among others, the exact location of such proposed change or relocation, the location of any new sidewalk to be laid and the connections and location of other sidewalks upon such street; no change or relocation of any sidewalk shall be made until the issuance of an appropriate permit; provided further, however, that the cost of reconstruction shall be borne solely by the abutting property owner without contribution from the city.

D. Property owners or tenants are responsible for repairing any damage that they cause. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.060 Hazardous conditions on public street right-of-way.

It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or any person occupying or having charge or control of any premises abutting upon any public street right-of-way or alley in the city to construct, place, cause, create, maintain, or permit to remain upon any part of said right-of-way located between the curb line, or if there is no curb line, then between the adjacent edge of the traveled portion of such right-of-way and the abutting property line, any condition, structure, or object dangerous or hazardous to the use of said right-of-way by the members of the general public, including but not limited to the following conditions:

A. Defective sidewalk surfaces, including but not limited to broken or cracked cement concrete, stub-toes, depressions within or between sidewalk joints.

B. Defective cement concrete surfaces placed adjacent to the public sidewalk or defects at the juncture between said cement surfaces and said public sidewalks, including stub-toes or depressions at said juncture.

C. Defects in sidewalks or public ways caused or contributed to by the roots of trees or similar growth or vegetation located either on private adjoining property or on the parking strip portion of any such street right-of-way.

D. Defective conditions caused by tree limbs, foliage, brush, or grass on or extending over such public sidewalks or rights-of-way.

E. Defective conditions on the parking strip area between the curb line and the sidewalk or, if there is no curb line, then between the edge of the traveled portion of the street and the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and the abutting property line.

F. Defects consisting of foreign matter on the public sidewalks, including but not limited to gravel, oil, grease, or any other foreign subject matter that might cause pedestrians using said sidewalk to fall, stumble, or slip by reason of the existence of such foreign matter.

G. Defective handrails or fences or similar structures within or immediately adjacent to said right-of-way area. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


12.04.070 Enforcement.

BMC Title 1 is hereby adopted by reference as the enforcement provisions for this chapter. (Ord. 1549 § 1, 2004).


Chapter 12.08 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.08.010    Display of goods beyond three feet from property line prohibited.

12.08.020    Goods damaging to sidewalk or passersby prohibited.

12.08.030    Violation – Penalty.


12.08.010 Display of goods beyond three feet from property line prohibited.

Except as permitted by chapter 5.30 BMC, it is unlawful for any merchant within the city to store, keep, place, exhibit or display goods, wares or merchandise on the public sidewalks of the city beyond a distance of three feet from the line of the property. All goods, wares or merchandise displayed shall be removed from and kept off said sidewalk during the hours between sunset and sunrise. (Ord. 1759 § 4, 2012; Ord. 183 § 1, 1913; Ord. 109 § 1, 1909).


12.08.020 Goods damaging to sidewalk or passersby prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to deposit, store or keep, on any sidewalks within the city, any goods, wares, merchandise or substance of any nature, kind or description that will be detrimental to said sidewalks or which shall interfere with going to and fro on said sidewalks by damaging, injuring or soiling the clothes of those traveling thereon. (Ord. 109 § 2, 1909).


12.08.030 Violation – Penalty.

Violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC. Each day shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1759 § 4, 2012; Ord. 109 § 3, 1909).


Chapter 12.12 EXCAVATIONS

Sections:

12.12.010    Short title.

12.12.020    Definitions.

12.12.030    Chapter not applicable when.

12.12.040    Permit – Required.

12.12.050    Permit – Application.

12.12.060    Drawings required when.

12.12.070    Property lines and easements.

12.12.080    Permit – Fees.

12.12.090    Permit – Placard display requirements.

12.12.100    Surety bond.

12.12.110    Urgent work.

12.12.120    Emergency action.

12.12.130    Breaking through pavement.

12.12.140    Sidewalk excavations.

12.12.150    Noise, dust and debris.

12.12.160    Clearance for fire equipment.

12.12.170    Protective measures – Fences, barriers and lights.

12.12.180    Protective measures – Routing of traffic.

12.12.190    Protective measures – Highways and crossings.

12.12.200    Protective measures – Utilities.

12.12.210    Protective measures – Adjoining property.

12.12.220    Protective measures – Watercourses.

12.12.230    Protective measures – Monuments.

12.12.240    Damage to existing improvements.

12.12.250    Tunnels.

12.12.260    Trenches.

12.12.270    Care of excavated material.

12.12.280    Cleanup.

12.12.290    Backfilling – Requirements.

12.12.300    Backfilling – Material.

12.12.310    Backfilling – Water settling method.

12.12.320    Backfilling – Dry method.

12.12.330    Backfilling – Surface finishing.

12.12.340    Restoration of surface – Procedure – Approval.

12.12.350    Restoration of surface – City’s right to complete work – Costs.

12.12.360    Prompt completion of work.

12.12.370    Inspections – Rules and regulations – Enforcement authority.

12.12.380    Insurance.

12.12.390    Liability of city.

12.12.400    Attractive nuisance prohibited.

12.12.410    Violation – Penalty.


12.12.010 Short title.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “street excavation ordinance of the city of Burlington.” (Ord. 763 § 10-1001, 1971).


12.12.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

A. “Applicant” means any person making written application to the city engineer for an excavation permit under this chapter.

B. “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city.

C. “Excavation work” means the excavation and other work permitted under an excavation permit and required to be performed under this chapter.

D. “Permittee” means any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect an excavation permit issued under this chapter.

E. “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

F. “Street” means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, easement made to the city for public use, or other public way or public grounds in the city. (Ord. 763 § 10-1002, 1971).


12.12.030 Chapter not applicable when.

The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any excavation work under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf of the city necessitating openings or excavations in streets. (Ord. 763 § 10-1038, 1971).


12.12.040 Permit – Required.

It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person has first obtained an excavation permit therefor from the city engineer as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1003, 1971).


12.12.050 Permit – Application.

No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of an excavation permit is submitted to the city engineer. The written application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of completion of the excavation, and other data as may reasonably be required by the city engineer. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior to said excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the excavation work and such other information as may be prescribed by the city engineer. (Ord. 763 § 10-1004, 1971).


12.12.060 Drawings required when.

A. Users of subsurface street space shall furnish the city engineer with accurate drawings, plans and profiles, showing the location and character of all underground structures being installed, including abandoned installations. Horizontal locations are to be referenced to street centerlines, as marked by survey monuments, and shall be accurate to a tolerance of plus or minus one foot. The depth of the utility or structure being installed may be referenced to the elevation of the street above the utility, with depths to the nearest one-half foot being shown at a minimum of 50-foot intervals along the location of the utility. Said maps shall be submitted to the city engineer’s office within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made.

B. In the event that the permittee does not have qualified personnel to furnish these drawings, he shall advise the city engineer in order that necessary field measurements may be taken by the city engineer during construction, and that the maps be prepared by the city engineer’s office. The cost of field inspection and measurement, and the preparing of the “as-built” maps shall be at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 763 § 10-1037, 1971).


12.12.070 Property lines and easements.

Property lines and limits of easements shall be indicated on the plan of excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit and it shall be the permittee’s responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits. (Ord. 763 § 10-1018, 1971).


12.12.080 Permit – Fees.

A permit fee shall be charged by the city engineer for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The excavation permit fee shall be in an amount established by the current city of Burlington fee resolution. (Ord. 1234 § 1, 1993; Ord. 763 § 10-1005, 1971).


12.12.090 Permit – Placard display requirements.

The city engineer shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued under this chapter a suitable placard plainly written or printed in English letters at least one inch high with the following notice:

City of Burlington Permit No.___    Expires ____________

and in the first blank space there shall be inserted the number of said permit, and after the word “expires” shall be stated the date when the permit expires. It shall be the duty of any permittee under this chapter to keep the placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the excavation work. It is unlawful for any person to exhibit such placard at or about any excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. (Ord. 763 § 10-1006, 1971).


12.12.100 Surety bond.

Before an excavation permit as provided in this chapter is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a surety bond in such reasonable amount as set by the city engineer payable to the city. The required surety bond must be:

A. With good and sufficient surety;

B. By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;

C. Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;

D. Conditioned upon the permittee’s compliance with this chapter and to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after the work has been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before the work was done. Any settlement of the surface within the two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Any owner of real estate repairing or engaging another to repair his own sidewalk shall be required to give such bond. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city’s giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and his surety. An annual bond may be given under this provision which shall remain in force for one year conditioned as above, in the amount specified above in other respects as specified above but applicable as to all excavation work in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from said date. (Ord. 763 § 10-1007, 1971).


12.12.110 Urgent work.

If in his judgment traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the city engineer shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (Ord. 763 § 10-1032, 1971).


12.12.120 Emergency action.

In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this chapter, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city engineer’s office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit under this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1033, 1971).


12.12.130 Breaking through pavement.

Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for excavation purposes, and where trenches are to be four feet or over in depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least six inches beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete breakage of concrete pavement or base without ragged edges. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line. No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement. (Ord. 763 § 10-1021, 1971).


12.12.140 Sidewalk excavations.

Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times. (Ord. 763 § 10-1013, 1971).


12.12.150 Noise, dust and debris.

Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the city engineer or in case of an emergency as otherwise provided in this chapter, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. (Ord. 763 § 10-1034, 1971).


12.12.160 Clearance for fire equipment.

The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. (Ord. 763 § 10-1009, 1971).


12.12.170 Protective measures – Fences, barriers and lights.

The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the city streets or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work is completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon such place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night during the maintenance of such obstructions. It is unlawful for anyone to remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or any lights provided there for the protection of the public. (Ord. 763 § 10-1014, 1971).


12.12.180 Protective measures – Routing of traffic.

The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as nearly normal as practicable are maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public; provided, that the city engineer may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the city police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic:

A. The permittee must receive the approval of the city engineer and the police department therefor;

B. The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed;

C. Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the city engineer and city police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made;

D. Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the city engineer, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the city engineer will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are no existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the city engineer. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. (Ord. 763 § 10-1008, 1971).


12.12.190 Protective measures – Highways and crossings.

The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers to confine earth from trenches or other excavations in order to encroach upon highways as little as possible. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Decking shall be not less than four inches thick and shall be securely fastened together with heavy wire and staples. Pedestrian crossings shall consist of planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide and of adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walk shall be not less than three feet in width and shall be provided with a railing as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 763 § 10-1010, 1971).


12.12.200 Protective measures – Utilities.

The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city engineer and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may, in any way, be affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In case any pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 763 § 10-1011, 1971).


12.12.210 Protective measures – Adjoining property.

The permittee shall at all times and at his or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for such purpose and if he cannot obtain a license from such owner the city engineer may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this chapter. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property. (Ord. 763 § 10-1012, 1971).


12.12.220 Protective measures – Watercourses.

The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provision for them as the city engineer may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (Ord. 763 § 10-1020, 1971).


12.12.230 Protective measures – Monuments.

The permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the city engineer. All street monuments, property corners, bench marks and other monuments disturbed during the program of the work shall be replaced by the city engineer and the cost of the same shall be paid by the permittee. (Ord. 763 § 10-1035, 1971).


12.12.240 Damage to existing improvements.

All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials and workmanship for such repair shall conform with the requirements of any applicable code or ordinance. If upon being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the city engineer shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on his or its bond therefor. (Ord. 763 § 10-1017, 1971).


12.12.250 Tunnels.

Tunnels under pavements shall not be permitted except by permission of the city engineer. Where pipes or cables are placed under main thoroughfares, concrete streets, state highways, first-grade asphalt streets, or wherever designated by the city engineer, such work shall be done by jacking or boring casings under street surfaces and placing said pipes or cables inside of the casing. (Ord. 763 § 10-1022, 1971).


12.12.260 Trenches.

Except by special permission from the city engineer, no trench shall be excavated more than 100 feet in advance of pipe laying nor left unfilled more than 200 feet where pipe has been laid. The length of the trench that may be opened at any one time shall not be greater than the length of pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at the side ready to put in place. Trenches shall be braced and sheathed according to generally accepted safety standards for construction work. No timber bracing, lagging, sheathing or other lumber shall be left in any trench. (Ord. 763 § 10-1030, 1971).


12.12.270 Care of excavated material.

All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the city engineer shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal. (Ord. 763 § 10-1016, 1971).


12.12.280 Cleanup.

As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. From time to time as may be ordered by the city engineer, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall at his or its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work and, upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the city engineer, said work may be done by the city engineer and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. The permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided under this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1019, 1971).


12.12.290 Backfilling – Requirements.

Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued under this chapter shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Compacting shall be done by mechanical tappers or vibrators, by rolling in layers, or by water settling, as required by the soil in question and sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. When water is taken from a fire hydrant, the permittees shall assign one man to operate the hydrant and shall make certain that said man has been instructed in the operation of the hydrant. The public utility district shall likewise be notified at both the beginning and end of the job so that the condition of the fire hydrants can be checked on both occasions. Any damage done to the hydrant during the excavation shall be the responsibility of the permittee. Water shall be paid for by the permittee on the terms agreed upon with the public utility district. (Ord. 763 § 10-1023, 1971).


12.12.300 Backfilling – Material.

Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock, the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench and the space under, around and six inches above the pipe shall be backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or one-quarter inch minus gravel. Broken pavement, large stones and debris shall not be used in the backfill. (Ord. 763 § 10-1026, 1971).


12.12.310 Backfilling – Water settling method.

When backfilling is to be done by water settling and before any compaction of the trenches is attempted, the permittee shall cause the loose material to be wetted by forcing a head of water of not less than 30 feet in height, down into the soft material so that the end of the pipe is not more than three feet above the bottom of the excavation. He shall allow the water to run until the material is saturated as indicated by the water rising and running out on the surface of the ground around the pipe. After each hole has been saturated, the jet pipe shall be moved along the trench line a distance of approximately four or five feet, but in no case more than eight feet, and the process repeated for the entire length of the backfill trench. All work shall be done in such manner as to obtain a relative compaction throughout the entire depth of the backfill of not less than existing adjacent to the excavation. (Ord. 763 § 10-1024, 1971).


12.12.320 Backfilling – Dry method.

Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of the utility pipes or similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each layer is to be tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are hand-tamped shall not exceed six inches in thickness. Layers that are power-tamped shall not exceed 12 inches in thickness. The same requirements shall apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches in diameter shall be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch layers, with each layer moistened and thoroughly tamped with suitable mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24 inches or less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified above to a depth of 18 inches above the top of the pipe before any additional backfilling is placed thereon. Any deviation from the method set forth above shall have prior written approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 763 § 10-1025, 1971).


12.12.330 Backfilling – Surface finishing.

Backfilling shall be completed by placing the backfill material well up over the top of the trench. For dry backfilling, the material shall be compacted with a roller of an approved type, or with the rear of a truck carrying at least five tons, until the surface is unyielding. Care shall be taken that material being compacted has proper moisture content for maximum compactibility. The surface shall then be graded as required. (Ord. 763 § 10-1027, 1971).


12.12.340 Restoration of surface – Procedure – Approval.

A. The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to their original condition in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes. Except when the pavement is to be replaced before the opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab shall be made with suitable material well tamped into place, and this fill shall be topped with a minimum of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until restoration can be made. The crown of the temporary restoration shall not exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement. The permittee shall exercise special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain such restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent restorations are made. The asphalt which is used shall be in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer. If in the judgment of the city engineer it is not expedient to replace the pavement over any cut or excavation made in the street upon completion of the work allowed under such permit by reason of the looseness of the earth or weather conditions, he may direct the permittee to lay a temporary pavement of wood or other suitable material designated by him over such cut or excavation to remain until such time as the repair of the original pavement may be properly made.

B. Permanent restoration of the street shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the city engineer to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as near as may be.

C. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the city engineer shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and his or its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. The city engineer’s presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities under this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1028, 1971).


12.12.350 Restoration of surface – City’s right to complete work – Costs.

A. If the permittee has failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such permit or fails to prosecute the work in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the city engineer, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost in addition for general overhead and administrative expenses. The city shall have a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amount paid out and due it for such work and the city shall also enforce its right under the permittee’s surety bond provided pursuant to this chapter.

B. It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. (Ord. 763 § 10-1029, 1971).


12.12.360 Prompt completion of work.

The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit therefor. (Ord. 763 § 10-1031, 1971).


12.12.370 Inspections – Rules and regulations – Enforcement authority.

The city engineer shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. When so made, the permittee shall pay for such inspections at the city’s cost. The city engineer shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1036, 1971).


12.12.380 Insurance.

A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work under this chapter, shall file with the public works director a certificate of insurance evidencing insurance in form and amount in accordance with policy established by the public works director, which insurance shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in Washington State. (Ord. 1663 § 1, 2008; Ord. 763 § 10-1039, 1971).


12.12.390 Liability of city.

This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued under this chapter, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this chapter, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any excavation work. (Ord. 763 § 10-1040, 1971).


12.12.400 Attractive nuisance prohibited.

It is unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and hazardous to their safety or health. (Ord. 763 § 10-1015, 1971).


12.12.410 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this chapter. (Ord. 763 § 10-1041, 1971).


Chapter 12.16 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS1

(Repealed by Ord. 1403)1

For current provisions on the city building numbering system, see chapter 15.10 BMC. 


Chapter 12.20  TREES

Sections:

12.20.010    Intent.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Urban forestry board – Established.

12.20.040    Urban forestry board – Duties and responsibilities.

12.20.050    Street tree permits.

12.20.060    Tree species to be planted – Spacing – Setbacks – Distances.

12.20.070    Public tree care.

12.20.080    Tree topping.

12.20.090    Pruning – Corner clearance.

12.20.100    Removal of stumps.

12.20.110    Dead, diseased or hazardous tree removal on private property.

12.20.120    Preservation of trees on private property with new development.

12.20.130    Penalty.


12.20.010 Intent.

Recognizing the positive cost-benefit ratio trees provide in maintaining a healthy urban ecosystem through their energy-saving and storm water management potential, as well as their role in improving the quality of our community, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees in the public right-of-way and on city-owned property, and to encourage the preservation of existing trees on private property where new development is planned. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.020 Definitions. 

A. Appraisal. Tree appraisals shall use the Trunk Formula Method of the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. 

B. “City-owned property” means property within the city limits of Burlington, and:

1. Owned by the city in fee simple absolute; or

2. Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements. 

C. “Columnar tree” means any tree growing in a symmetrical, pillar-like form with a spread at maturity equal to approximately half the height of the tree. 

D. “Large tree” means any mature tree which would reach a maximum height of more than 50 feet with a maximum spread of over 35 feet. 

E. “Major pruning” means cutting back of limbs larger than one and one-half inches in diameter on street trees. 

F. “Medium tree” means any mature tree which would reach a maximum height of 25 to 50 feet with a maximum spread of 35 feet. 

G. “Park trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 

H. “Small tree” means any mature tree which would reach a maximum height of 25 feet with a maximum spread of 25 feet. 

I. “Significant tree” means an existing deciduous or coniferous tree six inches or more in diameter breast high (measured four feet, six inches above adjacent grade – “dbh”), of any species suitable for inclusion as permanent landscaping in a proposed development project. This also includes unusual, historical or rare trees. 

J. “Street trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on public rights-of-way, land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or boulevards, within the city. 

K. “Topping” means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than one and one-half inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 

L. “Tree owner” means the owner of the real property upon which 51 percent or more of the trunk is located at ground level. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.030 Urban forestry board – Established.

There is hereby established an urban forestry board for the city of Burlington, which shall consist of a minimum of five members and any number of interested citizens, including a representative of the parks board, planning commission, business community, school district, and neighborhood planning committees. The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.040 Urban forestry board – Duties and responsibilities. 

It shall be the responsibility of the urban forestry board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. The plan is intended to advise the public and the parks board, who will in turn recommend the plan with any proposed modifications, to the planning commission and city council for adoption. The plan may be adopted in phases. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.050 Street tree permits. 

Application for street tree installation shall be required and shall be obtained from the permit center prior to any planting, removal, topping, and/or major pruning of street trees. The location of any street trees to be planted or removed shall be identified and mapped to keep the street tree inventory current. Utility companies shall notify the permit center prior to pruning any tree located on city-owned property for the purpose of maintaining safe line clearance and shall carry out all such work in accordance with accepted arboricultural standards. No street trees other than species listed as small trees in BMC 12.20.060 may be planted under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire, unless approved by the planning department. (Ord. 1799 § 19, 2014; Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.060 Tree species to be planted – Spacing – Setbacks – Distances. 

A. The tree plan shall include a map of arterial streets with street tree species identified, along with a list of desirable trees for planting along other streets in three sized classes based on mature height: small (under 25 feet); medium (25 to 50 feet); and large trees (over 50 feet). Special plantings may be approved by the planning department in consultation with the urban forestry board as applicable. Lists of trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the board, including but not limited to poplar, willow, and cottonwood. 

B. The spacing, setbacks, distances, and variety of any street tree shall be consistent with the guidelines specified in the tree plan. Consideration shall be given to the definitions of small, medium, large and columnar trees. 

C. Consideration shall also be given to location of the tree(s) in relation to streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, overhead utility wires, fire hydrants, water and sewer lines, and other public improvements. No street tree shall be located in the public right-of-way that would damage any of the improvements listed herein. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.070 Public tree care. 

A. The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 

B. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this chapter and the tree plan. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995). 


12.20.080 Tree topping. 

It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the parks supervisor. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.090 Pruning – Corner clearance. 

Every owner (see definition of tree owner, BMC 12.20.020(L)) of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall be responsible for pruning or causing to be pruned the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Said owner or owner’s representative shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the tree board prior to any trimming by the utility company. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.100 Removal of stumps. 

All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.110 Dead, diseased or hazardous tree removal on private property. 

The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor significant infestations of insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.120 Preservation of trees on private property with new development. 

This section shall apply to any new development or substantial addition to an existing development, including but not limited to the following: short and full subdivisions, construction of duplex and multifamily structures, business, commercial, and industrial projects other than construction of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure on an existing lot of record. 

A. No existing trees shall be removed until a final decision is made regarding the feasibility of preserving existing trees. 

B. At the time of the initial contact with the city, the applicant shall be advised that the site plan for the proposed project shall show the location, size and species of existing trees. If there are many trees on the site, a preliminary evaluation of the site shall be made by a certified arborist, at the applicant’s expense, to identity the trees that should be protected and to determine the feasibility of protecting the trees. 

C. The goal is a net gain in tree canopy, to be achieved initially by making an effort to save the significant trees and as much of the canopy as is feasible. Protecting 10 percent of the diameter of the trees on the site is the minimum requirement. Credit for saving small trees shall be given when larger, significant trees must be removed. If the goal of preserving a minimum of 10 percent of the diameter is not achieved, the applicant has two options: 

1. Significant trees, as defined in BMC 12.20.020, shall be appraised using the methodology defined in BMC 12.20.020, and the applicant shall contribute a sum equal to the value of the trees to the urban forestry program; or 

2. Trees shall be planted either on the site or on designated public property to replace the trees that are removed; or 

A combination of subsections (C)(1) and (2) above. 

D. Specifications for the contractor shall be shown on the construction plans, in conformance with the city standards for tree protection during construction, adopted by administrative rule. The contractor and all utilities shall be notified by the applicant that no work shall be done in the protected area without full-time inspection. Notices shall be posted on the fence in the protected area. 

E. The tree protection zone, defining the limits of work adjacent to trees, shall be delineated by installation of temporary chain link fencing six feet in height, or alternate approved by the planning department, around each tree or group of trees to be protected during construction. If there is not a full-time construction inspector on the job, inspection shall be done by the planning department and/or building department. 

1. Location and installation of the fence shall be designated by the certified arborist or, if plans are approved by the arborist and there is a full-time construction inspector on the project, the inspector may inspect the fence installation to ensure compliance with the approved plans. 

2. Construction activities that must occur in the tree protection zone shall be monitored by a certified arborist or may be subject to special restrictions for performance that can be inspected by the full-time construction inspector on the job site, when approved by the planning director. 

3. Typical issues are grading and compaction, storage of materials, use of herbicides or other chemicals, installation of utility or irrigation lines, and demolition of structures and pavement. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


12.20.130 Penalty. 

Any person, firm or corporation responsible for removing a street or park tree without a permit shall comply with one of the following options:

A. Significant trees, as defined in BMC 12.20.020, shall be appraised using the methodology defined in BMC 12.20.020, and the applicant shall contribute a sum equal to the value of the trees to the urban forestry program; or

B. Trees shall be planted either on the site or on designated public property to replace the trees that are removed; or

C. A combination of subsections A and B above. (Ord. 1286 § 1, 1995).


Chapter 12.24 STREET USE

Sections:

12.24.010    Title.

12.24.020    Exercise of police power.

12.24.030    Definitions.

12.24.040    Permit – Required.

12.24.045    Burlington Hill Business Park.

12.24.050    Permit – Application – Contents.

12.24.060    Permit – Application – Processing.

12.24.070    Permit – Fees.

12.24.080    Permit – Revocation.

12.24.090    Termination of use.

12.24.100    Indemnity deposit.

12.24.110    Agreement to save city harmless.

12.24.120    Right to prosecute in civil action.

12.24.130    Violation declared misdemeanor.


12.24.010 Title.

This chapter shall constitute the street ordinance of the city and may be referred to as such. (Ord. 917 § 1, 1978).


12.24.020 Exercise of police power.

This chapter is declared to be an exercise of police power of the city for the public safety, health and welfare, and its provisions shall be liberally construed to the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ord. 917 § 2, 1978).


12.24.030 Definitions.

A. “Public place” means and includes streets, avenues, ways, boulevards, drives, places, alleys, sidewalks, planting (parking) strips, squares, triangles and right-of-way open to the use of the public in the space above or beneath the surface of the same.

B. “Use” means and includes to construct, store, erect, place upon or maintain, upon, over or under any public place any staging, scaffolding, elevator, loading ramp or dock, building, or any other structure, or to use or occupy any public place for the storage or placement of any material, equipment or thing. (Ord. 917 § 4, 1978).


12.24.040 Permit – Required.

A written permit may be required from the city to ensure compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and those specific provisions addressed in the permit for the respective public place; provided, that nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to street construction and/or maintenance, utility construction and/or maintenance performed by the city or its authorized agents, and street excavation performed under chapter 12.12 BMC, relating to the opening and excavation of streets. (Ord. 1799 § 17, 2014; Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 5, 1978).


12.24.045 Burlington Hill Business Park.

Applicants requesting the use of those public places within the area known as Burlington Hill Business Park that front and are adjacent to Old Highway 99 shall have the following:

A. The public place that is requested by the applicant will include the entire useable area located within the parameters of this policy.

B. The area of display shall be limited to the following setbacks:

1. Displayed merchandise may not be parked within 25 feet of the center line of Old Highway 99.

2. Displayed merchandise may not be parked within 100 feet of either side of the street curb of Walton Street or North Hill Blvd.

3. Displayed merchandise shall not be parked within 50 feet of adjoining property lines unless the adjoining property is owned or leased by the same party. Exception: There shall be a 100-foot setback from the southern east-west property line of Lot 7.

4. The city shall place markers that clearly designate the boundaries of the public places permitted in the Burlington Hill Business Park.

C. There shall be overnight parking in the public space fronting Burlington Hill Business Park Lots 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6.

D. There shall be no overnight parking in the public space fronting Burlington Hill Business Park Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 16. 

E. There shall be no parking on the walking/bike path.

F. No structures of any kind shall be permitted in the public place.

G. This area will be used for display purposes only in compliance with city codes.

H. The entire public place fronting their property shall be mowed, maintained and free of garbage and weeds.

I. Any agent of the city can require removal of displayed merchandise immediately if it should be determined to be a traffic or safety hazard to the public. (Ord. 1799 § 18, 2014; Ord. 1527, 2003).


12.24.050 Permit – Application – Contents.

Application for permits provided for in this chapter shall be filed with the city public works director upon a form supplied by the city public works department. Such application shall be directed to the public works department and shall contain:

A. An accurate description of the public place or portion thereof desired to be used;

B. The use desired to be made of such public place;

C. The plans and specifications for any utility or structure desired to be constructed, erected or maintained by the applicant. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 6, 1978).


12.24.060 Permit – Application – Processing.

A. The city public works director shall examine each application to determine if it complies with the provisions of this chapter.

B. The city public works director or designee may inspect the premises which are desired to be used in order to ascertain any facts which may aid in determining whether a permit should be granted, and shall endorse his findings in such application.

C. The application shall then be submitted to the city council for consideration. Final approval of the permit shall be by the city council; provided, that the proposed use of such public place will not unduly interfere with the rights of the public or create a public safety hazard or nuisance. The city council may seek recommendations and comments from the planning commission.

D. If the application is approved, the time for which the permit may be granted shall be fixed and the city public works director shall be directed to issue the permit upon the applicant’s compliance with the provisions of this chapter relative to indemnity. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 7, 1978).


12.24.070 Permit – Fees.

The city public works director is authorized and directed to prepare and adopt a schedule of fees applicable to all such permits heretofore or hereafter issued commensurate with the cost of administration, inspection and policing involved in the issuance and continuance of such permits, and the use thereby granted. Any such schedule, when approved by the city council by resolution shall govern the amount of the fee for any such permit. The fee shall be paid on an annual basis. In the event the fee is not paid by the applicant, the permit shall be revoked. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 11, 1978).


12.24.080 Permit – Revocation.

All permits granted under the provisions of this chapter for the use of any public place shall be wholly of a temporary nature, shall vest no permanent right, and when issued it may in any case be revoked by the city upon 30 days’ written notice, or immediately without written notice in case such use or occupation shall become dangerous or any structure or obstruction permitted shall become insecure or unsafe, or shall not be constructed, maintained or used in accordance with the provisions of the permit and this chapter. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 10, 1978).


12.24.090 Termination of use.

In the event that a permit is not renewed, or in the event a permit is revoked, if the permittee fails to discontinue and/or remove the use within 60 days of the termination date of the permit, then the use may be enjoined by the city and any structures shall be removed by the city at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 12, 1978).


12.24.100 Indemnity deposit.

A. In the event that the city public works director, city administrator or the city council determines that there is a possibility of injury, damage or expense to the city arising from an applicant’s proposed use of any public place, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk-treasurer a cash indemnity deposit, the amount to be determined by the city administrator or the city council as the case may be at the time of approving the application. Such indemnity deposit shall be used to pay the cost, plus 15 percent thereof, of inspections, surveys, plans and other services performed by the city, restoring the street and removing any earth or other debris from the street, the replacement of any utility interrupted or damaged, or the completion of any work left unfinished, the cost of filing an indemnity agreement, if such an agreement is required with the permit, and any other expense the city may sustain in conjunction with the permitted work. The balance of the cash indemnity deposit, if any, after the foregoing deductions shall be returned to the applicant. If the indemnity deposit is insufficient, the applicant will be liable for the deficiency. In the event any studies are required prior to the issuance of a permit, the cost of such studies shall be paid for by the applicant.

B. The applicant, in lieu of or in addition to the cash indemnity deposit, may, as approved by the city administrator, file with the city a surety bond, which bond shall assume all the requirements provided in subsection A of this section in relation to a cash indemnity deposit, shall run for the full period of the permit, shall be in an amount to be fixed by the city, and conditioned that such applicant shall faithfully comply with all the terms of said permit and all the provisions of this chapter, and all other ordinances of the city, and indemnify and save the city free and harmless from any and all claims, actions or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to, or be suffered by, any person by reason of the use of any public place, as provided for in the application. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 8, 1978).


12.24.110 Agreement to save city harmless.

The owner of the premises in front of which, and in connection with which, a public way is going to be used, shall execute and deliver to the city public works department upon a form provided by the city public works department, an agreement in writing signed and acknowledged by such owners and by any existing lessee wherein they agree to save the city free and harmless and agree to indemnify the city, its elected and/or appointed officials, employees and/or agents from any and all claims, actions or damages of every kind and description which may accrue to, or be suffered by, any person by the use of such public place, or by the construction, existence or maintenance or use of such structure. No permit shall be issued until such agreement is signed and delivered to the city public works department. In addition, such agreement shall contain a provision setting forth the terms of BMC 12.24.080. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 9, 1978).


12.24.120 Right to prosecute in civil action.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to curtail or abridge the right of anyone to prosecute a civil action for damages by reason of injury to person or property resulting from the negligent use by any other person of any public place or the space above or beneath the same, nor shall the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter be construed as relieving the persons accepting the same, or anyone, from liability caused by the occupation, obstruction of or encroachment on, any public place. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 3, 1978).


12.24.130 Violation declared misdemeanor.

Anyone who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fails to remove any obstruction or discontinue use or occupancy of any public place when ordered to do so by the city, under authority of this chapter, is, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1527, 2003; Ord. 917 § 14, 1978).


Chapter 12.26 COMPLETE STREETS

Sections:

12.26.010    Complete streets.

12.26.020    Exceptions.


12.26.010 Complete streets.

The purpose of the complete streets program is to plan for, design and construct all city transportation projects to provide appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users and persons of all abilities in comprehensive and connected networks. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2013).


12.26.020 Exceptions.

Facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users and/or people of all abilities are not required to be provided:

A. Where their establishment would be contrary to public safety;

B. Where there is no identified long-term need; or

C. Where the public works director grants a documented exception which may only be authorized in specific situations where conditions warrant. Such site-specific exceptions shall not constitute general changes to the standards set in BMC 12.26.010. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 12.28 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND STORM DRAINS

Sections:

12.28.010    Application.

12.28.020    Standard specifications.

I. Street Classifications

12.28.030    Generally.

12.28.040    Major arterial (Principal).

12.28.050    Secondary arterial (Minor).

12.28.060    Collector arterial (Collector).

12.28.070    Access street (Access).

12.28.080    Street designations.

II. Street and Sidewalk Design Criteria

12.28.090    Plans required.

12.28.095    Telecommunication conduit required.

12.28.100    Geometric design standards – Generally.

12.28.110    Geometric design standards – General requirements.

12.28.120    Geometric design standards – Major arterials.

12.28.130    Geometric design standards – Secondary arterials.

12.28.140    Geometric design standards – Collector arterials.

12.28.150    Geometric design standards – Access streets.

12.28.160    Structural design standards.

III. Storm Sewers

12.28.170    Repealed.

12.28.180    Repealed.

12.28.190    Repealed.


12.28.010 Application.

This chapter sets forth the specifications and requirements for the construction of public works, including streets and sidewalks, within the city.

A. Improved right-of-way is required for access to all new construction projects. A traffic study prepared to the specifications of the city engineer may be required to identify required right-of-way improvements.

B. Improved right-of-way for new single-family and duplex buildings on existing lots of record is defined as grading to a minimum of 20 feet and installing six inches of crushed rock. An additional three-inch lift of crushed rock is required if the roadbed is destroyed by trucks during the construction process.

C. All other new construction shall meet the right-of-way improvement standards specified in this code unless, in the opinion of the city engineer, improvements are not warranted at the time of development. In that case, the property owner shall be required to do one of the following, as specified by the city engineer:

1. Enter into a binding agreement to participate in any street improvement, local improvement district (LID) affecting the described right-of-way which LID may be formed now or in the future;

2. Enter into a binding agreement to construct specified right-of-way improvements at a specified date;

3. Construct improvements which conform to existing improvements in the immediate area.

D. The city of Burlington comprehensive transportation plan has adopted level of service “C” for all streets except Burlington Boulevard, for which a level of service “D” is adopted. If a traffic study meeting the specifications of the city engineer is prepared that demonstrates that the development causes the level of service to decline below the adopted standards, then transportation improvements or strategies to accommodate the impacts of development are required to be made concurrent with the development, or the development permit application shall be denied.

These strategies may include increased public transportation service, ride sharing programs, demand management, and other transportation systems management strategies. For the purposes of this section, “concurrent with the development” shall mean that improvements or strategies are in place at the time of development, or that a financial commitment is in place to complete the improvements or strategies within six years. In the case of transportation facilities of statewide significance, which includes State Route 20, every effort shall be made to coordinate with the state to work toward timely planned improvements, although a six-year commitment may not be feasible. (Ord. 1536 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1474 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1419 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1401 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1188 § 1, 1991; Ord. 959 § 1, 1980).


12.28.020 Standard specifications.

Construction and maintenance of all public works, including streets, sidewalks, storm drains and all associated appurtenances shall be in conformance with, and comply with, the most current Washington State Department of Transportation/American Public Works Association (WSDOT/APWA) standard specifications, WSDOT amendments and General Special Provisions (GSPs), and the APWA amendments, and as hereafter amended, unless different standards or specifications are required by the city engineer, or are provided for in the applicable public works contract. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1059 § 2, 1985; Ord. 959 § 2, 1980).

I. Street Classifications


12.28.030 Generally.

All streets in the city shall be functionally classified in one of the categories specified in BMC 12.28.040 through 12.28.070. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).


12.28.040 Major arterial (Principal).

Major arterials provide for the movement of traffic across and between large subparts of the urban region and serve predominately “through” trips with minimum direct service to abutting land uses. Major arterial service is required by the central business district, large shopping centers, large industrial plants, major governmental centers, large hospitals, important secondary business districts and similar land uses which comprise the top layer of hierarchy of trip generators. Major arterials shall form a closed, interconnected system linking together major traffic generators in the urban region, and functioning to collect and distribute traffic from freeways and state highways to less important arterial streets. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).


12.28.050 Secondary arterial (Minor).

Secondary arterials provide for movement within the large subparts prescribed by major arterials. Secondary arterials may also serve “through” traffic, but provide more direct service to abutting land uses than do major arterials. Secondary arterial service is required by small central business districts, tourist districts with motels and restaurants, high schools and some grade schools, strip commercial development, parks and recreational areas, warehousing areas and similar land uses which comprise the middle layer of the trip generator hierarchy. Secondary arterials shall, whenever possible, be long, continuous streets with direct rather than meandering alignments. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).


12.28.060 Collector arterial (Collector).

Collector arterials provide for movement within the smaller areas, which are often definable neighborhoods and may be bounded by higher class arterials. Collector arterials serve very little “through” traffic but serve a high proportion of local traffic requiring direct access to abutting land uses. Collector arterial service is required for the majority of land uses which generate measurably important traffic volumes such as plats, churches, small parks and recreation areas, convenience shopping centers and other areas which are not served by major or secondary arterials. Collector arterials need not be particularly long or continuous since this would tend to attract through trips. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).


12.28.070 Access street (Access).

Access streets provide for movement within residential neighborhoods, light commercial areas, and the residential agricultural districts. Access streets serve no through traffic and may terminate in cul-de-sacs. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).


12.28.080 Street designations.

The city council shall designate a comprehensive arterial street plan. Classification of new streets shall be made by the city supervisor according to the comprehensive street plan. Every effort shall be made to incorporate new streets into the existing street grid pattern, and to provide for systematic naming and numbering of streets. (Ord. 959 § 3, 1980).

II. Street and Sidewalk Design Criteria


12.28.090 Plans required.

Street and sidewalk improvements or new street and sidewalk construction shall require engineering plans with the following information:

A. Vicinity map showing the location of existing arterial streets adjoining the proposed improvement or within the immediate vicinity of the improvement;

B. Street plans for individual street sections shall contain at least the following information:

1. Width and location of existing streets adjoining the improvement,

2. Property lines, right-of-way lines and easement lines with dimensions and north arrow,

3. Location of street improvement and appurtenances including driveways, properly dimensioned and stationed along the centerline and location and stationing of all horizontal angle points and horizontal curve data,

4. Location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities, including storm and sanitary sewers, water courses, railroad crossings, structures within the right-of-way, trees, and all pertinent topographic features, including location and elevations of all survey bench marks,

5. Suitable title plate on each drawing with street name, name and address of developer, scale, date and the name, address and telephone number and stamp of the registered engineer or land surveyor responsible for the plan preparation;

C. Street profiles for individual street sections shall contain at least the following information:

1. Street centerline stationing and vertical elevations,

2. A two or three line profile showing the existing ground surface along the street centerline and proposed top of curb and street centerline profiles,

3. Slope of the street between grade changes and vertical curve information,

4. Centerline profile of intersecting streets a minimum of 100 feet each side of street improvement and profile of all driveways with grades greater than eight percent,

5. Suitable title plate on each drawing with street name, name and address of developer, vertical and horizontal scale, date and the name, address, telephone number and stamp of the registered engineer or land surveyor responsible for the plan preparation;

D. Structural details shall include properly dimensioned details of curbs and gutters, street cross sections, drainage facilities, retaining walls and all major structures to be constructed within the right-of-way. (Ord. 959 § 4, 1980).


12.28.095 Telecommunication conduit required.

A. All development or redevelopment that requires a city right-of-way permit that results in cutting, boring or trenching of soil, pavement or other material located within the city right-of-way or properties destined to become dedicated city right-of-way including but not limited to new or improved roads, installation of infrastructure or utilities such as water, sewer, gas, electrical and communication lines, features and/or structures, shall be required to construct and install fiber optic telecommunications conduits and approved vaults (or to the closest vault within 500 feet as determined by the public works director) and shall dedicate the ownership and use of said conduits and vaults to the city.

B. Unless otherwise determined by the public works director or city engineer, the conduit shall be four-inch diameter for primary telecommunication paths and two-inch diameter for secondary paths with telecommunication vaults located at least every 500 feet, on all streets, alleys or trails, disturbed, constructed and/or improved by development activities as identified in subsection (A) of this section, and shall apply to any applicant for a city right-of-way permit including but not limited to telecommunication providers (Internet service providers, local exchange carrier, competitive local exchange carrier, etc.). Any waiver from this requirement shall be approved by the public works director. Said conduit and vaults shall be for the purpose of installing city telecommunications cable, fiber optic wiring or other public infrastructure as deemed necessary by the city.

C. The conduit shall be placed at horizontal and vertical locations as determined by the public works director. The conduit shall conform to the size, shape and characteristics as determined by the public works director based on an evaluation of industry standards. Once installed and accepted by the city, the conduit shall become the property of the city of Burlington.

D. Any underground boring or trenching for utility infrastructure, private or public, within the city right-of-way shall include conduit as referenced in subsection (A) of this section.

E. Any abandoned, unmarked or unused conduit and/or vaults located within the city right-of-way shall become the property of the city following 60 days’ notice posted at the approximate location of the conduit, and following reasonable efforts by the city public works director to contact the last known owner of said conduit and/or vaults. If reasonable efforts by the public works director fail to identify the last known presumed owner of said conduit and/or vaults, then the public works director shall publish a notice in the legal newspaper for the city of Burlington notifying the public of the city’s intent to take possession of the applicable conduit and/or vaults, and shall provide 60 days’ notice of said possession.

F. All conduit and vaults installed within the city right-of-way shall be properly labeled and identified as determined by the public works director. An “as built” drawing shall be provided to the public works director on the completion and/or inspection of the completed work. (Ord. 1810 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1805 § 1, 2014).


12.28.100 Geometric design standards – Generally.

Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements set out in BMC 12.28.110 through 12.28.150. (Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.110 Geometric design standards – General requirements.

Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following general requirements:

A. Streets shall be designed to provide vehicular access according to the street classification to, from and through the service area;

B. Street widths shall be adequate to provide access for emergency vehicles, firefighting equipment, garbage trucks and city service vehicles;

C. Whenever possible streets shall be used to collect runoff from adjacent properties in the service area and divert it into storm drain systems;

D. Whenever possible new streets shall align with the existing street grid. New streets shall intersect existing streets at an approximate 90-degree angle;

E. Vertical clearance of structures or vegetation above a paved roadway shall be 16-1/2 feet. Vertical clearance of structures or vegetation above a sidewalk or walkway surface shall be eight feet;

F. Lateral clearance between the curb or edge of street shoulder and the closest part of any fixed object (excluding traffic control signs and breakaway supports) shall be at least three feet;

G. Traffic control devices shall conform to the Washington State Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition;

H. Ramps for Handicapped. Curb ramps for physically handicapped persons shall be included in all construction in accordance with the laws of the state of Washington;

I. Roadway Geometrics. Street designs shall be based on accepted engineering practices and current standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials;

J. Design Year. Twenty years after the year construction is completed;

K. Street Intersections. Gutter drainage should not be allowed to cross any intersections on major, secondary or collector arterials. (Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.120 Geometric design standards – Major arterials.

Major arterials shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

A. Access conditions; intersections at grade with traffic signals at all major intersections; traffic channelization at all major intersections or driveways; parking restricted within road right-of-way; access control to adjoining properties according to the following conditions:

1. One driveway per lot or driveways spaced a minimum of 150 lineal feet apart,

2. No driveways within 150 lineal feet of street intersections,

3. Driveway width 24 feet minimum, 36 feet maximum;

B. Average daily traffic. 5,000 to 25,000 vehicles per day;

C. Right-of-way width: 80 feet minimum;

D. Traffic lane width criteria:

	Two-way traffic	12 feet minimum

	Turn lane	12 feet minimum

	Shoulders	8 feet minimum

	Bus lane	12 feet minimum

E. Pavement width (two-way traffic):

	With curbs	48 feet measured to face of curb

	With shoulders	56 feet

F. Horizontal curvature: minimum centerline radius = 955 feet;

G. Maximum grade = 6 percent; minimum grade = 0.5 percent;

H. Road surface cross slope: 2.5 percent minimum;

I. Curb radii at intersections = 25 feet minimum;

J. Curb type: APWA Type A;

K. Five-foot wide sidewalks each side required unless exempted by city council. (Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.130 Geometric design standards – Secondary arterials.

Secondary arterials shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

A. Access conditions: intersections at grade with traffic channelization at major intersections; driveways within 150 feet of an intersection may be prohibited if there are potential traffic hazards. The extent of the potential traffic hazard shall be determined by the city engineer in his sole discretion;

B. Average daily traffic: 1,500 to 10,000 vehicles per day;

C. Right-of-way width: 60 feet minimum;

D. Traffic lane width criteria:

	Two way traffic	11 feet minimum

	Turn lane	12 feet minimum

	Shoulders	8 feet minimum

	Parking lane	10 feet minimum

	Bus lane	12 feet minimum

E. Pavement width (two-way traffic):

	With curbs	44 feet measured to face of curb

	With shoulders	52 feet

F. Horizontal curvature: minimum centerline radius = 820 feet;

G. Maximum grade = 6 percent; minimum grade = 0.5 percent;

H. Road surface cross slope: 2.5 percent minimum;

I. Curb radius at intersections = 20 feet minimum;

J. Curb type: APWA Type A;

K. Five-foot wide sidewalks required each side of street unless exempted by the city council. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 1996; Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.140 Geometric design standards – Collector arterials.

Collector arterials shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

A. Access conditions: intersections at grade with stop signs at major cross streets; driveways within 150 feet of an intersection may be prohibited if there are potential traffic hazards. The extent of the potential traffic hazard shall be determined by the city engineer in his sole discretion;

B. Average daily traffic: 1,000 to 5,000 vehicles per day;

C. Right-of-way width: 60 feet minimum;

D. Traffic lane width criteria:

	Two-way traffic	11 feet minimum

	Parking lane	8 feet minimum

	Bus lane	12 feet minimum

E. Pavement width (two-way traffic):

	With curbs	36 feet measured to face of curb

	With shoulders	44 feet

F. Horizontal curvature: minimum centerline radius = 715 feet;

G. Maximum grade = 7 percent; minimum grade = 0.4 percent;

H. Road surface cross slope = 2.78 percent minimum;

I. Curb radius at intersections = 20 feet minimum;

J. Curb type: APWA Type A or D;

K. Five-foot wide sidewalks each side of street required. (Ord. 1326 § 2, 1996; Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.150 Geometric design standards – Access streets.

Access streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

A. Access conditions: intersections at grade with stop signs at all major cross streets; driveways within 150 feet of an intersection may be prohibited if there are potential traffic hazards. The extent of the potential traffic hazard shall be determined by the city engineer in his sole discretion;

B. Average daily traffic: 500 vehicles per day or less;

C. Right-of-way width: 50 feet minimum;

D. Traffic lane width criteria:

	Two-way traffic	10 feet minimum

	Parking lane	8 feet minimum;

E. Pavement width (two-way traffic):

	With curbs and parking	36 feet

	both sides	measured to face of curbs

	With curbs and parking	 

	one side	32 feet

	With shoulders (five	34 feet

	feet each side)	total width

F. Horizontal curvature: minimum centerline radius = 410 feet;

G. Maximum grade = 12 percent; minimum grade = 0.4 percent;

H. Road surface cross slope = 2.78 percent;

I. Curb radius at intersections = 10 feet minimum;

J. Curb type: APWA Type A or D;

K. Cul-de-sacs:

Length    300 feet maximum

Diameter    90 feet – residential zone

    100 feet – commercial zone

L. Sidewalks optional at discretion of the city council. (Ord. 1326 § 3, 1996; Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).


12.28.160 Structural design standards.

A. All streets shall be designed to provide a useful life span of 20 years without excessive maintenance. Major, secondary and collector arterials shall be designed and stamped by a civil engineer registered in the state of Washington. Accepted engineering practices shall be employed in the street designs. Soil, drainage and traffic conditions shall be considered in the design.

B. Access streets will not require design by a registered engineer but shall be submitted to the city according to the format described in BMC 12.28.090. The following minimum pavement cross-sections shall apply to access streets:

1. Asphalt concrete surfacing:

a. Three inches Class B asphalt concrete placed in two lifts of one and one-half inches;

b. One and one-half inches crushed rock base;

c. Eight inches pit run gravel ballast.

2. Portland cement concrete pavement:

a. Five inches 4,000 psi PC concrete on compacted subgrade.

C. Adequate storm sewers shall be provided for all streets. (Ord. 959 § 5, 1980).

III. Storm Sewers


12.28.170

Definitions. Repealed by Ord. 1273. (Ord. 959 § 6, 1980).


12.28.180

Plans required. Repealed by Ord. 1273. (Ord. 959 § 6, 1980).


12.28.190

Design criteria. Repealed by Ord. 1273. (Ord. 959 § 6, 1980).


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:

13.04    Sewage Disposal

13.08    Sewer Rates

13.12    Septic Tank Sludge


Chapter 13.04 SEWAGE DISPOSAL

Sections:

13.04.003    Purpose.

13.04.005    Construction – Intent.

13.04.010    Definitions.

13.04.012    Applicability.

13.04.015    Service interruptions.

13.04.017    Administration.

13.04.020    Connection to system – Required.

13.04.030    Connection to system – Permit – Required.

13.04.040    Connection to system – Permit – Application.

13.04.045    General facilities charge.

13.04.050    Connection to system – Outside city limits.

13.04.060    Connection to system – Separate sewer required.

13.04.070    Connection to system – Construction specifications.

13.04.080    Connection to system – Specifications.

13.04.090    Connection to system – Elevation requirements.

13.04.100    Connection to system – Use of old sewers permitted when.

13.04.110    Connection to system – Certain types prohibited.

13.04.120    Connection to system – Excavations.

13.04.130    Connection to system – Inspection and testing.

13.04.140    Connection to system – Within right-of-way or easement – Specifications.

13.04.150    Connection to system – Costs.

13.04.160    Repealed.

13.04.161    Federal categorical pretreatment standards.

13.04.170    Repealed.

13.04.171    Industrial user surveys.

13.04.177    Wastewater discharge permits.

13.04.180    Repealed.

13.04.181    Wastewater discharge permit appeals.

13.04.190    Repealed.

13.04.191    Search warrants.

13.04.200    Vandalism.

13.04.210    Emergency suspension.

13.04.220    Termination of discharge (nonemergency).

13.04.230    Appeal procedures.

13.04.240    Injunctive relief.

13.04.250    Civil penalties.

13.04.260    Criminal prosecution.

13.04.265    Pretreatment charges and fees.

13.04.270    Private wastewater disposal system – Prohibited when.

13.04.280    Private wastewater disposal system – Permitted when.

13.04.290    Private wastewater disposal system – Permit required.

13.04.300    Private wastewater disposal system – Notice to connect to public system.

13.04.310    Private wastewater disposal system – Maintenance.

13.04.320    Repealed.

13.04.330    Repealed.

13.04.340    Repealed.

13.04.350    Repealed.

13.04.360    Repealed.

13.04.370    Deposit of objectionable materials prohibited.

13.04.380    Discharge to natural outlet prohibited – Exception.

13.04.390    Repealed.

13.04.400    Failure to connect – Penalty.

13.04.410    Violation – Liability.

13.04.420    Violation – Notice to be served.

13.04.430    Violation – Continuance – Penalty.

13.04.440    Maintenance of disposal system.

13.04.450    Noncompliance – Nuisance.

13.04.460    Confidential information.


13.04.003 Purpose.

Pursuant to the authority conferred by chapters 35.67 and 90.48 RCW, this chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the POTW of the city of Burlington, and allows the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act, and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR Part 403. Through the adoption of these code provisions, it is the intent of the city council to provide for the general welfare of the residents of the city of Burlington. The city council expresses no intent to create a class of persons who are specially benefited by this code. The objectives of this chapter are to:

A. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW;

B. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that are incompatible with the POTW, or that will pass through the POTW inadequately treated into receiving waters;

C. Ensure that the quality of POTW biosolids is maintained at a level that allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;

D. Protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater, wastewater solids, and biosolids in the course of their employment, and to protect the general public;

E. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the POTW;

F. Promote strategies to reduce the amounts of pollution generated by users, thereby reducing the associated hazards to the POTW and the receiving waters. (Ord. 1617 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1583 § 2, 2005).


13.04.005 Construction – Intent.

A. This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the city of Burlington to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare; its provisions shall be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose.

B. It is expressly the purpose of this code to provide for and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited. 

C. It is the specific intent of this code to place the obligation of compliance upon the owner/operator. Nothing contained in this code is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burlington, its utility, officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the owner/operator of any private system to comply with the provisions of this code, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Burlington, its utility, officers, employees or agents.

D. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations referenced under this chapter does not necessarily mitigate all impacts to the environment, and additional mitigation may be required to protect the environment. (Ord. 1583 § 3, 2005).


13.04.010 Definitions.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:

1. “Accessory building” means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to the use of the main building on the same lot.

2. “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed in milligrams per liter.

3. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from wastes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning two feet (0.6 meters) from the outside face of the building wall.

4. “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the side sewer or other place of disposal, also called “house connection.”

5. “City sewer system” means the sewer system owned by or under operational control of the city within and outside the city limits.

6. “Contract customer” means a customer located outside the city of Burlington sewer service area that discharges wastewater to the city of Burlington sewer system.

7. “Easement” means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.

8. “Equivalent residential unit (ERU)” means the equivalent of one residential unit for purposes of computing general facilities charges.

9. “Garbage” means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.

10. “General facilities charge” means the charge that is assessed against property owners seeking to connect to the sewer system, in order that such property owners shall bear their equitable share of the cost of such system.

11. “High strength” means wastewater discharged from commercial accounts with Standard Industrial Classification Codes 5812, 5147, or 5093, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing a BOD between 700 to 1,050 mg/l or suspended solids of 700 to 1,050 mg/l.

12. “Industrial wastes” means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.

13. “Low strength” means wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing less than 350 mg/l biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or less than 350 mg/l suspended solids.

14. “May” is permissive (see “shall,” subsection (26) of this section).

15. “Medium strength” means wastewater discharged from commercial accounts with Standard Industrial Classification Codes 2051, 5411, or 7833, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing a BOD of 350 to 700 mg/l and less than 700 mg/l suspended solids, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing suspended solids of 350 to 700 mg/l and BOD less than 700 mg/l.

16. “Natural outlet” means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.

17. “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local government entities.

18. “pH” means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.

19. “POTW” means the publicly owned treatment works.

20. “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

21. “Public sewer” means a common sewer constructed for the conveyance of liquid wastes, which is controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.

22. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, storm water and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.

23. “Sewage” means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is “wastewater,” subsection (34) of this section.

24. “Sewer” means a pipe, conduit, ditch, or other device used to collect and transport wastewater from the generating source to the POTW.

25. “Sewer service area” means the city of Burlington sewer service area shown on Plate I of the 1991 comprehensive wastewater plan, city of Burlington, adopted by Resolution No. 7-91.

26. “Shall” is mandatory (see “may,” subsection (14) of this section).

27. “Side sewer” means the sewer from the main collection public sewer in either public right-of-way or easement to the building sewer (usually at the boundary of the property being served).

28. “Slug” means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and adversely affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.

29. “Storm drain” (sometimes referred to as “storm sewer”) means a drain or sewer for conveying rainwater, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any other source.

30. “Sewer department supervisor” means the city supervisor or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.

31. “Suspended solids” means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as nonfilterable residue.

32. “Unpolluted water” is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.

33. “Urban growth area (UGA)” means the area inside the city’s sewer service area east of Pulver Road, as defined by Plate I of the 1991 comprehensive wastewater plan, city of Burlington, adopted by Resolution No. 7-91.

34. “Wastewater” means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present, that are contributed to the POTW.

35. “Wastewater facilities” means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.

36. “Wastewater treatment works” means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. This term is sometimes used as synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or “water pollution control plant.”

37. “Watercourse” means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 

38. “Western service area” means the area inside the city of Burlington sewer service area west of Pulver Road, as defined by Plate I of the 1991 comprehensive wastewater plan, city of Burlington, adopted by Resolution No. 7-91. (Ord. 1583 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1302 § 1, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. I §§ 1 – 29, 1976).


13.04.012 Applicability.

A. General. This chapter shall apply to all direct and indirect users of the city’s municipal sewer system. 

B. Territorial Application. This code shall be in effect throughout the utility service area, as reflected in the City of Burlington 2005 Sanitary Sewer and Comprehensive Wastewater Plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and identified as Exhibit “A.” (Ord. 1583 § 5, 2005).


13.04.015 Service interruptions.

Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city of Burlington does not guarantee that sewer service will be continuously available within the utility service area. Sewer service may be temporarily unavailable due to a system failure, emergency, construction or maintenance, or other unforeseen circumstances. (Ord. 1583 § 6, 2005).


13.04.017 Administration.

A. The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. The director shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter, and may adopt reasonable rules and administrative procedures to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director is further authorized to adopt an industrial waste policy, consistent with state and federal law, that will prohibit or limit the discharge of deleterious substances to the wastewater treatment works. Such interpretations, rules, policies and administrative procedures shall be in conformity with the intent and purposes of this chapter.

B. Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures, the director may appoint such number of technical officers, inspectors, and other personnel as shall be authorized from time to time. The director may deputize such inspectors or employees as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.

C. Inspections. All activities regulated by this chapter, except those explicitly exempted herein, are subject to inspection by the director to determine that adequate control is being exercised, or to determine whether an approval is warranted. The director may establish inspection programs to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes.

Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water quality standards or the city’s NPDES permit, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 

Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other best management practices.

D. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the director or the director’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any property any condition or violation of this chapter relating to the pollution or the possible pollution of any of the waters of the state, the director or the director’s authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the director by this chapter; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, the director shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

E. Authority to Stop Work. Whenever construction work is being done that is contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or contrary to the provisions of plans, drawings, specifications, or calculations approved by the director, then the director may order the construction work stopped by notice in writing, served on those persons engaged in or causing the work to be done. Any such persons shall thereafter stop such work until authorized by the director to proceed. (Ord. 1617 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1583 § 7, 2005).


13.04.020 Connection to system – Required.

The owner(s) of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city, or within the area served by the city sewer system, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is required at the owner or owners’ expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so; provided, that the building to be served is not located more than 200 feet from a public sewer. (Ord. 1583 § 21, 2005; Ord. 846 Art. II § 4, 1976).


13.04.030 Connection to system – Permit – Required.

No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director of the city. (Ord. 1302 § 2, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 1, 1976).


13.04.040 Connection to system – Permit – Application.

Application for building sewer permits shall be made on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the sewer department supervisor and public works director. A permit and connection fee shall be charged as determined by council resolution and this chapter. (Ord. 1517 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1302 § 3, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 2, 1976).


13.04.045 General facilities charge.

A. The general facilities charge for property owners seeking to connect to the sewer system shall be adopted by city council resolution in the following categories:

1. Residential.

a. Single-family residences, duplexes and triplexes, western service area: fee per dwelling unit, plus applicable state taxes.

b. Single-family residences, duplexes and triplexes, urban growth area (UGA): fee per dwelling unit, plus applicable state taxes.

c. Residential accounts containing more than three dwelling units, western service area: fee per dwelling unit, plus applicable state taxes.

d. Residential accounts containing more than three dwelling units, urban growth area (UGA): fee per dwelling unit.

2. Commercial/Industrial.

a. The following definitions and Table of Equivalent Fixture Units shall be used as the basis for determining fees for commercial and industrial customers:

Private or Private Use. Applies to plumbing fixtures in residences and apartments, to private bathrooms in hotels, motels and hospitals, and to restrooms in commercial establishments where the fixtures are intended for the use of a family or an individual.

Public or Public Use. Applies to plumbing fixtures that are not defined as private or private use.

TABLE OF EQUIVALENT FIXTURE UNITS  (Includes Combined Hot and Cold Water Demand) 

	Fixture	Private Use	Public Use

	Bar sink	1	2

	Bathtub (with or without shower over)	2	4

	Bidet	2	4

	Dental unit or cuspidor	–	1

	Drinking fountain (each head)	1	2

	Hose bibb or sill cock (standard type)	3	5

	Mobile home (each)	6	6

	Laundry tub or clothes washer (each pair of faucets)	2	4

	Lavatory	1	2

	Lavatory (dental)	1	1

	Lawn sprinklers (standard type, each head)	1	1

	Shower (each head)	2	4

	Sink (bar)	1	2

	Sink or dishwasher	2	4

	Sink (flushing rim, clinic)	–	10

	Sink (washup, each set of faucets)	–	2

	Sink (washup, circular spray)	–	4

	Urinal (pedestal or similar type)	–	10

	Urinal (stall)	–	5

	Urinal (wall)	–	5

	Urinal (flush tank)	–	3

	Water closet (flush tank)	3	5

	Water closet (flushometer-tank)	3	5

	Water supply outlets for items not listed above shall be computed at their maximum demand, but in no case less than:

	3/8 inch (9.5 mm)	1	2

	1/2 inch (12.7 mm)	2	4

	3/4 inch (19.1 mm)	3	6

	1 inch (25.4 mm)	6	10

b. Low strength commercial/industrial customers, western service area: Fees shall be per plumbing fixture unit as described in the Table of Equivalent Fixture Units, plus applicable state taxes, or by other method approved by the public works director.

c. Low strength commercial/industrial customers, urban growth area: Fees shall be per plumbing fixture unit as described in the Table of Equivalent Fixture Units, plus applicable state taxes, or by other method approved by the public works director.

d. Medium strength and high strength commercial/industrial customers, western service area: fee per plumbing fixture unit as described in the Table of Equivalent Fixture Units, plus fee per pound/day BOD discharged into the sewer system, plus applicable state taxes. Pounds per day of BOD discharged into the sewer system will be determined based on the number of plumbing fixture units and the North American Industrial Classification Code, or by other method approved by the public works director.

e. Medium strength and high strength commercial/industrial customers, urban growth area: fee per plumbing fixture unit as described in the Table of Equivalent Fixture Units, plus fee per pound/day BOD discharged into the sewer system, plus applicable state taxes. Pounds per day of BOD discharged into the sewer system will be determined based on the number of plumbing fixture units and the North American Industrial Classification Code, or by other method approved by the public works director.

3. Residential Service Charge Credits for General Facilities Charge. Any residential account not connected to the sewer system within the western and urban sewer service area, paying a monthly service charge, will receive a credit at time of connection equal to the service charge payments that have been paid by the present owner since June 1, 1998, up to 50 percent of the general facilities charge to connect to the sewer system. This policy will become effective May 1, 2003, and will not be retroactive to those residential accounts that have been connected prior to this date.

4. Contract Customers. Contract customers shall pay the general facilities charge specified for the western service area customers.

B. General Facilities Charge – Proceeds. All proceeds of the general facilities charge shall be placed in the sewer capital improvements fund for the following uses: construction of sewer expansion made necessary by system growth, debt service for indebtedness resulting from construction of sewer expansion made necessary by system growth, and the repair, replacement, and maintenance of existing sewer facilities. (Ord. 1799 § 20, 2014; Ord. 1641 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1517 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1302 § 4, 1995).


13.04.050 Connection to system – Outside city limits.

A. Pursuant to the authority granted by RCW 35.67.310, connections to the city sewer system, either direct or indirect, from property situated beyond the corporate boundaries of the city shall be allowed only upon specific approval from the city council, and upon the terms, conditions, and payments as may be set forth in an agreement authorized by the city council. 

B. An agreement authorizing property situated beyond the corporate boundaries of the city to connect to the city sewer system shall address the following subjects; provided, that the city council, by appropriate action, may waive any of the following requirements:

1. Such agreement shall identify with specificity the property to be connected with the city sewer system;

2. Such agreement shall grant permission for connection upon payment of prescribed fees and charges therefor; provided, that monthly or periodic fees for sewer services shall not be fixed or otherwise capped in the agreement;

3. Such agreement shall require the property owners to construct such connection in accordance with city plans and specifications and under the supervision of the director of public works, without cost or expense to the city;

4. Such agreement shall provide that the property owner shall not allow any additional property to be served by such connection until the owner of such additional property has executed a similar agreement;

5. Such agreement shall provide that the owner of the property to be served, its successors and assigns, shall agree to execute an annexation petition to the city of Burlington when presented for signature by the city;

6. Such agreement shall provide that the owner of the property shall agree that the city, in the event the terms and conditions of said agreement are not faithfully kept and performed, may disconnect the sewer serving the property from the city’s system and for that purpose shall authorize the director of public works to enter upon the premises of such property owner; and

7. Such agreement shall provide that such agreement shall be filed for record in the office of the auditor of Skagit County, Washington, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land binding upon the property owner, his heirs and assigns, and upon any parties subsequently acquiring any right, title or interest in said property. (Ord. 1583 § 22, 2005; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 4, 1976).


13.04.060 Connection to system – Separate sewer required.

A. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building or residence; provided:

1. Where one building or residence stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building or residence through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the side sewer to the front building or residence may be extended to the rear building or residence with the sewer department supervisor’s approval;

2. Where two buildings or residences share a common property line, a common side sewer line located on the common property line may be shared, with city approval;

3. Service to accessory buildings as defined in BMC 13.04.010, may be extended from the primary building sewer line on approval of the sewer department supervisor.

B. The city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for maintenance or damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. (Ord. 1302 § 5, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 5, 1976).


13.04.070 Connection to system – Construction specifications.

The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 846 Art. IV § 7, 1976).


13.04.080 Connection to system – Specifications.

The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the sewer department supervisor before installation. (Ord. 1302 § 6, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 10, 1976).


13.04.090 Connection to system – Elevation requirements.

Wherever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (Ord. 846 Art. IV § 8, 1976).


13.04.100 Connection to system – Use of old sewers permitted when.

Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the sewer department supervisor, to meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1302 § 7, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 6, 1976).


13.04.110 Connection to system – Certain types prohibited.

No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the sewer department supervisor for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. (Ord. 1302 § 8, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 9, 1976).


13.04.120 Connection to system – Excavations.

All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 846 Art. IV § 12, 1976).


13.04.130 Connection to system – Inspection and testing.

The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the sewer department supervisor when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the sewer department supervisor or his representative. (Ord. 1302 § 9, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. IV § 11, 1976).


13.04.140 Connection to system – Within right-of-way or easement – Specifications.

All construction related to sewer installation within public rights-of-way and easements shall be governed by the latest edition of the Washington State Chapter American Public Works Association, “Standard Specification for Municipal Public Works Construction.” (Ord. 846 Art. IV § 13, 1976).


13.04.150 Connection to system – Costs.

All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 846 Art. IV § 3, 1976).




13.04.160 Discharges – Applicability – Special agreements authorized when.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 846 Art. V § 10, 1976).


13.04.161 Federal categorical pretreatment standards.

The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, adopted, and hereafter amended by the EPA pursuant to the Act, are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full. These standards shall be met by all industrial users of the regulated industrial categories. (Ord. 1583 § 8, 2005).


13.04.170 Discharges – Unpolluted water – Prohibited when.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 10, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. V § 1, 1976).


13.04.171 Industrial user surveys.

All existing and new businesses that discharge or have the potential to discharge wastes regulated by BMC 13.04.161 shall be required to complete an industrial user survey form. (Ord. 1583 § 9, 2005).


13.04.177 Wastewater discharge permits.

The director shall establish a policy by which no user of the POTW shall discharge industrial wastes to the POTW without first having obtained a permit from the director. Any violation of the terms and/or conditions of such a permit shall be deemed to be a violation of this section. (Ord. 1583 § 10, 2005).


13.04.180 Discharges – Unpolluted water – Exemptions.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 11, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. V § 2, 1976).


13.04.181 Wastewater discharge permit appeals.

Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance.

A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

D. If the director fails to act within 60 days of the receipt of an appeal, the appeal shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (Ord. 1583 § 11, 2005).


13.04.190 Discharges – Prohibited substances.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 846 Art. V § 3, 1976).


13.04.191 Search warrants.

If the director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this policy, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this policy or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the director has the right to seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from the municipal court, the district court, or the Skagit County superior court. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the director and may be accomplished in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. (Ord. 1583 § 12, 2005).


13.04.200 Vandalism.

No person shall willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this provision shall be subject to the sanctions set out in RCW 9A.48.070 through 9A.48.090. (Ord. 1583 § 13, 2005).


13.04.210 Emergency suspension.

The director may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.

The director may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit (after informal notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.

A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals.

B. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in BMC 13.04.220 are initiated against the user.

C. No person shall attempt to prevent the city from terminating wastewater service in an emergency situation by barring entry, by physically interfering with city employees or contractors, or by any other means.

D. A user that is responsible, in whole, or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent danger to persons, property, or the POTW, shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under BMC 13.04.220.

E. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 1583 § 14, 2005).


13.04.220 Termination of discharge (nonemergency).

Any user that violates the following conditions is subject to revocation of the user’s discharge permit:

A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;

B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or

E. Violation of the pretreatment standards established by the director pursuant to BMC 13.04.017;

F. Violation of any lawful order of the city, issued with respect to this policy. 

Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 1617 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1583 § 15, 2005).


13.04.230 Appeal procedures.

A. Appeals.

1. Any user seeking to dispute a notice of violation, order, or other action of the director, may file an appeal.

2. The appeal must be filed in writing and received by the director within 10 calendar days of the receipt of notice of the disputed action. If the notice of appeal is not received by the director within the 10-calendar-day period, the right to an appeal is waived. 

The notice of appeal shall state with particularity the basis upon which the appellant is disputing the action taken. 

3. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the director shall set a date and time for an appeal hearing, but in no case shall the hearing be set for more than 30 days from the receipt of the timely notice of appeal. The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and place for the appeal hearing. The director or his/her designee shall serve as the hearing examiner.

B. Appeal Hearing.

1. The director may admit and give probative effect to evidence which possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing examiner shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. The director may exclude incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence. Factual issues shall be resolved by a preponderance of evidence.

2. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts or by incorporation by reference.

3. Every party shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence; provided, that the director may control the manner and extent of the cross-examinations and rebuttals.

4. The director may take notice of judicially cognizable facts.

C. Appeal Conclusion. At the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall determine if the disputed action was proper, and shall approve, modify, or rescind the disputed action. The final determination of the director shall be in writing, and all parties shall be provided a copy of the final determination.

D. Judicial Review of Appeal.

1. Pursuant to chapter 36.70C RCW, any party, including the city, the Washington State Department of Ecology, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or the user/appellant, is entitled to review of the final determination of the director in the Skagit County superior court. 

2. Copies of the petition for review shall be served as in all civil actions.

3. The filing of the petition shall not stay enforcement of the final determination except by order of the superior court and on posting of a bond to be determined by the court naming the city as beneficiary.

4. The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The record shall be satisfied by a narrative report certified by the director and no verbatim record of proceedings before the director shall be required to be presented to the superior court. (Ord. 1583 § 16, 2005).


13.04.240 Injunctive relief.

When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this policy, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the Skagit County superior court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this policy on activities of the user. 

The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. Injunctive relief shall be non-exclusive to other remedies available to the city. (Ord. 1583 § 17, 2005).


13.04.250 Civil penalties.

A. This section shall be applicable to all violations of this chapter and to violations of regulations and federal or Washington State statutes that are incorporated into this code by reference or otherwise, except for violations that are expressly designated to be misdemeanors or gross misdemeanors in this chapter.

B. Except as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any violation of this chapter is deemed and declared to be a Class 1 civil infraction unless such violation is expressly designated as another class of civil infraction in the applicable section of this chapter. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate civil infraction.

C. Notice of Civil Infraction – Issuance, Service and Filing.

1. A civil infraction proceeding is initiated by the issuance, service and filing of a notice of infraction.

2. A notice of civil infraction may be issued upon certification that the issuer thereof has probable cause to believe, and does believe, that a person has committed an infraction contrary to law:

a. By an enforcement officer. The infraction need not have been committed in the enforcement officer’s presence, except as provided by statute;

b. By the city attorney.

3. A notice of infraction may be served either by:

a. The enforcement officer serving the notice of infraction on the person named in the notice of infraction at the time of issuance;

b. The enforcement officer or the city attorney filing the notice of infraction with the court, in which case the court shall have the notice served either personally or by mail, postage prepaid, on the person named in the notice of infraction at his or her address. If a notice of infraction served by mail is returned to the court as undeliverable, the court shall issue a summons.

4. A notice of infraction shall be filed with the Burlington municipal court within 48 hours of issuance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. A notice of infraction not filed within the time limits prescribed in this section may be dismissed without prejudice.

D. Person Receiving Notice – Identification and Detention. A person who receives a notice of infraction is required to identify himself or herself to the enforcement officer by giving his or her true name, address, and date of birth. Upon request of the enforcement officer, the person shall produce reasonable identification, including a driver’s license or identicard.

E. Notice of Civil Infraction – Form. The notice of civil infraction shall be as prescribed by the administrator for the courts, and shall contain the following information:

1. A statement that the notice of infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed by the defendant and that the determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter;

2. A statement that a civil infraction is a noncriminal offense for which imprisonment may not be imposed as a sanction;

3. A statement of the specific infraction that the defendant is alleged to have committed and the accompanying Burlington Municipal Code section number, the date, time and place the alleged infraction occurred, the time that the notice of infraction was issued, and the name and, if applicable, the number of the enforcement officer;

4. A statement that the defendant must respond to the notice of infraction within 14 days of issuance;

5. A space for the defendant to sign a promise to respond to the notice of infraction within the time required;

6. A space for the entry of a monetary penalty which defendant may pay in lieu of appearing in court;

7. A statement that a mailed response must be mailed not later than midnight on the day the response is due;

8. A statement of the options provided in this chapter for responding to the notice of civil infraction and the procedures necessary to exercise these options;

9. A statement that at any hearing to contest the determination that the city has the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the civil infraction was committed and that the defendant may subpoena witnesses including the enforcement officer who issued the notice of civil infraction;

10. A statement that at any hearing requested for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, the defendant will be deemed to have committed the civil infraction and may not subpoena witnesses;

11. A statement that failure to respond to the notice of infraction or a failure to appear at a hearing requested for the purpose of contesting the determination or for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances will result in a default judgment against the defendant in the amount of the penalty and that this failure may be referred to the city attorney for criminal prosecution for failure to respond or appear;

12. A statement that the defendant shall sign that the defendant promises to respond to the notice of infraction in one of the ways provided in this chapter;

13. A statement that failure to respond to a notice of infraction as promised or to appear at a requested hearing is a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine or imprisonment in jail;

14. The name, address, and telephone number of the Burlington municipal division of the district court;

15. The name and address of the defendant.

F. Notice – Determination Final Unless Contested. A notice of infraction represents a determination that a civil infraction has been committed. The determination is final unless contested as provided in this chapter.

G. Response to Notice of Infraction – Required. A defendant who receives a notice of infraction shall respond to such notice as provided in subsection (H) of this section within 15 days of the date of the notice if it is personally served or, if the notice is served by mail, within 10 days of the date the notice was mailed. If the response is mailed, it must be postmarked not later than midnight of the day the response is due.

H. Response to Notice of Infraction – Uncontested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does not contest the determination, such person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the notice of infraction and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. A check or money order in the amount of the penalty prescribed for the civil infraction must be submitted with the response. The clerk of the court may accept cash in payment for a civil infraction. When a response that does not contest the determination is received, an appropriate order shall be entered into the court’s records.

I. Response to Notice of Infraction – Contested Determination. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction wishes to contest the determination, such person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall be not earlier than seven days nor more than 90 days from the date of the notice of hearing, except by agreement.

J. Response to Notice of Infraction – Mitigation Hearing. If the person determined to have committed the civil infraction does not contest the determination but wishes to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the infraction, such person shall respond by completing the appropriate portion of the notice of infraction requesting a hearing for that purpose and submitting it, either by mail or in person, to the court. The court shall notify the person in writing of the time, place, and date of the hearing, and that date shall be not earlier than seven days nor more than 90 days from the date of the notice of hearing, except by agreement.

K. Response to Notice of Infraction – Failure to Respond or Appear. The court shall enter a default judgment assessing the monetary penalty prescribed for the civil infraction and shall notify the city attorney of the failure to respond to the notice of civil infraction or to appear at a requested hearing if a person issued a notice of infraction:

1. Fails to respond to the notice of infraction as provided herein; or

2. Fails to appear at a hearing requested as provided herein.

L. Hearings – Rules of Procedure. Procedures for the conduct of all hearings provided for in this chapter are those established by the Washington State Supreme Court in the “IRLJ.”

M. Hearings – Counsel.

1. A person subject to proceedings under this section may be represented by counsel.

2. The attorney representing the city may appear in any proceedings under this chapter but need not appear, notwithstanding a statute or rule of court to the contrary.

N. Hearings – Contesting Determination That Infraction Committed – Appeal.

1. A hearing held to contest the determination that a civil infraction has been committed shall be without a jury and shall be recorded in the manner provided for in courts of limited jurisdiction.

2. The court may consider the notice of infraction and any other written report made under oath submitted by the enforcement officer who issued the notice of infraction or whose statement was the basis for the issuance of the notice of infraction in lieu of the enforcement officer’s personal appearance at the hearing. The person named in the notice of infraction may request the court for issuance of a subpoena of witnesses, including the enforcement officer who issued the notice of infraction, and has the right to present evidence and examine witnesses present in court.

3. The burden of proof is upon the city to establish the commission of the civil infraction by a preponderance of the evidence.

4. After consideration of the evidence and argument, the court shall determine whether the civil infraction was committed. Where it has not been established that the civil infraction was committed, an order dismissing the notice of infraction shall be entered into the court’s records. Where it has been established that the civil infraction was committed, an appropriate order shall be entered into the court’s records.

5. An appeal from the court’s determination or order shall be to the superior court in the manner provided by the “Rules for Appeal of Decision of Court of Limited Jurisdiction.”

O. Hearing – Explanation of Mitigating Circumstances.

1. A hearing held for the purpose of allowing a person to explain mitigating circumstances surrounding the commission of a civil infraction shall be an informal hearing. The person may not subpoena witnesses. The determination that a civil infraction has been committed may not be contested at a hearing held for the purpose of explaining mitigating circumstances.

2. After the court has heard the explanation of the circumstances surrounding the commission of the civil infraction, an appropriate order shall be entered in the court’s records.

3. There is no appeal from the court’s determination or order.

P. Monetary Penalties – When Payable.     Whenever a monetary penalty is imposed by the court under this section it is immediately due and payable. If the person is unable to pay at that time, the court may grant an extension of the period in which the penalty may be paid. If the penalty is not paid on or before the time established for payment, the court may proceed to collect the penalty in the same manner as other civil judgments and may notify the city attorney of the failure to pay.

Q. Costs and Attorney Fees. Each party to a civil infraction case is responsible for costs incurred by that party, but the court may assess witness fees against a nonprevailing defendant.

R. Notice – Failure to Sign – Nonappearance – Failure to Pay Penalty – Misdemeanor.

1. A person upon whom a notice of civil infraction is personally served by an enforcement officer who fails to sign the same is guilty of a misdemeanor.

2. Any person willfully violating his or her written and signed promise to appear in court or his or her written and signed promise to respond to a notice of civil infraction is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the notice of civil infraction. A written promise to appear in court or a written promise to respond to a notice of civil infraction may be complied with by an appearance by counsel.

3. A person who willfully fails to pay a monetary penalty or to perform community service as required by a court under this chapter may be found in contempt of court as provided in chapter 7.21 RCW. (Ord. 1583 § 18, 2005).


13.04.260 Criminal prosecution.

A. A user who knowingly introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than $5,000 and/or one year in jail. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 

B. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this policy, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this policy shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and punished by a fine of not more than $5,000 and/or one year in jail. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 

In addition, the user shall be subject to:

1. The provisions of 18 USC Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;

2. The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation, or certification; and 

3. The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water Act, regarding responsible corporate officers. (Ord. 1583 § 19, 2005).


13.04.265 Pretreatment charges and fees.

Pretreatment charges are adopted by city council resolution and are identified as separate from all other rates or charges for sewer service; provided, that the city shall collect said charges in the same manner as other sewer utility rates are collected including, but not limited to, the sewer lien procedures provided under chapter 35.67 RCW in the following categories:

A. A five-year permit for a categorical user or a significant industrial user.

B. A five-year discharge authorization.

C. A one-year discharge authorization.

D. A discharge authorization for a one-time batch discharge.

E. Permit transfer fee.

F. Permit Modification Fee. Permit modification fees will only be charged in a case where changes in the user’s operation require modification, or when the user requests a modification.

G. Monitoring Fees. Fees for semi-annual inspections and semi-annual sampling events of categorical users and significant industrial users per visit.

H. Any user establishing a pattern of noncompliance, or having a history of noncompliance, or suspected of being in noncompliance, may require additional monitoring visits as deemed appropriate by the director. Any additional inspections, sampling, surveillance monitoring activities, and analysis performed which detect noncompliance will be billed directly to the user.

I. Enforcement Actions. All expenses in preparing enforcement actions will be billed directly to the user.

J. Medium, high, and very high strength waste fees: in accordance with BMC 13.08.050.

K. Industrial Flow Surcharge. An industrial flow surcharge will be billed to significant industrial users and categorical users based upon the amount of industrial waste flow. The surcharge rate is based on gallons of industrial waste flow. The director may establish new rates by city council resolution based upon the cost of administering the pretreatment program. (Ord. 1799 § 21, 2014; Ord. 1641 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1583 § 20, 2005).


13.04.270 Private wastewater disposal system – Prohibited when.

Except as provided in BMC 13.04.280 through 13.04.310, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. (Ord. 846 Art. II § 3, 1976).


13.04.280 Private wastewater disposal system – Permitted when.

Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provision of BMC 13.04.020, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the regulations of the Skagit County health department. (Ord. 846 Art. III § 1, 1976).


13.04.290 Private wastewater disposal system – Permit required.

Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the county health officer. (Ord. 846 Art. III § 2, 1976).


13.04.300 Private wastewater disposal system – Notice to connect to public system.

At such time as a public sewer, as defined in BMC 13.04.010, becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material; provided, that cement septic tanks with reinforced concrete lids may be exempt from cleaning and filling at owner’s option. (Ord. 846 Art. III § 3, 1976).


13.04.310 Private wastewater disposal system – Maintenance.

The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city in compliance with Skagit County health department regulations. (Ord. 846 Art. III § 4, 1976).


13.04.320 Sewer department supervisor – Right of entry for inspection.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 16, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. VII § 1, 1976).


13.04.330 Sewer department supervisor – Obtaining information – Restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 17, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. VII § 2, 1976).


13.04.340 Sewer department supervisor – Inspection – Safety rules applicable – Liability.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 18, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. VII § 3, 1976).


13.04.350 Sewer department supervisor – Right of entry on easements.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 1302 § 19, 1995; Ord. 846 Art. VII § 4, 1976).


13.04.360 Additional requirements authorized when.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 846 Art. VII § 5, 1976).


13.04.370 Deposit of objectionable materials prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. (Ord. 846 Art. II § 1, 1976).


13.04.380 Discharge to natural outlet prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 846 Art. II § 2, 1976).


13.04.390 Damage of system declared misdemeanor – Penalty.

Repealed by Ord. 1583. (Ord. 846 Art. VI § 1, 1976).


13.04.400 Failure to connect – Penalty.

Any person failing to connect a residential unit to the city sewer system in compliance with BMC 13.04.020 shall pay a penalty to the city in the amount equal to the minimum residential service charge that would be made for sewer service if the property was connected to such system. The minimum service charge will be based on the location of the property whether it is inside the city limits or is located outside of the city limits per BMC 13.08.030 and 13.08.065. All penalties collected shall be considered revenue of the system. (Ord. 1517 § 3, 2003; Ord. 846 Art. VIII § 3, 1976).


13.04.410 Violation – Liability.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any engineering, legal or administrative expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 846 Art. VIII § 4, 1976).


13.04.420 Violation – Notice to be served.

Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except BMC 13.04.020 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a 90-day time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (Ord. 846 Art. VIII § 1, 1976).


13.04.430 Violation – Continuance – Penalty.

Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided for in BMC 13.04.420 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punishable according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 846 Art. VIII § 2, 1976).


13.04.440 Maintenance of disposal system.

It is the duty of all owners and occupants of premises using disposal systems to at all times maintain the same in such a manner as to protect the public health and welfare; and in the event a disposal system fails to function properly although constructed in accordance with this chapter, the same shall be forthwith reconstructed in order to place the same in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 1583 § 41, 2005).


13.04.450 Noncompliance – Nuisance.

Compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter constitutes minimum health, sanitation and safety provisions and material; noncompliance with said terms and conditions constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated as such, in addition to any other criminal, civil and equitable remedies that may be available. (Ord. 1583 §§ 25, 42, 2005).


13.04.460 Confidential information.

A. Presumption of Open Records. In accordance with the Public Records Act (chapter 42.17 RCW) and the provisions of 33 USC 1318, information and data that relate to a discharger that is obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless a discharger specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information and data would divulge processes, methods of production, or information that is entitled to protection as trade secrets. When requested and demonstrated by the discharger as described above, the portions of a report, survey, wastewater discharge permit application, wastewater discharge permit, or monitoring program which might disclose trade secrets shall not be made available for inspection by the public.

B. Violations. During the time that possible violations of this chapter are being investigated by the city, investigation notes, draft orders, worksheets, summaries, and similar documents pertaining to the investigation shall be considered confidential information. Such documents shall be clearly marked, “CONFIDENTIAL,” and shall be maintained as confidential documents to the extent allowed under chapter 42.17 RCW. At the time that an enforcement action, if any, is signed thus designating that enforcement action as final, then the confidential status shall terminate, and the document shall be made available for public inspection.

C. Disclosure Pursuant to Government Programs. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the director from disclosing such information to other officers, employees, or authorized representatives of a governmental agency for uses related to applicable governmental programs including, but not limited to, the NPDES program, and the pretreatment program.

D. Disclosure Pursuant to Enforcement Activities. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the director from disclosing such information to other officers, employees, or authorized representatives of a governmental agency pursuant to enforcement proceedings involving the person or entity furnishing the information. (Ord. 1583 § 25, 2005).


Chapter 13.08 SEWER RATES

Sections:

13.08.010    Definitions.

13.08.020    Established.

13.08.030    Repealed.

13.08.040    Repealed.

13.08.045    Minimum service charge for residential units not connected to the sewer system.

13.08.050    Repealed.

13.08.060    Repealed.

13.08.065    Repealed.

13.08.070    Irrigation season.

13.08.075    Repealed.

13.08.080    Payment – Due date – Delinquency penalty.

13.08.090    Charges deemed lien when – Recordation notice.

13.08.100    Lien foreclosure procedures.

13.08.110    Changes to rates or charges – Council resolution required.


13.08.010 Definitions.

A. “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).

B. “Chargeable water” shall be measured by the water consumed on the premises and which subsequently enters the sanitary sewer system, whatever the source of such water; and the same will be metered either by public utility meter or one installed and maintained by the owner of the premises at his own expense and approved by the city. Where the use of water is such that a portion of all the water used does not flow into the sewer system, but is lost by evaporation, irrigation, sprinkling, or is used in a manufactured product, and the person in control provides proof of this fact and installs a meter or other measuring device approved by the city to measure the amount of water so used and so lost, this water may be deducted from the actual water consumption used in calculating the sewer charge. The sewer charges for residential users during the irrigation season shall be computed on the average consumption during the previous nonirrigation season, unless the user elects to install, at his own expense, an approved measuring device to measure water not entering the sewer system. 

C. “High strength” means wastewater discharged from commercial accounts with Standard Industrial Classification Codes 5812, 5147, 5093, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing a BOD between 700 to 1,050 mg/l or total suspended solids of 700 to 1,050 mg/l.

D. “Low strength” means wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing less than 350 mg/l BOD or less than 350 mg/l total suspended solids.

E. “Medium strength” means wastewater discharged from commercial accounts with Standard Industrial Classification Codes 2051, 5411, or 7833, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing a BOD of 350 to 700 mg/l and less than 700 mg/l total suspended solids, or wastewater discharged to the sewer system containing total suspended solids of 350 to 700 mg/l and BOD less than 700 mg/l.

F. “Total suspended solids (TSS)” means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).

G. “Very high strength” means wastewater discharged to the sewer system in which the average of the BOD and total suspended solids 

	BOD mg/l + TSS mg/l

	2

exceeds 1,050 mg/l. (Ord. 1386 § 2(1), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(1), 1995; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 1, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4, 1947).


13.08.020 Established.

In order to take care of the costs of maintenance and operation, bond and warrant principal and interest, reserve fund requirements, and other costs incidental to the sewer and refuse collection and disposal systems, the sewer rates shall be prescribed pursuant to resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1868 § 1, 2019).


13.08.030 Single-family residences, duplexes and triplexes – Within the city.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1641 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1518 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1386 § 2(2), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(2), 1995; Ord. 1152 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 1, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4(a)(1), 1947).


13.08.040 Residential – Exceptions.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1641 § 4, 2007; Ord. 1518 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1386 § 2(5)(a), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(5)(a), 1995; Ord. 1152 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 1, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4(b)(1), 1947).


13.08.045 Minimum service charge for residential units not connected to the sewer system.

Any person failing to connect his or her residential unit to the city sewer system in compliance with BMC 13.04.020 and 13.04.400 shall pay a penalty to the city in an amount equal to the minimum charge that would be made for sewer service if the residential property was connected to such system. All penalties collected shall be considered revenue of the system. The minimum service charge will be based on the location of the residential property whether it is inside the city limits or is located outside of the city limits per BMC 13.08.065. (Ord. 1868 § 1, 2019).


13.08.050 Commercial accounts and residential accounts containing more than three living units – Inside city limits.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1844, 2017; Ord. 1641 § 5, 2007; Ord. 1518 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1386 § 2(3), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(3), 1995; Ord. 1152 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 1, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4(a)(2), 1947).


13.08.060 Commercial – Exceptions.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1641 § 6, 2007; Ord. 1518 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1386 § 2(5)(b), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(5)(b), 1995; Ord. 1152 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 1, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4(b)(2), 1947).


13.08.065 Service outside city limits – Rates.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1386 § 2(4), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(4), 1995).


13.08.070 Irrigation season.

The sewer charges for residential users during the irrigation season shall be computed on the average consumption during the previous nonirrigation season, unless the user elects to install, at his own expense, an approved measuring device to measure water not entering the sewer system. When a user has a swimming pool or an air conditioner discharging to the storm sewer, he must install an approved meter to determine the amount of water exempt from sewer charges during the irrigation season. The irrigation season shall be defined as the period of May through October. (Ord. 1152 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1119 § 2, 1988; Ord. 1061 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1009 § 2, 1982; Ord. 451 § 4, 1947).


13.08.075 Annual rate review.

Repealed by Ord. 1868. (Ord. 1386 § 2(6), 1999; Ord. 1305 § 2(6), 1995).


13.08.080 Payment – Due date – Delinquency penalty.

All of the foregoing charges for sewerage services and those hereafter fixed by the council shall be paid on or before the fifteenth of the month after the date of billing and if not so paid, interest shall be charged against each delinquent account at a rate of eight percent per annum. (Ord. 1844, 2017; Ord. 1836 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1182 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1163 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1064 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1062 § 4, 1985; Ord. 451 § 6, 1947).


13.08.090 Charges deemed lien when – Recordation notice.

All delinquent and unpaid rates and charges, including interest and penalty thereon for sewerage service, shall be a lien against the premises to which the same has been furnished, and the rate of interest on such delinquency is fixed at 10 percent. Such lien shall be effective for a total of not to exceed six months’ delinquent charges without the necessity of any writing or recording, but if the lien is for more than six months’ charges, the city clerk-treasurer or official charged with the administration of the affairs of such utility shall cause to be filed for record in the office of the county auditor of Skagit County a notice in substantially the following form:

Sewerage Lien Notice

City of Burlington, Wash.,_________     –VS –  ________________, Reputed owner,

Notice is hereby given that the city of Burlington has and claims a lien for sewer charges against the following described premises, situated in Skagit County, Washington, to-wit:

(Legal description)

Said lien is claimed for not exceeding six months such charges and interest now delinquent, amounting to $____, and is also claimed for future sewerage charges against said premises.

Dated_______

City of Burlington By_______________

(Ord. 451 § 1, 1947).


13.08.100 Lien foreclosure procedures.

The lien described in BMC 13.08.090 may be foreclosed and any of the tracts or premises subject to said lien proceeded against and all parties of record as owning or claiming to own, having or claiming to have, any interest in, or lien upon said tracts or premises shall be made defendants thereto, together with all parties personally liable for any charges involved, including court costs, interest and attorney’s fees, all as provided in Chapter No. 193 of the Session Laws of the State of Washington, 1941, as amended. (Ord. 451 § 8, 1947).


13.08.110 Changes to rates or charges – Council resolution required.

The council of the city may, from time to time as necessity therefor arises, change any of the rates and charges set forth in this chapter, or fix rates and charges for sewerage service by resolution, for all classes of buildings, structures and properties not provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 451 § 5, 1947).


Chapter 13.12 SEPTIC TANK SLUDGE

Sections:

13.12.010    Dumping into sewers – Prohibited – Exception.

13.12.020    Dumping into sewers – Permitted when.

13.12.030    Violation – Penalty.


13.12.010 Dumping into sewers – Prohibited – Exception.

It is unlawful for any person to dump or pour sludge from septic tanks into the city sewer of the city except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 597 § 1, 1962).


13.12.020 Dumping into sewers – Permitted when.

Any person residing in the city and having a septic tank inside the city limits of the city may, upon application signed by himself to the city clerk-treasurer dump sludge from his septic tank inside the city limits of the city into the city sewer at times and places to be designated by the city supervisor. (Ord. 597 § 2, 1962).


13.12.030 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails to comply therewith is severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable according to the provisions of chapter 1.24 BMC. (Ord. 597 § 3, 1962).


Title 14 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS1

Chapters:

14.01    General Provisions

14.05    Surface Water Management

14.10    Environmental Policy

14.15    Critical Area Regulations1

Prior legislation: Ords. 1273, 1330, 1441, 1471, 1636, 1640, 1681, 1708, 1709, 1799 and 1839. 


Chapter 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

14.01.010    Title.

14.01.020    Application.

14.01.030    Purpose.

14.01.040    Authority.

14.01.050    Adoption by reference.

14.01.060    Definitions.

14.01.070    Liability.

14.01.080    Minimum requirements.

14.01.090    Violations and penalties.

14.01.100    Appeal.

14.01.110    Severability.


14.01.010 Title.

This title shall be called “Environmental Regulations.” This chapter shall be called “General Provisions.” (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.020 Application.

This title shall be applicable as is set forth in the following chapters. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to include all regulations concerning the protection of the environment and critical areas. The specific chapters included are General Provisions, Surface Water Management, Environmental Policy, and Critical Area Regulations. The shoreline master program is adopted separately as BMC Title 18, Shoreline Master Program. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.040 Authority.

This title is authorized by the general provisions of chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW, the specific authority set forth in each chapter and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.050 Adoption by reference.

Statutes, codes or regulations identified or adopted herein shall be the existing version of that statute, code or regulation and any subsequent amendment to the same, unless expressly stated otherwise. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.060 Definitions.

For the purpose of this title, the words listed in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms relating to pollutants and to hazardous wastes, materials, and substances, where not defined in this title, shall be as defined in chapters 173-303 and 173-340 WAC, the Uniform Building Code or the Uniform Fire Code. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.

Additional defined terms applicable to chapter 14.10, Environmental Policy, can be found in that chapter or adopted WAC provisions found at WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799.

“A”

“Agency” means any governmental entity or its subdivision.

“AKART” means all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. See also the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010 and 90.48.520.

“Aquifer recharge areas, critical” refers to areas where an aquifer that is a source of drinking water is vulnerable to contamination that would affect the potability of water.

“B”

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level on all sides).

“Basin plan” means a plan to manage the quality and quantity of storm water in a drainage basin as described in the city of Burlington comprehensive surface water management plan, as now or hereafter amended.

“Best management practice (BMP)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, structural or managerial practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

Nonstructural best management practices are those which require modified or additional operational or behavioral practices, such as sweeping a parking lot or having spill response equipment on site.

Structural best management practices are those which require the construction of a structure or other physical modification on the site.

“Buffer, critical area” is an area which provides a reasonable margin of safety through protection of slope stability, attenuation of surface water flows and landslide hazards reasonably necessary to minimize risk to the public from loss of life or well-being or property damage resulting from natural disasters; or an area which is an integral part of a stream or wetland ecosystem and which provides shading, input of organic debris and coarse sediments, room for variation in stream or wetland boundaries, habitat for wildlife, and protection from harmful intrusion necessary to protect the public from losses suffered when the functions and values of aquatic resources are degraded.

“C”

“Cause or contribute” to a violation includes acts or omissions that create a violation, that increase the duration, extent, or severity of a violation, and that aid or abet a violation.

“Certificate of occupancy” means a written document issued by the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that, in the opinion of the building official, the project has been completed in accordance with the building and zoning codes. This document gives the owner permission from the authorities to occupy and use the premises for the intended purpose.

“City engineer” means the Burlington director of public works.

“Civil engineer, licensed” means a person who is licensed by the state of Washington to practice civil engineering.

“Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

“Combined sewer” means a system that collects sanitary sewage and storm water in a single sewer system.

“Community development director” means the city administrator or designee.

“Compensatory mitigation” is replacing project-induced critical area losses or impacts, and includes, but is not limited to, restoration, creation, or enhancement.

“Complete application” or “completed application” means an application that contains all of the materials and information required by Burlington Municipal Code in accordance with the requirements of this title.

“Critical areas” include the following areas and ecosystems:

1. Wetlands;

2. Areas with a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water;

3. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

4. Frequently flooded areas; and

5. Geologically hazardous areas.

“Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

“D”

“Damages” means monetary compensation for harm, loss, costs, or expenses incurred by the city including, but not limited to, costs of abating violations of this title or public nuisances; fines or penalties by the city incurred as a result of a violation of this title; and costs to repair or clean the public drainage control system as a result of a violation. For the purposes of this title, it does not include compensation to any person other than the city.

“Delineation” is the precise determination of wetland boundaries in the field according to the application of specific methodology as described in the most recently adopted Washington State Wetlands Identification and Delineation Manual, Washington State Department of Ecology Publication.

“Design storm” means a rainfall event used in the analysis and design of drainage facilities.

“Designated receiving waters” means the Skagit River, Padilla Bay and other receiving waters designated by the public works director as having the capacity to receive drainage discharges.

“Detention” refers to temporary storage of drainage water.

“Developed parcel” means a parcel of real property which has been altered by developmental coverage.

“Development” means any manmade change to the land or improvements occurring after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter including structures, mining, dredging, drilling, filling, grading, paving or excavation, storage of equipment and materials, and excluding the removal of vegetation; provided, that development located within the area of special flood hazard includes removal of substantial amounts of vegetation, or alteration of natural site characteristics. Where a project is dividable into parts, the entire scope of such changes or improvements constituting an integral, functional project should be considered the development for purposes of determining whether such development is allowed or requires a permit.

“Developmental coverage” means all areas within a site planned to be developed or redeveloped including, but not limited to, rooftops; driveways; carports; accessory buildings; parking areas; areas in which soils, slopes and vegetation have been altered; and roadways and other pervious and impervious surfaces.

“Director” means the community development director.

“Discharge point” means the location to which drainage water from a specific site is released.

“Discharge rate” means the rate at which drainage water is released from a specific site. The discharge rate is expressed as volume per unit of time, such as cubic feet per second.

“Drainage basin” means the tributary area through which drainage water is collected, regulated, transported, and discharged to receiving waters.

“Drainage control” means the management of drainage water. Drainage control is accomplished through the collection, conveyance, and discharge of drainage water, controlling the rate of discharge from a site, or separating, treating or preventing the introduction of pollutants.

“Drainage control facility” means any facility, including best management practices, installed or constructed for the purpose of controlling the flow, quantity, and/or quality of drainage water. Drainage control facilities include, but are not limited to, all types of catch basins, pipes, detention/retention ponds, bioswales, and other structural and nonstructural components that handle surface water.

“Drainage control plan” means a plan for collecting, controlling, transporting and disposing of drainage water falling upon, entering, flowing within, and exiting the site, including designs for drainage control facilities. The plan shall contain information as set forth in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.

“Drainage control system” means a system to collect, convey and control release of only drainage water. The system may serve public or private property. It includes constructed and/or natural components such as ditches, culverts, streams and drainage control facilities.

“Drainage water” means storm water, snow melt, surface water, surface and irrigation runoff, water from footing drains and other drains approved by the public works director or installed in compliance with this title and rules which may be adopted hereunder. Other water which is not an illicit discharge as defined in BMC 14.05.070 shall be considered drainage water if it drains from the exterior of a building or structure, a pervious or impervious surface, or undeveloped land, or by surface or shallow subsurface flow.

“Dredging” means the excavating of earth materials from land covered by water. The term shall include dredging which maintains an established water depth.

“E”

“Equivalent service unit” means a configuration of impervious surface estimated to contribute an amount of runoff to the city’s surface water management system which is approximately equal to that created by the average single-family residential developed parcel in Burlington. One equivalent service unit (ESU) is equivalent to 2,400 square feet of impervious surface area. For purposes of computation of rates, the number of equivalent service unit shall be rounded to the nearest tenth.

“Erosion” means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of mass wasting or the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

“F”

“FEMA” means the Federal Emergency Management Agency and its predecessor and successor agencies.

“Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas” is as defined in the critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC.

“Flood fringe” means those portions of the floodplain other than floodways and special flood risk zones.

“Flood prone area” is as defined in the critical areas code, BMC 14.15.390.

“Floodplain” or “frequently flooded areas” are lands subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, which means all lands that would be covered by the 100-year flood (A zones), together with all B zones, as established by FEMA in the “Flood Insurance Study, City of Burlington,” dated July 3, 1984, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated January 3, 1985. That document is on file at Burlington City Hall, 833 South Spruce Street.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Floodways in Burlington consist of all areas riverward of the riverward toe of dikes and levees along the Skagit River.

“G”

“Geologically hazardous areas” are areas that, because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geological events, are not suited to siting commercial, residential, or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.

“Ground water” means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of the land or below a surface water body.

“H”

“Habitats of local importance” include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a given species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. These might include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These might also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alteration, such as cliffs, talus, and wetlands.

“Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

“Hearing examiner” means a person who reviews and interprets land use regulations, conducts hearings, makes decisions and recommendations on land use applications, hears administrative appeals on permits, decisions or determinations made by city officials, and reviews and hears other matters.

The hearing examiner serves in a role similar to that of a judge. The hearing examiner ensures that parties receive proper due process; and issues final decisions on some land use applications and makes recommendations to the city council on others. The hearing examiner for the city of Burlington shall be the person designated under chapter 17.120 BMC.

“Hyperchlorinated” means water that contains more than 10 milligrams per liter of chlorine.

“I”

“Illicit connection” means any manmade conveyance that is connected to a municipal separate storm sewer without a permit, excluding roof drains, footing drains, and other similar type connections that convey any material not composed entirely of storm water. Examples of illicit connections include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the municipal separate storm sewer system.

“Illicit discharge” means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the city’s storm drain system as expressly defined by BMC 14.05.070.

“Impervious surface” means any surface from which most water runs off including, but not limited to, paved streets, graveled or paved areas such as driveways, parking areas, packed earth material, oiled macadam or other treated surfaces, walkways, roof surfaces, patios and formal planters.

“Inspector” means the city inspector, inspection agency, or licensed civil engineer performing the inspection work required by this title.

“L”

“Land disturbing activity” means any activity that results in a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) or the existing topography. Land disturbing activities include but are not limited to demolition, clearing, grading, filling and excavation.

“Land use action” means an action taken by the appropriate city of Burlington review authority concerning the development or use of land or street right-of-way including project permits as defined in BMC 14A.01.060.

“Low impact development” or “LID” means a storm water and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation, and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed storm water management practices that are integrated into a project design. Low impact development features, practices, and techniques include bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated or green roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title found in BMC 14.15.400(G)(6).

“M”

“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling unit built in accordance with regulations adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and RCW 43.22.335. This term includes modular homes as defined in this chapter but does not include mobile homes. This term also does not include recreational vehicles, park models, trailers, and other similar vehicles which are licensed for use on public roads, capable of being licensed for use on public roads, or designed and constructed to be licensed for use on public roads. Only structures which are certified by the state of Washington or federal government for use as a permanent habitable dwelling are included in this definition.

“Manufactured home park” means an area of land occupied or designed for the occupancy of two or more manufactured homes.

“Mean sea level” means the average height of the sea for all stages of tide; also equals National Geodetic Vertical Datum.

“Mobile home” means a factory built dwelling unit that does not meet current state or federal standards for factory built dwellings, modular homes, or manufactured homes. This definition does not include manufactured or modular homes as defined in this chapter or site built homes constructed in accordance with city building code requirements. Mobile homes may not be placed within the city of Burlington; however, existing legally established mobile homes shall be considered a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the nonconforming standards set forth in chapter 17.100 BMC.

“Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains): (1) owned or operated by the city of Burlington; (2) designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).

“N”

“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permit” means a permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (or by the Washington Department of Ecology under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.

“New development” means any of the following activities:

1. Structural development, including construction of a new building or other structure;

2. Expansion or alteration of an existing structure that results in an increase in the footprint of the building or structure;

3. Land disturbing activities;

4. Creation or expansion of impervious surface;

5. Demolition;

6. Subdivision and short subdivision of land as defined in BMC Title 16, Subdivisions; or

7. Class IV general forest practices, as defined in WAC 222-16-050, that are conversions from timber land to other uses.

No other forest practices or commercial agriculture are considered new development.

“Non-storm water discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.

“NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the national program for controlling discharges under the Federal Clean Water Act.

“O”

“One-hundred-year flood” means that flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as established by FEMA.

“Owner” means any person having title to and/or responsibility for a building or property, including a lessee, guardian, receiver or trustee and the owner’s duly authorized agent.

“P”

“Parcel” means the smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which constitutes a separate lot or tract capable of being conveyed without further subdivision.

“Party of record” means all persons, agencies or organizations who have submitted written comments in response to a notice of application, made oral comments in a formal public hearing conducted on the application, or requested in writing to be a “party of record.” In all cases the permit applicant and property owner shall be considered parties of record. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no person shall be a party of record who has not furnished an accurate post office mailing address.

“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, and government, and the individual’s or entity’s heirs, successors and assigns.

“Plan” means, for the purposes of this title, and unless a different meaning is set forth or clearly required, a graphic or schematic representation with accompanying notes, schedules, specifications and other related documents.

“Plot plan” is a scaled map of a site and adjacent public rights-of-way showing locations and dimensions of various existing and proposed features, such as buildings, curbs, driveways, sidewalks, trees, grades and drainage patterns.

“Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

“POTW” or “publicly owned treatment works” means any device or system used in treatment of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is publicly owned.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

“Primary drainage system” means a drainage system serving a watershed of 20 acres or greater.

“Private storm drain” means the part of a private drainage control system which is wholly or partially piped, is owned or operated by a private entity, and is designed to carry only drainage water.

“Project permit” means a land use action subject to the provisions of chapter 36.70B RCW and applicable provisions of BMC Title 14A, and as defined in BMC 14A.01.060.

“Public drainage control system” means a drainage control system owned or used by the city of Burlington serving city streets and adjacent property.

“Public facilities” includes streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, parks and recreation facilities, and schools.

“Public services” include fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, recreation, environmental protection, and other governmental services.

“Public storm drain” means the part of a public drainage control system which is wholly or partially piped, is owned or operated by a public entity, and is designed to carry only drainage water.

“Public works director” means the director of public works or designee.

“Q”

“Qualified expert” means a person having substantial demonstrated experience as a practicing specialist and who has a degree in a related field from an accredited college or university or who has equivalent training.

“R”

“Redevelopment” means, on a site that is already substantially developed (i.e., has 35 percent or more of existing impervious surface coverage), the creation or addition of impervious surfaces; the expansion of a building footprint or addition or replacement of a structure; structural development including construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure; replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities.

“Residential health care facilities” means facilities caring for elderly or infirm persons wherein clients are partly or entirely residents or detainees thereof. They include hospitals, convalescent homes and homes for the elderly where some supervision or health care is provided.

“Responsible party” means all of the following persons: (1) owners and occupants of property within the city of Burlington; and (2) any person causing or contributing to a violation of the provisions of this title.

“Riparian corridor” is as defined in the critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC.

“Rules” means administrative rules promulgated by the public works director in accordance with the State Administrative Procedures Act.

“S”

“Secondary drainage system” means a drainage system serving a watershed less than 20 acres in size or a watershed with a runoff of three cubic feet per second or less for a storm with a five-year frequency.

“Seismic hazard areas” are areas subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction. The city of Burlington is located in Seismic Zone 3 and construction is required to comply with the International Building Code seismic standards.

“Serve” or “service,” when used regarding a document, means the procedures set forth in BMC 1.34.040 and 1.44.060.

“Service drain” means a privately owned and maintained drainage control facility or system which carries only drainage water. Service drains include, but are not limited to, conveyance pipes, catch basin connections, downspout connections, pipes, and subsurface drain connections.

“Shoreline district” means all land regulated by the Shorelines Management Act of 1971 (chapter 90.58 RCW). See BMC Title 18, Shoreline Master Program.

“Single-family residential parcel” means a parcel which has been actually developed with a single-family residence.

“Site” means any lot, parcel of land, street or highway right-of-way, or contiguous combination thereof, where a permit for new development, redevelopment, land disturbing activity, or grading has been issued or where any such work is proposed or performed.

“Special flood risk zone” means a zone of high flood risk consisting of those areas of the floodplain described as follows:

1. Those areas in Gages Slough having a ground elevation which is three feet or more below the 100-year floodplain elevation and having alignment with other such areas along Gages Slough to allow passage of floodwaters; and

2. Lying within 300 feet of the landward toe of dikes and levees along the Skagit River, excluding floodways.

“Species of local importance” are those species that are of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation or that are game species.

“Standard design” is a design approved by the Burlington public works department for drainage and erosion control for a typical site.

“Steep slope areas” are areas with slopes greater than 15 percent.

Storm Drain. See “private storm drain,” “public storm drain” and “service drain.”

“Storm drainage system” means publicly owned facilities, including the city’s municipal separate storm sewer system, by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.

“Storm water” means runoff during and following precipitation and snowmelt events, including surface runoff and drainage.

“Storm water pollution prevention plan” means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a premises and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. The plan shall contain elements as set forth in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building or mobile home, or gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1. Before the improvement is started; or

2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

This term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a structure listed in the National or State Register of Historic Places.

“U”

“Uncontaminated” means, for the purposes of this title, not containing sediment or other pollutants or contaminates above natural background levels when referring to surface or ground water, and not containing pollutants or contaminants in levels greater than city-supplied drinking water when referring to potable water.

“Undeveloped parcel” means any parcel of real property which has not been altered by grading or filling of the ground surface, or by construction of any improvement or other impervious surface area which affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.

“Urban growth” refers to growth that makes intensive use of land for the location of buildings, structures, and impermeable surfaces to such a degree as to be incompatible with the primary use of such land for the production of food, other agricultural produce, or fiber, or the extraction of mineral resources. When allowed to spread over wide areas, urban growth typically requires urban governmental services. “Characterized by urban growth” refers to land having urban growth located on it, or to land located in relationship to an area with urban growth on it as to be appropriate for urban growth.

“W”

“Watercourse” means the route, constructed or formed by humans or by natural processes, generally consisting of a channel with bed, banks, or sides, in which surface waters flow, including lakes, bogs, streams, sloughs, and intermittent artificial components (including ditches and culverts) but not including receiving waters.

“Wetland” or “wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities. However, wetlands may include these artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands, if permitted by the city. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.070 Liability.

It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of compliance upon the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title. Nothing contained in this title is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title, to comply with the provisions of this title, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents. This title is not intended to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by its terms. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.080 Minimum requirements.

The requirements of this title are minimum requirements. They do not replace, repeal, abrogate, supersede or affect any other more stringent requirements, rules, regulations, covenants, standards, or restrictions. Where this title imposes requirements which are more protective of human health or the environment than those set forth elsewhere, the provisions of this title shall prevail.

Approvals and permits granted under this title are not waivers of the requirements of any other laws. Compliance is still required with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including rules promulgated under authority of this title. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.090 Violations and penalties.

All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or omissions that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title, are hereby determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or omissions shall be subject to fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC, criminal penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.100 Appeal.

Decisions made pursuant to this title are appealed in the manner set forth in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.01.110 Severability.

If any portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 14.05 SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT

Sections:

14.05.010    Title.

14.05.020    Application.

14.05.030    Purpose.

14.05.040    Authority.

14.05.050    Authority of the public works director/city engineer.

Part I. Storm Water, Drainage and Erosion Control

14.05.060    Scope.

14.05.070    Prohibited discharges.

14.05.080    Requirements for existing discharges and land uses.

14.05.090    Storm water, drainage, and erosion control requirements.

14.05.100    Scope of drainage control review and application requirements.

14.05.110    Drainage control plan registry.

14.05.120    Installation of drainage control facilities.

14.05.130    Modifications of drainage control facilities during construction.

Part II. Storm Water and Surface Water Inspection and Maintenance

14.05.140    Scope.

14.05.150    Compliance.

14.05.160    Responsibility for inspection and maintenance.

14.05.170    Inspection program.

14.05.180    Entry for inspection and abatement purposes.

14.05.190    Disposal of waste from maintenance activities.

14.05.200    Records of installation and maintenance activities.

14.05.210    Exceptions to requirements.

Part III. Public Storm Sewers

14.05.220    Plans required.

14.05.230    Design criteria.

14.05.240    Storm sewer permits required.

14.05.250    Fees.

14.05.260    Financial assurance and covenants.

14.05.270    Date of initial enforcement.


14.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Surface Water Management.” (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.020 Application.

This chapter applies to:

A. All grading, drainage, and erosion control, whether or not a permit is required; and

B. All new development, redevelopment, land disturbing activities, and construction sites, whether or not a permit is required; and

C. All new and existing discharges directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system; and

D. All new and existing land uses. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.030 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its remedial purposes, which are:

A. To protect, to the greatest extent practical, life, property and the environment from loss, injury and damage by pollution, erosion, flooding, landslides, strong ground motion, soil liquefaction, accelerated soil creep, settlement and subsidence, and other potential hazards whether from natural causes or from human activity;

B. To protect the public interest in drainage and related functions of drainage basins, watercourses and shoreline areas;

C. To protect surface waters, ground waters and other receiving waters from pollution, mechanical damage, excessive flows and other conditions in their drainage basins which will increase the rate of downcutting, streambank erosion, and/or the degree of turbidity, siltation and other forms of pollution, or which will reduce their low flows or low levels to levels which degrade the environment, reduce recharging and ground water, or endanger aquatic and benthic life within these surface waters and receiving waters of the state;

D. To meet the requirements of state and federal law and comply with regulatory standards for the city’s municipal storm water; and

E. To fulfill the responsibilities of the city as trustee of the environment for future generations. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.040 Authority.

This chapter is authorized by the provisions of chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW, the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.050 Authority of the public works director/city engineer.

A. The public works director is authorized to issue, monitor, stop work or require modifications of storm water permits and inspections for the construction, capping, alterations, or repairs of privately owned and operated drainage control systems as more specifically set forth in BMC 14.05.120; require modification of drainage control facilities and associated project designs during construction and approve and file approved drainage control plans as more specifically set forth in BMC 14.05.130; and accept and approve when appropriate storm sewer permits for the construction or alteration of all storm water systems as more specifically set forth in BMC 14.05.240. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.

B. The public works director is authorized to take actions necessary to implement the provisions and purposes of this title in their respective spheres of authority, including, but not limited to: promulgating and amending rules and regulations, which may include prescribing best management practices (“BMPs”); establishing and conducting inspection programs; establishing and conducting or, as set forth in BMC 14.05.070, requiring responsible parties to conduct monitoring programs, which may include sampling of discharges to or from drainage control facilities, the public drainage control system, or surface water; taking enforcement action; abating nuisances; promulgating guidance and policy documents under this title. The public works director shall also have the authority to review and approve or disapprove required submittals and applications for approvals and permits as set forth in this title. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency as designated by the public works director.

The public works director is further authorized to develop drainage basin plans for managing surface water, drainage water, and erosion within individual subbasins. Compliance with an adopted drainage basin plan may, when approved by the public works director, modify requirements of this title, provided the level of protection for human health, safety, and welfare, the environment, and public or private property will equal or exceed that which would otherwise be achieved. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

Part I. Storm Water, Drainage and Erosion Control


14.05.060 Scope.

BMC 14.05.060 through 14.05.130 are applicable to:

A. General. All new and existing discharges subject to this title as set forth in BMC 14.05.030, all land uses and all new development, redevelopment, and grading shall comply with all requirements of this title unless explicitly exempted by this title or exempted by the public works director pursuant to the authority granted in BMC 14.05.050 and as specifically set forth in this chapter.

B. Exemptions. The following land uses are exempt from the provisions of this title.

1. Commercial agriculture, including only those activities conducted on lands defined in RCW 84.34.020(2), and production of crops or livestock for wholesale trade;

2. Forest practices regulated under WAC Title 222, except for Class IV general forest practices, as defined in WAC 222-16-050, that are conversions from timber land to other uses;

3. Development undertaken by the Washington State Department of Transportation in state highway right-of-way that complies with the standards found in chapter 173-270 WAC, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program; and

4. Any additional exemptions as set forth in Appendix 1, Minimum Technical Requirements for New Development and Redevelopment, of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.070 Prohibited discharges.

A. Storm Water Discharges to Sanitary and Combined Sewers. In consultation with the local sewage treatment agency, the public works director may approve discharges of storm water to a public combined sewer or sanitary sewer if other methods of controlling pollutants in the discharge are not adequate or reasonable, and the discharging party certifies that the discharge will not harm the environment and will not overburden or otherwise harm the public combined sewer or sanitary sewer systems. The public works director shall condition approval of such a discharge on compliance with local pretreatment regulations.

B. Discharges Prohibited to Public Drainage Control Systems. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants other than storm water. It is unlawful to make illicit discharges, as defined in subsection (C) of this section, either directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system.

C. Illicit Discharges Defined. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, all discharges which are not composed entirely of storm water are illicit discharges, as defined in BMC 14.01.060.

The following is a partial list, provided for informational purposes only, of common substances which are illicit discharges when allowed to enter a public drainage control system:

1. Trash or debris.

2. Construction materials.

3. Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil, and heating oil.

4. Antifreeze and other automotive products.

5. Metals in either particulate or dissolved form.

6. Flammable or explosive materials.

7. Radioactive material.

8. Batteries.

9. Acids, alkalis or bases.

10. Paints, stains, resins, lacquers or varnishes.

11. Degreasers and solvents.

12. Drain cleaners.

13. Pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers.

14. Steam cleaning wastes.

15. Soaps, detergents or ammonia.

16. Swimming pool backwash.

17. Chlorine, bromine and other disinfectants.

18. Heated water.

19. Domestic animal wastes.

20. Sewage.

21. Recreational vehicle waste.

22. Animal carcasses.

23. Food wastes.

24. Bark and other fibrous materials.

25. Collected lawn clippings, leaves, or branches.

26. Silt, sediment or gravel.

27. Dyes.

28. Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water.

29. Washing of fresh concrete for cleaning and/or finishing purposes or to expose aggregates.

30. Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this section.

31. Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.

D. Allowable Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the public works director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

1. Diverted stream flows.

2. Rising ground water.

3. Uncontaminated ground water infiltration.

4. Uncontaminated pumped ground water.

5. Foundation drains.

6. Air conditioning condensation.

7. Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban storm water.

8. Springs.

9. Water from crawlspace pumps.

10. Footing drains.

11. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.

12. Non-storm water discharges authorized by another NPDES or state waste discharge permit.

13. Discharges from emergency firefighting activities.

E. Conditional Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter if they meet the stated conditions, or unless the public works director determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

1. Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyperchlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the storm water system;

2. Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff is permitted but shall be minimized;

3. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges. These discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted if necessary, and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the storm water system. Discharges shall be thermally controlled to prevent an increase in temperature of the receiving water;

4. Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down that does not use detergents are permitted if the amount of street wash and dust control water used is minimized. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street;

5. Other non-storm water discharges. The discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed and approved by the city, which addresses control of such discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface or ground water.

F. Testing for Illicit Discharges. When the public works director has reason to believe that any discharge is an illicit discharge, the public works director or designee may sample and analyze the discharge and recover the costs from a responsible party in an enforcement proceeding. When the discharge is likely to contain illicit discharges on a recurring basis, the public works director may conduct, or may require the responsible party to conduct, ongoing monitoring at the responsible party’s expense.

G. Illicit Connections Prohibited. Any connection identified by the public works director that could convey anything not composed entirely of surface and storm water directly to surface and storm water or ground water is considered an illicit connection. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.080 Requirements for existing discharges and land uses.

A. General. For all existing discharges directly or indirectly to a public drainage control system, responsible parties shall implement and maintain nonstructural best management practices as specified in rules promulgated by the public works director. Nonstructural best management practices shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and source control housekeeping practices such as cleaning of catch basins and detention facilities, sweeping of parking lots, storing oil barrels and other contaminant sources out of the rain, covering material stockpiles, and proper use and storage of hazardous materials.

If the public works director or designee determines that discharges from a drainage facility are causing or contributing to a water quality problem, such as discharges that cannot be adequately addressed by nonstructural best management practices, including, but not limited to, areas with recurrent spills such as discharges from vehicle maintenance shops or gas stations, then the director may require the responsible party to undertake more stringent or additional best management practices. These best management practices may include structural best management practices or other action necessary to cease causing or contributing to the water quality problem. Structural best management practices include but shall not be limited to constructed facilities such as detention tanks, wet ponds, oil/water separators, grassed swales, roofing and berming of container storage areas, and revised piping systems.

B. Spill Prevention Required. All responsible parties shall take measures to prevent spills or other accidental introduction of illicit discharges into a public drainage control system. Such measures shall include:

1. Establishment and implementation of plans and procedures to prevent spills and other accidental releases of materials that may contaminate storm water;

2. Implementation of procedures for immediate containment and other appropriate action regarding spills and other accidental releases to prevent contamination of storm water; and

3. Provision of necessary containment and response equipment on site, and training of personnel regarding the procedures and equipment to be used.

The provisions of this subsection may be satisfied by a storm water pollution prevention plan prepared in compliance with the NPDES industrial storm water permit for the site.

The responsible parties shall make the plans and procedures required by this subsection available to the public works director or designee when requested.

C. Release Notification Requirements. A responsible party must, at the earliest possible time, but in any case within 24 hours of discovery, report to the public works department a spill, release, dumping, or other situation that has contributed or is likely to contribute pollutants to a public drainage control system. This reporting requirement is in addition to, and not instead of, any other reporting requirements under federal, state or local laws.

D. Natural Drainage Patterns. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained.

E. Obstruction of Watercourses. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, sediment, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. Watercourses shall not be obstructed. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.090 Storm water, drainage, and erosion control requirements.

A. Stormwater Management Manual Adopted. The city of Burlington hereby adopts as a technical reference manual, hereafter referred to as the “storm water manual,” the 2014 State Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington, as amended by Sections 1 through 6 of Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, August 1, 2013, modified January 16, 2015, as now or hereafter amended. The city hereby further adopts the thresholds, definitions, minimum requirements, and exceptions, adjustments and variance criteria found in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit as the city of Burlington’s minimum storm water regulations.

B. Thresholds for Minimum Technical Requirements for Storm Water Control.

1. All new development, redevelopment, and construction sites, regardless of type and regardless of whether or not a permit is required, that meet or exceed the threshold conditions set forth in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit must comply with the minimum technical requirements of said Appendix 1, including the mandatory incorporated provisions of the 2014 Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.

2. The city of Burlington requires that all projects, even those that result in land disturbance of less than one acre, adhere to the minimum requirements for erosion and storm water control set forth in Appendix 1 and Appendix 7 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.

3. For those projects meeting the review thresholds set forth in this section, the applicant shall submit a site assessment and analysis along with a drainage control plan or storm water site plan pursuant to requirements in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.

4. The city of Burlington allows applications for an erosivity waiver as specified in Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit.

C. Standards and Definitions. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all standards, definitions, and requirements shall be in accordance with the storm water manual.

D. Flood Prone Areas. Sites within flood prone areas must employ measures to minimize the potential for flooding on the site and for the project to increase the risk of floods on adjacent or nearby properties. Flood control measures shall include those set forth in other titles of the Burlington Municipal Code and rules promulgated thereunder, including but not limited to the critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC, and in rules promulgated by the public works director to meet the purposes of this subsection.

E. Natural Drainage Patterns. Natural drainage patterns shall be maintained.

F. Obstruction of Watercourses. Watercourses shall not be obstructed.

G. Low Impact Development. The city requires a site analysis and technical evaluation to ensure that all sites meeting the minimum qualifications shall utilize low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs), as an alternative to conventional storm water management systems that rely on detention ponds and closed conveyances, when such measures are feasible. Low impact development is intended to manage runoff close to the source of generation and to mimic predeveloped hydrologic condition of a site. Low impact development is accomplished through minimizing the impervious surface coverage and loss of vegetation and by managing runoff through dispersion, infiltration, evapotranspiration, or a combination of these approaches. Use of LID BMPs may reduce or eliminate the need for conventional detention facilities but does not remove the obligation to comply with the minimum requirements of the storm water manual. A variety of BMPs to minimize impervious surfaces and to manage storm water have been developed and tested for use in Western Washington. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.100 Scope of drainage control review and application requirements.

A. Scope of Review. Where drainage and approval are required by BMC 14.05.090, the scope of this review shall at least include the following:

1. Applications for Building and Other Permits. The public works director shall review any application for a building permit or other permit, other than land use permit applications, for compliance with BMC 14.05.090 and to determine whether improvements to the public drainage control system shall be required.

2. The public works director shall review all storm water plans for proposed development activities in accordance with the site planning process and best management practice selection and design criteria as set forth in the storm water manual.

B. Application and Approval Requirements. Drainage control plans for projects subject to review under BMC 14.05.090 shall be reviewed by the public works director or designee. The public works director or designee may approve those plans which comply with the provisions of this title and rules promulgated hereunder, and may place conditions upon the approval in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this title. Submission of the required drainage control application information shall be a condition precedent to the processing of any of the above-listed permits. Approval of drainage control shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any of the above-listed permits. A storm sewer permit shall be issued to construct on-site and off-site drainage control facilities based on the approved plans. See BMC 14.05.240, Storm sewer permits required.

The public works director may disapprove plans which do not comply with the provisions of this title and rules promulgated hereunder. Disapproved plans shall be returned to the applicant, who may correct and resubmit the plans.

C. Submittal Requirements.

1. Applications shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with provisions of this section, with this chapter (public storm sewers) and with associated rules and regulations adopted by the public works director.

2. The public works director or designee may require additional information necessary to adequately evaluate applications for compliance with the requirements and purposes of this title and other laws and regulations, including the critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC. The public works director or designee may also require appropriate information about adjoining properties which may be related to, or affected by, the drainage control proposal in order to evaluate effects on the adjacent property. This additional information may be required as a precondition for permit application review and approval.

3. Where an applicant simultaneously applies for more than one of the permits listed in subsection (A) of this section for the same property, the application shall comply with the requirements for the permit which are the most detailed and complete. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.110 Drainage control plan registry.

The public works director shall maintain a permanent file of all approved drainage control plans. Each plan shall be cataloged according to the property address, legal description of the property and the storm sewer permit number for which the plan is required. See BMC 14.05.240, Storm sewer permits required. Where a drainage control plan covers more than one property, the approved plan shall be cataloged for each property covered by the plan. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.120 Installation of drainage control facilities.

All privately owned and operated drainage control facilities or systems, whether or not they discharge to a public drainage control system, shall be considered storm sewers and shall be subject to this title, the public works department director’s rules promulgated under this title, and the public works department’s design and installation specifications and permit requirements for storm sewer and drainage control systems.

Storm sewer permits and inspections shall be required for construction, capping, alterations, or repairs of privately owned and operated drainage control systems as provided in this title. When the work is ready for inspection, the permittee shall notify the public works director. If the work is not in accordance with plans approved under this title and in accordance with the department of community development design and installation specifications adopted by administrative rule, the public works director may order the work stopped by written notice to the persons engaged in performing the work or causing the work to be done, and may require modifications as provided in this title. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.130 Modifications of drainage control facilities during construction.

During construction the public works director may require, or the applicant may request, that the construction of drainage control facilities and associated project designs be modified if physical conditions are discovered on the site which are inconsistent with the assumptions upon which the approval was based, including but not limited to unexpected soil and/or water conditions, weather-generated problems, or changes in the design of the improved areas. Modifications shall be submitted to the public works director for approval prior to implementation.

Any such modifications made during the construction of drainage control facilities shall be recorded on the final approved drainage control plan, a revised copy of which shall be filed by the community development director. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

Part II. Storm Water and Surface Water Inspection and Maintenance


14.05.140 Scope.

BMC 14.05.140 through 14.05.200 are intended to:

A. Provide for the inspection and regulation of public or private storm and surface water system control or detention facilities in order to provide for a properly functioning city storm and surface water drainage system and to protect the public health, safety and welfare;

B. Authorize the storm and surface water utility to inspect storm and surface water system control and drainage control facilities and to require owners of such systems to maintain, operate and repair such systems in conformity with the code and the utility standards and regulations; and

C. Authorize the storm and surface water utility to investigate the source of suspected illicit discharges, dumping, and/or illicit connections. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.150 Compliance.

Each owner or person responsible for the maintenance, operation or repair of detention facilities within the city shall maintain, operate and repair said detention facilities in compliance with the requirements of this code and in compliance with the utility standards and regulations. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.160 Responsibility for inspection and maintenance.

Drainage control facilities required by this title and by the rules adopted hereunder shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible party. The owner or responsible party shall inspect permanent drainage control facilities at least annually, and shall inspect temporary drainage control facilities and other temporary best management practices or facilities on a schedule sufficient for the facilities to function at design capacity. When an inspection identifies a need for maintenance as defined by standards found in chapter 4 of Volume V of the storm water manual, maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule:

A. Within one year for typical maintenance of facilities, except catch basins.

B. Within six months for catch basins.

C. Within two years for maintenance that requires capital construction of less than $25,000. The public works director may require the responsible party to conduct more frequent inspections and/or maintenance when necessary to ensure functioning at design capacity. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.170 Inspection program.

The public works director shall establish inspection programs to ensure compliance with the requirements of this title and accomplishment of its purposes. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspections of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; visual inspection of catch basins and detention/retention ponds; video inspection of pipe system; sampling discharges, surface water, ground water, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other best management practices. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.180 Entry for inspection and abatement purposes.

A. New Installations and Connections. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, and when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, or sanitary sewer, the property owner shall obtain approval from the public works director. The property owner shall grant the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner pursuant to an inspection program established pursuant to BMC 14.05.170, and to enter the property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this title is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this title.

B. The public works director or designee, whenever implementing the provisions of the utility’s inspection program or whenever he/she has cause to believe that a violation of this code or the utility standards and regulations has been or is being committed, is authorized to inspect during regular working hours and at other reasonable times all drainage control facilities within the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this code and the utility standards and regulations. If a property owner has not granted right of entry under subsection (A) of this section, prior to making any inspection the director shall present identification credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and request entry.

1. If said property or any building or structure on said property is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control of the property or portion thereof and request entry.

2. If, after reasonable effort, the public works director or designee is unable to locate the owner or such other person(s) having charge or control of the property, and he/she has reason to believe the condition of the detention facility creates an imminent hazard to persons or property, he/she may make entry.

3. Unless entry is consented to by the owner or person(s) in control of said property or portion thereof or unless conditions are reasonably believed to exist which create an imminent hazard, the public works director, prior to entry, shall obtain a search warrant as authorized by the laws of the state.

4. The public works director or designee may inspect the drainage control facility without obtaining a search warrant pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section if said inspection can be conducted while he/she remains on public property or on other property on which he/she has permission to be. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.190 Disposal of waste from maintenance activities.

Disposal of waste from maintenance of drainage and storm water control facilities shall be conducted in accordance with federal, state and local regulations, including the minimum functional standards for solid waste handling, chapter 173-304 WAC, guidelines for disposal of waste materials, and, where appropriate, dangerous waste regulations, chapter 173-303 WAC, including any subsequent amendments to these provisions. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.200 Records of installation and maintenance activities.

When a new drainage control facility is installed, the party having the facility installed shall obtain a copy of the as-built plans from the public works director. Responsible parties shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repair and shall retain the records for at least 10 years. These records shall be made available to the public works director during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request of the public works director. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.210 Exceptions to requirements.

A. General. The purpose of this chapter is to administer and enforce all requirements set forth in this title. Requests for exceptions to the requirements of this title shall be made according to this section and Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, Section 6. Exceptions shall include alternative requirements, waivers, reductions, or modifications of the requirements. An exception shall only be granted to the extent necessary to meet the criteria set forth in this section. An applicant is not entitled to an exception, whether or not the criteria allowing approval of an exception are met. The director may require an applicant to submit an engineer’s report or analysis with a request for an exception. When an exception is granted, the director may impose new or additional requirements to offset or mitigate harm that may be caused by granting the exception, or that would have been prevented if the exception had not been granted.

B. Public Notice. Public notice of an application for an exception under the criteria set forth in this section shall comply with Appendix 1 of the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, Section 6. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

Part III. Public Storm Sewers


14.05.220 Plans required.

Storm sewers and drainage improvements shall require a storm sewer permit with approved engineering plans with the following information:

A. Plan map properly dimensioned and drawn to scale showing the location of the proposed storm sewer, drainage ditches and sewer appurtenances within the street right-of-way. Sewers and drainage ditches shall be stationed and all manholes, catch basins, and appurtenances shall be numbered;

B. Location of existing above and below ground utilities in road right-of-way or adjacent easements;

C. Location and dimensions of utility and drainage easements and location of all existing watercourses, ditches, trunk storm sewers, ponds and retention facilities connected with or adjacent to the proposed drainage facilities;

D. Profiles of storm drains and drainage ditches with the following information:

1. Location and number of all manholes, catch basins and appurtenances,

2. Profile of existing and proposed ground surface and storm drain,

3. Size, slope and length of storm sewers between consecutive manholes, and

4. Sewer, manhole, and catch basin invert elevations;

E. Suitable title plate on each drawing with street or sewer name, name and address of the developer, scale, date and the name, address and telephone number and stamp of the registered engineer responsible for the plan preparation;

F. Structural details of any special manholes, catch basins, and appurtenances including drop manholes, retention control manholes, outlet structures, pumping stations, diversion structures, etc. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.230 Design criteria.

A. Storm sewers and drainage facilities shall be designed for a projected life span of 30 years without excessive maintenance. All trunk sewers and collector sewers shall be designed and stamped by a civil engineer registered in the state of Washington unless otherwise approved by the public works director. Accepted engineering practices shall be employed in the design of all drainage facilities.

B. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed per specifications in the storm water manual. All drainage facilities in public rights-of-way or easements shall have an outfall into an approved drainage system.

C. The minimum requirements for storm drainage facilities shall be as follows:

1. Catch basins or inlets shall be spaced a maximum of 200 feet apart along any street, alley or avenue;

2. The minimum catch basin lateral pipe size shall be 12 inches in diameter and the minimum storm main size shall be 12 inches in diameter;

3. Manholes on trunk sewers shall have a maximum spacing of 400 feet; and

4. Construction materials and methods shall be in accordance with Standards and Specifications for Municipal Public Works Construction prepared by the American Public Works Association, latest edition. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.240 Storm sewer permits required.

A. A storm sewer permit shall be obtained for the construction or alteration of all storm sewer systems, including on-site and off-site installations. Applications for storm sewer permits shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

B. To obtain a storm sewer permit, an application shall be filed with the community development department. Applications for storm sewer permit approval shall be made on forms provided by the community development director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

1. A detailed description of the work to be covered by the permit;

2. A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed project or work;

3. Any plans, diagrams, computations and specifications, or other data as required in this title;

4. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council; and

5. Applications must be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

C. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the public works director. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the public works director finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this title and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified in the current fee resolution have been paid, the public works director shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

When the public works director issues the permit where plans are required, the public works director shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “APPROVED.” Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the public works director, and all work regulated by this title shall be in accordance with the approved plans. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.250 Fees.

Fees for drainage control plan review, recordkeeping or other activities pursuant to this title shall, unless otherwise provided for in this title, be prescribed by resolution. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.260 Financial assurance and covenants.

As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit or approval provided for in this title, the director may require an applicant for a permit or approval to submit financial assurances as provided in this section.

A. Insurance.

1. The director may require the owner(s), or contractor to carry liability and property damage insurance against damage, naming the city as an additional insured. The amount shall be commensurate with the risks as determined by the director.

2. The director may also require the owner(s) to maintain a policy of general public liability insurance against personal injury, death, property damage and/or loss from activities conducted pursuant to the permit or approval, or conditions caused by such activities, and naming the city as an additional insured. The policy shall be in an amount which the director determines to be commensurate with the risks. It shall cover a period of not more than 10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or finalization of the permit or approval. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the director before issuance of a certificate of occupancy or finalization of a permit for any single-family dwelling or duplex.

3. The insurance policy shall provide that the city will be notified of cancellation of the policy at least 30 days prior to cancellation. The notice shall be sent to the director who required the insurance and shall state the insured’s name and the property address. If a property owner’s insurance is canceled and not replaced, the permit or approval and any interrelated permit or approval may be revoked, including a certificate of occupancy or approval for occupancy.

B. Bonds, Cash Deposits or Instruments of Credit.

1. Surety Bond. The director may require that the owner or contractor deliver to the director for filing in the office of the city clerk a surety bond, cash deposit or an instrument of credit in such form and amounts deemed by the director to be necessary to ensure that requirements of the permit or approval are met. A surety bond may be furnished only by a surety company licensed to do business in the state of Washington. The bond shall be conditioned that the work will be completed in accordance with the conditions of the permit or approval, or, if the work is not completed, that the site will be restored if damaged or made unsafe by activities conducted pursuant to the permit or approval.

The bond will be exonerated one year after a determination by the director that the requirements of the permit or approval have been met.

For work under a building permit, issuance of a certificate of occupancy or approval for occupancy following a final inspection shall be considered to be such a determination. For grading, completion of the final grading inspection and submittal of required final reports in accordance with BMC 14.05.240 shall be such a determination.

2. Assurance in Lieu of Surety Bond. In lieu of a surety bond, the owner may elect to file a cash deposit or instrument of credit with the director in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond and in a form approved by the director. The cash deposit or instrument of credit shall comply with the same conditions as required for surety bonds.

C. Covenants.

1. The director may require a covenant between the owner(s) of the property and the city. The covenant shall be signed by the owner(s) of the site and notarized prior to issuance of any permit or approval in a potential landslide area, potentially hazardous location, flood prone zone, or other area of potentially hazardous soils or drainage or erosion conditions. The covenant shall not be required where the permit or approval is for work done by the city. The covenant shall include:

a. A legal description of the property; and

b. A description of the property condition making this subsection applicable; and

c. A statement that the owner(s) of the property understands and accepts the responsibility for the risks associated with development on the property given the described condition, and agrees to inform future purchasers and other successors and assignees of the risks; and

d. The application date, type, and number of the permit or approval for which the covenant is required; and

e. A statement waiving the right of the owner(s), the owner’s heirs, successors and assigns to assert any claim against the city by reason of or arising out of issuance of this permit or approval by the city for the development on the property, except only for such losses that may directly result from the negligence of the city.

2. The covenant shall be filed by the director with the Skagit County auditor’s office, at the expense of the owner, so as to become part of the Skagit County real property records. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.05.270 Date of initial enforcement.

The public works director shall not enforce provisions of this code which require existing discharges and land uses to adopt operational and nonstructural best management practices until six months after adoption of rules identifying the best management practices to be required. The director shall not enforce the provisions of this code which require existing discharges and land uses to install structural best management practices until one year after adoption of rules identifying the best management practices to be required. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 14.10 ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

Sections:

14.10.010    Title.

14.10.020    Application.

14.10.030    Purpose.

14.10.040    Authority.

14.10.050    Basic requirements and adoption by reference.

14.10.060    Additional definitions.

14.10.070    Designation of responsible official.

14.10.080    Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

14.10.090    Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

14.10.100    Additional consideration in time limits applicable to the SEPA process.

14.10.110    Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations, purpose and adoption by reference.

14.10.120    Flexible threshold for categorical exemptions.

14.10.130    Use of exemptions.

14.10.140    Environmental checklist.

14.10.150    Mitigated DNS.

14.10.160    Environmental impact statements (EIS) – Purpose and adoption by reference.

14.10.170    Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

14.10.180    Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.

14.10.190    Commenting, adoption by reference.

14.10.200    Public notice.

14.10.210    Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.

14.10.220    Using existing environmental documents, purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

14.10.230    SEPA and agency decisions, purpose and adoption by reference.

14.10.240    Substantive authority.

14.10.250    SEPA appeals.

14.10.260    Planned action.

14.10.270    Notice/statute of limitations.

14.10.280    Definitions – Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

14.10.290    Agency compliance, purpose and adoption by reference.

14.10.300    Form – Adoption by reference.


14.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Environmental Policy.” (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all proposals as defined in chapter 197-11 WAC where the city is presented with an application or has a goal and is actively preparing to make a decision on the means of accomplishing that goal and environmental impacts can be reasonably identified.

Application of this chapter shall be implemented in a manner consistent with WAC 197-11-055. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform requirements for compliance with chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 197-11 WAC, in a manner that is consistent with the provisions of WAC 197-11-020 and 197-11-030. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.040 Authority.

A. The city adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120, and the SEPA rules, chapter 197-11 WAC, chapter 36.70A RCW, and other applicable laws and regulations.

B. This chapter contains the city’s SEPA procedures and policies.

C. The SEPA rules, chapter 197-11 WAC, must be used in conjunction with this chapter. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.050 Basic requirements and adoption by reference.

This part contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. This city adopts the following sections of chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

WAC

197-11-040    Definitions.

197-11-050    Lead agency.

197-11-060    Content of environmental review.

197-11-070    Limitations on actions during SEPA process.

197-11-080    Incomplete or unavailable information.

197-11-090    Supporting documents.

197-11-100    Information required of applicants.

197-11-158    SEPA/GMA project review – Reliance on existing plans, laws, and regulations.

197-11-210    SEPA/GMA integration.

197-11-220    SEPA/GMA definitions.

197-11-228    Overall SEPA/GMA integration procedures.

197-11-230    Timing of an integrated SEPA/GMA process.

197-11-232    SEPA/GMA integration procedures for preliminary planning, environmental analysis, and expanded scoping.

197-11-235    SEPA/GMA integration documents.

197-11-238    SEPA/GMA monitoring.

197-11-250    SEPA/Model Toxics Control Act integration.

197-11-253    SEPA lead agency for MTCA actions.

197-11-256    Preliminary evaluation.

197-11-259    Determination of nonsignificance for MTCA remedial actions.

197-11-262    Determination of significance and EIS for MTCA remedial actions.

197-11-265    Early scoping for MTCA actions.

197-11-268    MTCA interim actions.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.060 Additional definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-220 and 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

A. “Department” means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the city established by ordinance, rule or order.

B. “SEPA rules” means chapter 197-11 WAC adopted by the Department of Ecology.

C. “Ordinance” means the ordinance, resolution, or other procedure used by the city to adopt regulatory requirements.

D. “Early notice” means the city’s response to an applicant stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated determination of nonsignificance (DNS) procedures). (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.070 Designation of responsible official.

A. For those proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the community development director.

B. For all proposals for which the city is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the “lead agency” or “responsible official” by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in BMC 14.10.050.

C. The city shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (chapter 197-11 WAC) and make them available in accordance with chapter 42.56 RCW. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.080 Lead agency determination and responsibilities.

A. If the city receives an application for or initiates a proposal that involves a nonexempt action, the city shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050, 197-11-253, and 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the city is aware that another agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.

B. When the city is not the lead agency for a proposal, the city shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. The city shall not prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the city may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.

C. If the city receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-253 or 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within 15 days of receipt of the determination, or the city must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the 15-day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the city may be initiated by the responsible official.

D. The city is authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944; provided, that the responsible official and any city department that will incur responsibilities as the result of such agreement approve the agreement.

E. The city, in making a lead agency determination for a private project, shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal (that is: which agencies require nonexempt licenses?).

F. When the city/county is lead agency for a MTCA remedial action, the Department of Ecology shall be provided with an opportunity under WAC 197-11-253(5) to review the environmental documents prior to public notice being provided. If the SEPA and MTCA documents are issued together with one public comment period under WAC 197-11-253(6). The city/county shall decide jointly with Ecology who receives the comment letters and how copies of the comment letters will be distributed to the other agency. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.090 Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

For any proposal for a private project where the city would be the lead agency and for which one or more state agencies have jurisdiction, the city’s responsible official may elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a state agency. The state agency with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in WAC 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency and the city shall be an agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the city’s responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate state agency with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the city shall also give notice of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.100 Additional consideration in time limits applicable to the SEPA process.

Time estimates contained in this section (expressed in calendar days) shall apply when the city processes licenses for all private projects and those governmental proposals submitted to the city by other agencies. The actual time may vary with the complexity of the project, availability of staff, cooperation of agencies with jurisdiction or expertise, etc. The time estimates contained herein shall not be construed to be mandatory. Time periods for making threshold determinations shall commence upon payment of fees.

A. Categorical Exemptions. The city will normally identify whether an action is categorically exempt within seven days of receiving a completed application.

B. Threshold Determinations.

1. For project actions involving the issuance of a city license or permit the city shall make a threshold determination on a completed application using the optional DNS process provided for in WAC 197-11-355 unless the responsible official determines the proposed action is unusually complex or significant uncertainties exist with respect to potential environmental impacts.

2. For projects where the optional DNS process is used the city shall issue a threshold determination together with the notice of application required by BMC Title 14A.

3. If the optional DNS process provided for in WAC 197-11-355 is not used, the city will normally complete threshold determinations that can be based solely upon review of the environmental checklist for the proposal within 15 days of the date an applicant’s completed application and completed checklist are submitted.

4. When the responsible official requires further information from the applicant or consultation with other agencies with jurisdictions:

a. The city will normally request such further information within 15 days of receiving a completed application and completed environmental checklist;

b. The city will normally wait no longer than 30 days for a consulted agency to respond;

c. The responsible official will normally complete the threshold determination within 15 days of receiving the requested information from the applicant or the consulted agency.

5. When the city must initiate further studies, including field investigations, to obtain the information to make the threshold determination, the city will normally complete the studies within 30 days of receiving a completed application and a completed checklist.

6. The city will normally complete threshold determinations on actions where the applicant recommends in writing that an EIS be prepared, because of the probable significant adverse environmental impact(s) described in the application, within 15 days of receiving a completed application and completed checklist. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.110 Categorical exemptions and threshold determinations, purpose and adoption by reference.

This part contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a “probable significant, adverse environmental impact” requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This part also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this part:

WAC

197-11-300    Purpose of this part.

197-11-305    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-310    Threshold determination required.

197-11-315    Environmental checklist.

197-11-330    Threshold determination process.

197-11-335    Additional information.

197-11-340    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-350    Mitigated DNS (MDNS).

197-11-355    Optional DNS process.

197-11-360    Determination of significance (DS)/initiating of scoping.

197-11-390    Effect of threshold determination.

197-11-800    Categorical exemptions.

197-11-880    Emergencies.

197-11-890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.120 Flexible threshold for categorical exemptions.

Categorical exemptions are adopted by reference under BMC 14.10.110. The city establishes the following exempt levels for minor new construction under WAC 197-11-800(1)(b) based on local conditions:

A. For residential dwelling units in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(i): nine units;

B. For agriculture structures in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(ii): 10,000 square feet;

C. For office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage buildings in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iii): 4,000 square feet and 20 parking spaces;

D. For parking lots in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(iv): 20 parking spaces;

E. For landfills and excavations in WAC 197-11-800(1)(b)(v): 100 cubic yards;

F. Demolition of any structure or facility up to the maximum exempt level provided in WAC 197-11-800;

G. Replacement, addition of up to 20 percent of gross floor area, alteration or modification of an existing commercial structure, up to 12,000 square feet. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.130 Use of exemptions.

A. Upon receiving an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department initiating the proposal, the city shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The city’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter shall apply to the proposal.

B. In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the city shall make certain the proposal is properly defined and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the city shall determine the lead agency, even if the license application that triggers the city’s consideration is exempt.

C. If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the city may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

1. The city shall not give authorization for:

a. Any nonexempt action; or

b. Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or

c. Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives; or

d. Any combination of exempt activities which when considered together would not be exempt.

2. The city may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.

3. The city may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.

D. Proposed short subdivision of land that is adjacent to previous short subdivisions or adjacent to land on which a subdivision is pending shall not be exempt if adjacent subdivisions share any improvements or access easements. In such cases, the proposed short plat will be considered physically or functionally related regardless of ownership. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.140 Environmental checklist.

A. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a completed environmental checklist (or a copy), in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate, or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; provided, that a checklist is not needed if the city and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The city shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and if the city is the lead agency, for determining the responsible official and for making the threshold determination.

B. For private proposals, the city will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For city proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal.

C. For projects submitted as planned actions under WAC 197-11-164, the city shall use its existing environmental checklist form or may modify the environmental checklist form as provided in WAC 197-11-315. The modified environmental checklist form may be prepared and adopted along with or as part of a planned action ordinance; or developed after the ordinance is adopted. In either case, a proposed modified environmental checklist form must be sent to the Department of Ecology to allow at least a 30-day review prior to use. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.150 Mitigated DNS.

A. As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a DNS based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.

B. An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must:

1. Follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the city is lead agency; and

2. Precede the city’s actual threshold determination for the proposal.

C. The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within 15 working days. The response shall:

1. Be written;

2. State whether the city currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific areas of concern that are leading the city to consider a DS; and

3. State that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

D. As much as possible, the city should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

E. When the applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal along with a revised or amended environmental checklist, the city shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within 15 days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal.

1. If the city indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the city shall issue and circulate a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2).

2. If the city indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the city shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate.

3. The applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to “control noise” or “prevent storm water runoff” are inadequate whereas proposals to “muffle machinery to X decibel” or “construct 200-foot storm water retention pond at Y location” are adequate.

4. Mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.

F. A mitigated DNS is issued either under WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a 14-day comment period and public notice, or under WAC 197-11-335, which may require no additional comment period beyond the comment period on the notice of application.

G. Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision· and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the city. Failure to comply with the designated mitigation measures shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of any issued license or permit.

H. If the city’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the city should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (Withdrawal of DNS).

I. The city’s written response under subsection (B) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussions of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the city to consider the clarifications or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.160 Environmental impact statements (EIS) – Purpose and adoption by reference.

This part contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by this part:

WAC

197-11-400    Purpose of EIS.

197-11-402    General requirements.

197-11-405    EIS types.

197-11-406    EIS timing.

197-11-408    Scoping.

197-11-410    Expanded scoping (optional).

197-11-420    EIS preparation.

197-11-425    Style and size.

197-11-430    Format.

197-11-435    Cover letter or memo.

197-11-440    EIS contents.

197-11-442    Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.

197-11-443    EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.

197-11-444    Elements of the environment.

197-11-448    Relationship of EIS to other considerations.

197-11-450    Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-455    Issuance of DEIS.

197-11-460    Issuance of FEIS.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.170 Preparation of EIS – Additional considerations.

A. Preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EISs (SEIS) is the responsibility of the city under the direction of the responsible official. Before the city issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and chapter 197-11 WAC.

B. The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by city staff, the applicant, or by a consultant selected by the city or the applicant. A consultant selected by the applicant requires written approval by the city to ensure compliance with the provisions of chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 197-11 WAC. (See WAC 197-11-420(1) through (4).) If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the city will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant immediately after completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official shall also notify the applicant of the city’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.

C. The city may require an applicant to provide information the city does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. (This does not apply to information the city may request under another ordinance or statute.)

D. The environmental impact statement may be combined with the recommendation or report on the proposal or issued as a separate document. The substantive decisions or recommendations shall be clearly identifiable in the combined document.

E. The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing or compensating the city for all costs associated with the preparation of draft and final EISs (DEIS and FEIS) and draft and final supplemental EISs (SEIS). Work shall not proceed on such documents until arrangements for all associated costs have been made and approved in writing by the city. (See WAC 197-11-420 and 197-11-914.) (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.180 Additional elements to be covered in an EIS.

The following additional elements are part of the environment for the purpose of EIS content, but do not add to the criteria for threshold determinations or perform any other function or purpose under this chapter:

A. Economy of the area;

B. Social policy analysis;

C. Cost-benefit analysis;

D. Such other elements as may be required by the responsible official. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.190 Commenting, adoption by reference.

This part contains rules for consulting, commenting, and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented in this part:

WAC

197-11-500    Purpose of this part.

197-11-502    Inviting comment.

197-11-504    Availability and cost of environmental documents.

197-11-508    SEPA register.

197-11-510    Public notice.

197-11-535    Public hearings and meetings.

197-11-545    Effect of no comment.

197-11-550    Specificity of comments.

197-11-560    FEIS response to comments.

197-11-570    Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.200 Public notice.

A. Whenever the city issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2) or a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3) the city shall give public notice as required by chapter 14A.05 BMC.

B. Whenever the city issues a DNS or MDNS under WAC 197-11-355 the city shall combine the SEPA threshold determination notice and the notice of application required by BMC Title 14A and issue a single notice using the timelines and procedures prescribed by BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.210 Designation of official to perform consulted agency responsibilities for the city.

A. The responsible official shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the city in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping, and reviewing a DEIS.

B. The responsible official shall be responsible for the city’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the city is a consulted agency and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate city departments. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.220 Using existing environmental documents, purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the city’s own environmental compliance. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-164    Planned actions – Definition and criteria.

197-11-168    Ordinances or resolutions designating planned actions – Procedures for adoption.

197-11-172    Planned actions – Project review.

197-11-600    When to use existing environmental documents.

197-11-610    Use of NEPA documents.

197-11-620    Supplemental environmental impact statement – Procedures.

197-11-625    Addenda – Procedures.

197-11-630    Adoption – Procedures.

197-11-635    Incorporation by reference – Procedures.

197-11-640    Combining documents.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.230 SEPA and agency decisions, purpose and adoption by reference.

This part contains rules (and policies) for SEPA’s substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This part also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-650    Purpose of this part.

197-11-655    Implementation.

197-11-660    Substantive authority and mitigation.

197-11-680    Appeals.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.240 Substantive authority.

A. The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those set forth in chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 197-11 WAC and those identified in subsection (D) of this section.

B. The city may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:

1. Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

2. Such conditions are in writing; and

3. The conditions or mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and

4. The city has considered whether other local, state, or federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and

5. Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (D) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.

C. The city may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:

1. A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a FEIS or final SEIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

2. A finding is made that no reasonable mitigation measures are capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and

3. The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (D) of this section and identified in writing in the decision document. (Chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 197-11 WAC.)

D. The city designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the city’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

1. The city shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:

a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

b. Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

d. Preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our national heritage;

e. Maintain, whenever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

2. The city recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

3. The city adopts by reference the policies in the following:

a. Burlington Municipal Code, including all chapters contained in BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction, as may be further amended;

b. Burlington Comprehensive Plan dated June 1994, and map, as may be further amended;

c. Shoreline Management Act, as may be further amended;

d. Growth Management Act, as may be further amended;

e. Forest Practice Act and regulations as may be further amended. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.250 SEPA appeals.

A. Any person may appeal the issuance of:

1. A determination of nonsignificance;

2. A determination of significance when issued in conjunction with a project permit; or

3. A final environmental impact statement.

The appeal of a SEPA decision not requiring a legislative decision, conditioning or denying a proposal, to the city council as set forth in RCW 43.21C.060, shall only be available where expressly provided for in this section.

B. An appeal must be filed in writing with the responsible official (WAC 197-11-680) within 14 calendar days of the date the decision becomes final. The appeal shall identify the decision, contain a summary of the grounds for the appeal and be accompanied by an appeal fee in an amount established by the adopted fee ordinance or applicable resolution. Following receipt of the appeal and the fee, the responsible official shall transmit a copy of the appeal to the hearing examiner, unless the decision is made by the hearing examiner, in which case an appeal shall go directly to city council or to whatever authority that has jurisdiction over the underlying action.

C. Because a major purpose of this chapter is to combine environmental considerations with public decisions, any appeal brought under this chapter shall be linked to the appeal of a specific governmental action. The State Environmental Policy Act provides a basis for challenging whether governmental action is in compliance with the substantive and procedural provisions of this chapter. The State Environmental Policy Act is not intended to create a cause of action unrelated to a specific governmental action.

D. Unless otherwise provided by this section:

1. Appeals under this chapter shall be of the governmental action together with its accompanying environmental determinations.

2. Appeals of environmental determinations made or the lack thereof under this chapter shall be combined with and commenced within the time and in the manner required to appeal the governmental action which is subject to environmental review, pursuant to chapter 14A.05 BMC.

3. An appeal of a determination of significance may be filed as set forth above, prior to and separate from a final hearing and determination of a project action and a determination of nonsignificance of a nonproject action initiated by the city may also be made independent of the underlying action, in the manner set forth in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.260 Planned action.

A. A planned action, as provided for in subsection (B) of this section, does not require a threshold determination or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under this chapter, but is subject to environmental review and mitigation as provided in this chapter.

B. 1. For purposes of this section, a “planned action” means one or more types of project action that:

a. Are designated planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by a county, city or town planning under RCW 36.70A.040;

b. Have had the significant impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement prepared in conjunction with (i) a comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW, or (ii) a phased project;

c. Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in subsection (B)(1)(b) of this subsection;

d. Are located within an urban growth area, as defined in RCW 36.70A.030;

e. Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200; and

f. Are consistent with the comprehensive plan adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW.

2. The city shall limit planned actions to development or specific geographical areas that are less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and may limit a planned action to a time period identified in the environmental impact statement or the ordinance or resolution adopted under this subsection. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.270 Notice/statute of limitations.

A. The city, applicant for, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.

B. The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the city clerk, applicant or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.280 Definitions – Purpose of this part and adoption by reference.

This part contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The city adopts the following sections by reference, as supplemented by BMC 14.10.060:

WAC

197-11-700    Definitions.

197-11-702    Act.

197-11-704    Action.

197-11-706    Addendum.

197-11-708    Adoption.

197-11-710    Affected tribe.

197-11-712    Affecting.

197-11-714    Agency.

197-11-716    Applicant.

197-11-718    Built environment.

197-11-720    Categorical exemption.

197-11-721    Closed record appeal.

197-11-722    Consolidated appeal.

197-11-724    Consulted agency.

197-11-726    Cost-benefit analysis.

197-11-728    County/city.

197-11-730    Decision maker.

197-11-732    Department.

197-11-734    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-736    Determination of significance (DS).

197-11-738    EIS.

197-11-740    Environment.

197-11-742    Environmental checklist.

197-11-744    Environmental document.

197-11-746    Environmental review.

197-11-750    Expanded scoping.

197-11-752    Impacts.

197-11-754    Incorporation by reference.

197-11-756    Lands covered by water.

197-11-758    Lead agency.

197-11-760    License.

197-11-762    Local agency.

197-11-764    Major action.

197-11-766    Mitigated DNS.

197-11-768    Mitigation.

197-11-770    Natural environment.

197-11-772    NEPA.

197-11-774    Nonproject.

197-11-775    Open record hearing.

197-11-776    Phased review.

197-11-778    Preparation.

197-11-780    Private project.

197-11-782    Probable.

197-11-784    Proposal.

197-11-786    Reasonable alternative.

197-11-788    Responsible official.

197-11-790    SEPA.

197-11-792    Scope.

197-11-793    Scoping.

197-11-794    Significant.

197-11-796    State agency.

197-11-797    Threshold determination.

197-11-799    Underlying governmental action.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.290 Agency compliance, purpose and adoption by reference.

This part contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating categorical exemptions which do not apply within critical areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The city adopts the following sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-900    Purpose of this part.

197-11-902    Agency SEPA policies.

197-11-916    Application to ongoing actions.

197-11-920    Agencies with environmental expertise.

197-11-922    Lead agency rules.

197-11-924    Determining the lead agency.

197-11-926    Lead agency for governmental proposals.

197-11-928    Lead agency for public and private proposals.

197-11-930    Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction.

197-11-932    Lead agency for private projects requiring licensing from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is county/city.

197-11-934    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county/city, and one or more state agencies.

197-11-936    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency.

197-11-938    Lead agencies for specific proposals.

197-11-940    Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

197-11-942    Agreements on lead agency status.

197-11-944    Agreements on division of lead agency duties.

197-11-946    DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.

197-11-948    Assumption of lead agency status.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.10.300 Form – Adoption by reference.

The city adopts the following forms and sections by reference:

WAC

197-11-960    Environmental checklist.

197-11-965    Adoption notice.

197-11-970    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

197-11-980    Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS).

197-11-985    Notice of assumption of lead agency status.

197-11-990    Notice of action.

(Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 14.15 CRITICAL AREA REGULATIONS

Sections:

14.15.010    Title.

14.15.020    Application.

14.15.030    Purpose.

14.15.040    Authority.

14.15.050    Jurisdiction and coordination.

14.15.060    Resource information and maps.

14.15.070    General requirements and authorizations required.

14.15.080    Public notice and records.

14.15.090    Application submittal requirements.

14.15.100    Administration.

14.15.110    Critical areas checklist, site assessment and conditions of approval.

14.15.120    Application of standards.

14.15.130    General construction and maintenance standards.

14.15.140    Reasonable use exception.

14.15.150    Critical area and buffer mitigation requirements – General provisions.

14.15.160    Protected critical area (PCA) requirements.

14.15.170    Incentives.

WETLANDS

14.15.180    Wetlands identification and rating.

14.15.185    Wetland buffers.

14.15.190    Wetlands initial project review.

14.15.200    Wetlands site assessment requirements.

14.15.210    Alteration of wetlands.

14.15.220    Wetland mitigation standards.

AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS

14.15.230    Aquifer recharge areas.

14.15.240    Aquifer recharge area designations.

14.15.250    Aquifer recharge applicability and prohibited activities.

14.15.260    Aquifer recharge initial project review.

14.15.270    Aquifer recharge site assessment report.

14.15.280    Aquifer recharge area mitigation.

GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS

14.15.300    Geologically hazardous area designation.

14.15.310    Geologically hazardous area initial project review.

14.15.320    Geologically hazardous area site assessment requirements.

14.15.330    Geologically hazardous area mitigation standards.

FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS

14.15.350    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area designations.

14.15.360    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas initial project review.

14.15.370    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area site assessment requirements.

14.15.380    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area mitigation standards.

FLOOD HAZARD AREA

14.15.390    Flood hazard area designations.

14.15.400    Development in floodplains – General.

14.15.410    Development in special flood risk zone.

14.15.420    Development in the floodway.

14.15.430    Critical facility.

COMPLIANCE

14.15.440    Compliance with critical area regulations.

14.15.450    Construction.

14.15.460    Severability.

14.15.470    State Environmental Policy Act.

14.15.480    Liability disclaimer.


14.15.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Critical Area Regulations.” (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.020 Application.

A. This chapter shall apply to land use, development and platting located in the city limits of Burlington, within the geographical areas that meet the definitions and criteria for critical areas regulation as set forth in this chapter.

B. The following shall constitute critical areas:

1. Wetlands and riparian corridors, including Gages Slough. Wetlands serve many important ecological and environmental functions and help to protect public health, safety and welfare by providing flood storage and conveyance, erosion control, fish and shellfish production, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, water quality protection, water storage, education, scientific research and other public benefits. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect these functions to prevent the continual loss of wetlands, and where practical to enhance or restore wetland functions and values;

2. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. In addition to their intrinsic value, certain species of fish and wildlife represent important historic, cultural, recreational and economic resources. Many species serve as indicators of the condition of the environment and the quality of life that local residents have invested in, enjoy and respect. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, restore where practical, and enhance fish and wildlife populations and their associated habitats;

3. Frequently flooded areas. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in the floodplain and the floodway according to the provisions established under this code; and

4. Geologically hazardous areas. Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to the effects of erosion, sliding, earthquake, or other geologic events. They pose a threat to the health and safety of citizens when incompatible residential, commercial, industrial, or infrastructure development is sited in areas of a hazard. Geologic hazards pose a risk to life, property, and resources when steep slopes are destabilized by inappropriate activities and development or when structures or facilities are sited in areas susceptible to natural or human caused geologic events. Some geologic hazards can be reduced or mitigated by engineering, design, or modified construction practices so that risks to health and safety are acceptable. When technology cannot reduce risks to acceptable levels, building and other construction within identified geologically hazardous areas shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.030 Purpose.

A. This chapter is adopted to assist in orderly development, conserve the value of property, safeguard the public welfare, and provide protection for defined critical areas.

B. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent contamination and depletion, avoid exorbitant cleanup costs, hardships and potential physical harm to people.

C. The ordinance codified in this chapter was developed under the directives of the Growth Management Act to conserve and protect critical areas pursuant to RCW 36.70A.172. “Critical areas” are defined as wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, flood hazard areas, geologically hazardous areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. Some of these areas, such as geologic hazards and flood hazard areas, are critical because of the hazard they represent to public health. Others, such as fish and wildlife habitats and wetlands, are critical because of their public value.

D. Maps are useful primarily as an indicator of the distribution and extent of critical areas. Maps will be used wherever possible as part of the screening process for evaluating individual permit applications. Although a number of map resources are utilized in this chapter, regulatory measures such as buffer requirements are based upon the identification of critical areas during the permit, development authorization, or other approval processes.

E. Critical areas will be designated by definition and then classified through site assessments so that they can be identified using scientifically based criteria and protected. The use of site assessments to confirm the actual presence and classification of critical areas is central to the management approach developed under this chapter.

F. The ordinance codified in this chapter was drafted to provide regulatory structure for identification, designation and protection of critical areas. This chapter allows staff to provide site visits, preliminary reviews, and preapplication meetings to assist in the identification of critical areas.

G. These regulations are intended to:

1. Protect human life, property, and the public health and safety of the citizens of Burlington;

2. Minimize the expenditure of public money;

3. Maintain the city’s flood insurance eligibility while avoiding regulations which are unnecessarily restrictive or difficult to administer;

4. Ensure that wetland and other critical area functions and values are protected to provide public benefits. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.040 Authority.

The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under the authority of chapters 36.70 and 36.70A RCW, and Article II of the Washington State Constitution. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.050 Jurisdiction and coordination.

A. Relationship to Other Federal, State and County Jurisdictional Agencies’ Regulations. Many state, federal and regional regulations apply to projects conducted within critical areas. Uses otherwise allowed by local codes do not eliminate other agency regulatory requirements.

1. Federal regulations include:

a. Clean Water Act, Section 401, 404;

b. Coastal Zone Management Act;

c. Endangered Species Act;

d. Federal Water Pollution Control Act;

e. Food Security Act – Swampbuster;

f. National Environmental Policy Act;

g. National Floodplain Insurance Program;

h. River and Harbor Act, Section 10.

2. State regulations include:

a. Chapter 43.21C RCW, State Environmental Policy Act;

b. Chapter 75.20 RCW, Construction Projects in State Waters;

c. Chapter 76.09 RCW, Forest Practices Regulations;

d. Chapter 77.12 RCW, Powers and Duties;

e. Chapter 78.44 RCW, Surface Mining Act;

f. Chapter 86.16 RCW, Floodplain Management (Formerly flood control zones by state);

g. Chapter 90.03 RCW, Water Code;

h. Chapter 90.48 RCW, Water Pollution Control Act;

i. Chapter 90.58 RCW, Shoreline Management Act of 1971.

3. Local regulations include:

a. Chapter 14.10 BMC, Environmental Policy;

b. Chapter 14.05 BMC, Surface Water Management;

c. Skagit County shoreline management program.

B. Jurisdictional Substitution. In cases where other agencies possess jurisdictional control over critical areas and it is determined by the director that the permit conditions satisfy the requirements of this chapter, those requirements may substitute for the requirements of this chapter. Such requirements shall be a condition of critical area approval and be enforceable under this chapter. Such agencies may include, but are not limited to, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Protection Agency, and Fish and Wildlife Service, the Swinomish Tribe, and the Washington State Department of Ecology, Department of Natural Resources and Department of Fish and Wildlife. The applicant shall be notified in writing when any such substitution is made. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.060 Resource information and maps.

A. Critical areas defined and identified in this chapter shall be mapped whenever possible. These maps shall be advisory and used by the director to provide guidance in determining applicability of the standards to a property. All sites which contain or include critical areas, whether mapped or not, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Critical area maps, with the exception of the flood insurance rate map used to designate certain flood hazard areas, are provided only as a general guide to alert the user to the possible distribution, location and extent of critical areas. Map identification of critical areas provides only approximate boundaries and locations. The actual locations and boundaries of critical areas, as well as their quality and quantity, shall be based upon the presence of the features applicable to each critical area element in this chapter. Maps shall not be considered a regulatory standard or substitute for site-specific assessments. The application of definitions, methodologies and performance standards pursuant to the site-specific assessment requirements provided in this chapter is the controlling factor in determining the actual presence and extent of critical areas.

C. Critical area maps maintained by the department shall utilize the best information currently available and should be updated on a continual basis.

D. Critical areas mapped under the site assessment requirements of this chapter should be compiled in a database and incorporated into critical area maps. This map information shall be utilized to facilitate tracking of compliance with the requirements of this chapter to ensure long-term protection of critical areas.

E. The city will make interpretations where needed as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). If there is a disagreement about the location of the boundary, additional information from a licensed surveyor may be needed, and the application shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the standards of Section 60.6 of the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59-76). (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.070 General requirements and authorizations required.

A. In addition to any other requirements identified in this chapter, or otherwise imposed by the Burlington Municipal Code, all development occurring in critical areas, or critical area buffers, shall meet the following general requirements:

1. Site. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site which are disturbed or impacted by the proposed development, including all development coverage and construction activity areas, shall be required. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site refers to the process and actions necessary to ensure that existing and proposed site improvements are stabilized, and that all on-site areas and adjacent properties which are disturbed or impacted are stabilized. The proposed development shall be limited and controlled to avoid adverse impacts and potential harm and ensure safe, stable and compatible development appropriate to site conditions. Other reasonable and appropriate solutions to solve site stability problems may be required by the director.

2. Adjacent Site, Surrounding Area, and Drainage Basin. The proposed development shall ensure safe, stable and compatible development which avoids adverse environmental impacts and potential harm to adjacent sites, the surrounding neighborhood, and the drainage basin. Detailed analysis of impacts of the development upon wetlands, riparian corridors, native vegetation and wildlife habitats, water quality, natural water temperature, slope and soil conditions, and surface water drainage may be required at the request of the director when site and area conditions indicate the need for this analysis. Supplemental technical reports may be required by the director to specify measures to preserve, protect, and maintain adjacent sites and the drainage basin and ensure safe, stable and compatible development.

B. With the exception of activities identified as exempt under BMC 14.15.120, any land use activity that can impair the functions and values of critical areas or their buffers through a development activity or by disturbance of the soil or water, and/or by removal of, or damage to, existing vegetation shall require critical areas review and written authorization pursuant to this chapter. Vegetation destruction or removal, other than the normal maintenance of existing landscaping identified as exempt under BMC 14.15.120, shall be prohibited within a critical area or its required buffer, unless there is an approved buffer management plan pursuant to the requirements of the particular critical area that demonstrates there will be no adverse impact to the critical area with the proposed vegetation removal and disturbance of the soil or water and includes any mitigation or buffer enhancement necessary to address critical areas impacts. Authorizations required under this chapter overlay other permit and approval requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code. Regardless of whether a development permit or approval is required, any proposed alteration that can adversely affect a critical area or its standard buffers’ functions must comply with the substantive and procedural requirements of this chapter. Critical areas review pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted as part of the underlying permit or approval, where applicable. It is the responsibility of the landowner, or designee, who conducts or proposes to undertake land use activities that can adversely impact critical areas or their buffers to obtain authorization prior to commencing such activities. In some cases, the typical thresholds that trigger review and permits have been reduced to zero for any development activity located within a critical area or its required buffer.

C. Procedures. No land use development permit, land division, development approval, or other authorization required shall be granted until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

1. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposal submitted conforms to the purposes and standards of this chapter, assesses impacts an the critical area from activities and uses proposed, and identifies protective mechanisms adequate to meet the requirements of this chapter.

2. Each proposal shall be reviewed by the director for consistency with the applicable regulations identified in this chapter and to ensure the protective mechanisms proposed are sufficient to protect the critical area, public health, safety and welfare. If not, conditions of approval shall be specified as necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If there are no conditions under which the proposal could be approved, then the proposal shall be denied.

D. All land use actions shall be conditioned as necessary to mitigate impacts to critical areas as required by this chapter and any project that cannot adequately mitigate its impacts to critical areas shall be denied.

E. Conflicts with Other Provisions. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other applicable code provision, the more restrictive shall apply unless specifically accepted in this chapter.

F. Satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter shall also be sufficient to satisfy the requirement for critical areas analysis and mitigation pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW, State Environmental Policy Act, and chapter 14.10 BMC, Environmental Policy.

G. SEPA Compliance. The goals, policies and purposes set forth in this chapter shall be considered policies of the State Environmental Policy Act. When applicable the applicant must meet SEPA requirements.

H. Other Permits Required. It is recognized that many local, state, and/or federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action, and that compliance with the provisions of this chapter may not necessarily constitute compliance with other such requirements. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.080 Public notice and records.

Public notice for projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of BMC Title 14A, land use permit process. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.090 Application submittal requirements.

In addition to the application submittal requirements specified in other codes, a complete application for development subject to this chapter shall include the following additional information:

A. Surveyed Site Plan. A surveyed site plan shall be prepared by a state of Washington licensed surveyor and shall include the following, when required by the community development director:

1. Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals on site, within 25 feet of the site’s abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

2. Terrain and drainage flow characteristics within the site, within 25 feet of the site’s abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

3. Proposed location and boundaries of all required undisturbed fenced areas and buffers on site and on adjacent lands;

4. Location of all vegetation, including location and description of all trees over six inches in diameter measured five feet above the base of the trunk, shrubs over eight feet tall or six feet wide, and noting their species;

5. Location and boundaries of all existing and proposed site improvements on the site and within 25 feet of the site’s property boundaries, and the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements. This shall include the limits of development coverage, impervious surfaces and construction activity areas (noting total square footage and percentage of site occupied);

6. Location of all grading activities in progress or proposed, and all drainage control facilities or systems in existence, in progress or proposed within 25 feet of the site’s property boundaries, and the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

7. Location of all existing and proposed utilities (water, sewer, gas, electric, phone, cable, etc.), both above and below ground, on site, on adjacent lands within 25 feet of the site’s property lines, and in the full width of abutting public rights-of-way, and proposed methods and locations for the proposed development to hook up to these services;

8. Such other additional site plan information as necessary to complete review of a project or waive specific submittal requirements when not necessary for project review.

B. Technical Reports. Technical reports shall be prepared and submitted as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.100 Administration.

A. The director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter, including:

1. Review applications for land use actions to verify compliance with this chapter, issue permit decisions, or make recommendations to the hearing examiner in accordance with the permit processing procedures identified in BMC Title 14A;

2. Review applications for land use actions to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local government agencies from which prior approval is required;

3. Recording and maintaining records of:

a. As-built elevation above mean sea level of the lowest floor including basement of all new and substantially improved structures requiring a floodplain approval and whether same structure contains a basement,

b. Certification by registered professional engineer or architect as required by this chapter,

c. Floodplain approvals and other actions pursuant to the administration of this chapter;

4. Notification to adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse with copy to FEMA, and maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;

5. When base flood elevation data has not been provided, obtaining, reviewing, and reasonably utilizing any base flood elevation and floodway data that should become available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer standards and floodways;

6. Issuance of development permits pursuant to BMC Title 14A, Land Use Decisions, and chapter 15.04 BMC, Uniform Codes, before construction or development begins within the city limits.

B. This chapter shall be administered in accordance with chapter 86.16 RCW and chapter 508-60 WAC. This chapter shall be revised as necessary to conform with any changes in state rules pertaining to flood control zones which may be adopted by the State Department of Ecology subsequent to the effective date of delegation of the state’s permit program to the city.

C. The administrative procedure for critical areas review shall be as follows:

1. Determination that an Activity Requires Standard Review. All applications for approval of activities requiring written authorization pursuant to BMC 14.15.070 shall require the submission of a critical areas checklist completed and filed by the applicant on the forms provided by the planning department. If not otherwise required, all applications for critical areas review shall include a description of the proposed activity and a site plan showing the location of the proposed activity and associated area of disturbance in relation to all known critical areas or critical area indicators. Upon receipt of the application, a determination shall be made as to whether or not the proposed activity fits within any of the exempt activities found in BMC 14.15.120. If the proposed activity is classified as exempt, and meets the associated conditions for such an allowance, no other critical areas review shall be required, except as necessary to ensure that any conditions for such an allowance are met in practice. This determination shall be made in writing and included in the application file.

Proposed activities identified under BMC 14.15.120 that do not meet the conditions for such an allowance or that may result in significant adverse impacts to a critical area or its buffer shall be subject to standard critical areas review.

2. Method for Initial Determination of Critical Areas. Upon determination that the proposed activity requires detailed critical areas review, and upon receipt of a completed critical areas checklist, the following method shall be used to determine whether critical areas or their required buffers will possibly be affected by the proposed activity:

a. Review the critical areas checklist together with the maps and other critical areas resources identified in the relevant sections of this chapter; and

b. Complete the critical areas staff checklist; and

c. Inspect the site; and

d. Complete the critical areas field indicator form.

3. Determination that Critical Areas Are Not Affected. If critical area indicators are not present within 200 feet of the proposed activity or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter, then the review required pursuant to this chapter is complete, except as necessary to ensure that the proposed activity is undertaken as described in the application and as shown on the site plan. This determination shall be noted in the application file and provide written authorization shall be provided for the project or activity to proceed as proposed in the application or, where applicable, with any specific conditions of approval. This determination shall not constitute approval of any use or activity or its compliance with the requirements of this chapter, outside the scope of that stated in the application. Any proposed change in use or scope of activity from that contained in the application shall be subject to further review under this chapter. The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the determination regarding the apparent absence of critical area indicators and the likelihood that critical areas will not be affected is not intended as an expert certification regarding the presence or absence of critical areas and that the critical areas review process is subject to possible reopening if new information is received as described in subsection (C)(4) of this section. If the applicant wants greater assurance of the accuracy of any such critical area indicators determination, the applicant shall hire a qualified critical areas expert to provide such assurances.

4. Reopening of Review Process.

a. If at any time prior to completion of the public input process on the associated permit or approval, the city receives new evidence that a critical area may be present within 200 feet of the project area or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter, then the critical areas review process shall be reopened pursuant to this chapter and shall require whatever level of critical areas review and mitigation as is required by this chapter.

b. Once the public input process on the associated permit or approval is completed and the record is closed, then the city’s determination regarding critical areas pursuant to this chapter shall be final; provided, however, that the critical areas review process may be reopened if it is determined that incomplete or incorrect information was provided by the applicant in the application or checklist. For the purposes of this subsection, “incomplete or incorrect information” means information regarding the nature and/or location of the proposed activity as presented in the application or regarding the presence of a critical area or critical area indicators on the subject property which the applicant knew or should have known was relevant at the time of the submittal of the checklist. Prior to reopening a critical areas review under this subsection, the city shall conduct a site visit. No critical areas review shall be reopened under this section unless it is determined, after the site visit, that incomplete or incorrect information was provided.

5. Determination that Critical Areas Are Affected. If the city determines that critical area indicators are present within 200 feet of the proposed activity or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter, then the determination shall be recorded in the project file and the applicant shall provide a critical areas site assessment as specified in this chapter. Development of a site assessment may precede a site visit; provided, that no disturbance of vegetation or land surface occurs prior to authorization.

6. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. Based on the critical areas site assessment report and other available critical areas information, the city shall make a determination on the proposed activity. A determination to approve a proposed activity shall include designation of protected critical areas (PCAs) pursuant to this chapter and stipulation of binding conditions and required mitigation, monitoring, maintenance or other conditions of approval pursuant to this chapter. If there are no conditions under which the proposed activity could be approved, then the community development director shall deny the proposal. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.110 Critical areas checklist, site assessment and conditions of approval.

A. Critical Areas Checklist. Every application for an activity that might alter or adversely affect a critical area or critical area buffer shall include a critical area checklist on a form provided by the director. The checklist shall identify all critical area indicators and/or all known critical areas within 200 feet of the proposed activity or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter. The checklist shall be signed by the applicant and shall inform the applicant that if the information on the checklist is later determined incorrect, then any permit or approval issued based on information provided may be rescinded and the site restored to its original, predevelopment, condition.

B. Site Assessment Required. If, after a site visit, the city determines that the proposed activity area is within 200 feet, or within a distance otherwise specified in this chapter, of an area that may contain critical area indicators, or if the city determines that the proposed activity will adversely impact a critical area or its associated buffer, then a complete critical areas site assessment shall be required. Critical areas site assessments, as described in more detail in the various sections for each type of critical area, shall be submitted as part of a complete application for a development permit, or other approval of land use activities having the potential to impact critical areas or their buffers, by a qualified expert.

C. Site Assessment Preparation. The critical area site assessment shall be prepared by a qualified expert for the type of critical area or areas involved and shall contain the information specified for each type of critical area. In general, the site assessment shall include critical area inventory, assessment of impacts and, where applicable, proposed mitigation, land use restrictions and landowner management, maintenance and monitoring responsibilities. The city may require peer review or review by personnel from state and federal agencies with expertise.

D. Any site plans required by this chapter may be combined into a single site plan wherever possible.

E. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. After receiving a complete site assessment report, the city shall determine whether or not the proposed activity meets the requirements of this chapter and under what conditions. This determination shall utilize the information provided in the site assessment report and all other resource information available.

Critical area determinations shall be made in writing, contain findings addressing the requirements of this chapter, and shall identify any conditions of approval, land use prohibitions, and mitigation, management, monitoring and maintenance requirements. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.120 Application of standards.

This chapter shall apply to all public and private land use actions and development including, but not limited to, new structures, additions, land divisions, grading, and filling located on either public or private property. Projects may be exempted from the detailed critical area review requirements of this chapter when the following situations and/or conditions apply:

A. Emergencies that threaten the public health, safety and welfare. An emergency is an unanticipated and imminent threat to the public health or safety or to the environment which requires immediate action within a period of time too short to allow full compliance with this chapter. Emergency actions that create an impact to a critical area or its buffer shall use reasonable methods that can address the emergency but also that have the least possible impact to the critical area or its buffer. The responsible party (property owner or agent) shall restore the critical area and buffer after the emergency to the extent feasible. The person or agency undertaking such action shall notify the director within one working day or as soon as practical following commencement of the emergency activity. Following such notification, the director shall determine if the action taken was within the scope of the emergency actions allowed in this subsection. If the director determines that the action taken or any part of the action taken was beyond the scope of allowed emergency actions, then the enforcement provision shall apply.

B. Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing structures, utilities, sewage disposal systems, potable water systems, drainage facilities, ponds, or public and private roads and driveways associated with preexisting residential or commercial development, provided any maintenance or repair activities shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the critical areas and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.

C. Normal maintenance, repair, or operation of existing structures, facilities, and improved areas accessory to a single-family residential use, provided any maintenance or repair activities shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the critical area and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.

D. Modification of an existing single-family residence that does not change the use from residential, does not expand the building footprint or increase septic effluent, and does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

E. Modification of other than a single-family use which does not expand the building footprint, alter the use or increase septic effluent, pursuant to the requirements of the nonconforming use and structure provisions, and does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

F. Outdoor recreational activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

G. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling soil, planting crops, or changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources and provided further that the activity does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

H. The operation and maintenance, construction and reconstruction of diking and drainage systems which protect life and property along the Skagit River.

I. Education and scientific research activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

J. Construction or modification of navigational aids and channels markers.

K. Site investigation work necessary for land use applications such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests and other related activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers. In every case, critical area impacts shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored.

L. Maintenance activities such as mowing and normal pruning; provided, that such maintenance activities are limited to existing landscaping improvements and do not expand into critical areas or associated buffers, do not expose soils, do not alter topography, do not destroy or clear native vegetation, and do not diminish water quality or quantity.

M. Fish, wildlife, wetland and/or riparian enhancement activities not required as mitigation; provided, that the project is approved by the U. S. Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife or the Washington State Department of Ecology.

N. Developments in the floodplain other than the following shall require a floodplain approval:

1. Minor structures and additions for which a building permit is not required and which create no new residence such as a slab on grade, or a storage building less than 120 square feet in area, or other structures exempt from permits in the International Building Code;

2. Fills of less than 12 cubic yards or which will not raise the level of the land above that of the surrounding area;

3. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding, at comparable grade of streets, and accessways;

4. Underground improvements and excavations;

5. Maintenance and minor repair of existing improvements;

6. Improvements to structures listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places;

7. Other minor developments which cause no significant impoundment or displacement of floodwaters, such as open fences, signs and small unenclosed structures.

All such activities shall be carried out in ways that cause the least impact to critical areas and their buffers. If any damage is caused to a critical area or buffer in connection with such activity, the critical area and its buffer must be restored to the extent feasible. To be exempt does not give permission to destroy a critical area or ignore risk. Proponents of such activities shall be responsible for notifying the community development director if any damage occurs and shall provide all necessary restoration or mitigation. For information on identifying, protecting or mitigating adverse impacts to critical areas, refer to sections in this chapter on wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, geologically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and flood hazard areas. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.130 General construction and maintenance standards.

All land use actions and development activities located in critical areas or critical area buffers shall be subject to the following general construction and maintenance standards:

A. All buffer areas and other designated protected areas shall be fenced with a highly visible and durable protective barrier during construction to prevent access and protect critical areas.

B. All disturbed areas on the site, including development coverage and construction activity areas, shall be controlled in a manner sufficient to control drainage and prevent erosion during construction, and revegetated to promote drainage control and prevent erosion after construction. In cases where erosion potential is severe, a vegetation and revegetation report prepared by a qualified professional with landscaping, plant ecology and botany education and experience may be required. All revegetation shall consist of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that is suitable for the location and does not require permanent irrigation systems for long-term survival.

C. When development is proposed in a critical area or critical area buffer, grading activities shall be strictly limited to areas located on the most environmentally suitable portion of the site.

D. All drainage associated with the development shall be managed using an approved drainage control system in accordance with the provisions of this title.

E. Land use actions and development shall comply with the seismic design requirements identified in the building code adopted by, or referenced in, BMC Title 15.

F. All grading in critical areas shall not occur prior to March 31st and shall be stabilized by October 31st unless demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director based on approved technical analysis that no environmental harm or safety issues would result from grading between November 1st and March 31st.

G. Construction activities shall adhere to a prepared schedule approved by the city prior to issuance of a building or development permit. This schedule shall include, but not be limited to, a schedule for compliance with project conditions, limits of construction and work activities, equipment to be used, start and duration of each phase, and work sequencing.

H. Dumping or filling is prohibited in wetlands and special flood risk areas. Dumping includes deposit of yard waste, trash, litter, refuse, dirt, concrete, asphalt, rocks or similar materials, but shall not include work authorized by approved plans and permits. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.140 Reasonable use exception.

If the application of this chapter would result in denial of reasonable and economically viable use of a property, then a landowner may seek a reasonable use exception from the standards of this chapter, except for the flood hazard critical area where no exceptions are allowed. Reasonable use exceptions shall only apply to legal lots of record established prior to the effective date of this chapter. Reasonable use exceptions are intended as a “last resort” when no plan for mitigation can meet the requirements of this chapter and allow the applicant a reasonable economically viable use of their property. Reasonable use exceptions may only be granted under the following conditions:

A. The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable and economically viable use of the property and there is no reasonable and economically viable use with a lesser impact on the critical area than the use proposed; and

B. The proposed development does not pose a threat to the public health and safety; and any proposed modification to a critical area will be evaluated through consideration of a site assessment and mitigation plan prepared by the applicant’s qualified consultant pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, and will be the minimum necessary to allow reasonable and economically viable use of the property; and

C. Reasonable use determinations may be issued with conditions of approval, including modifications to the size and placement of structures and facilities to minimize impacts to critical areas and associated buffers. Mitigation requirements may also be imposed to ensure that all impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.150 Critical area and buffer mitigation requirements – General provisions.

A. Buffers.

1. As described in more detail in each relevant section, buffers have in some cases been determined necessary and appropriate to protect critical areas and their functions or to prevent risk from a critical area hazard. In those sections of this chapter where specific buffers are identified, those buffers are deemed “required” or “standard” buffers. If a project or activity does not propose any alteration of those buffers or of the associated critical area and the city determines that these buffers are adequate to protect the critical area or to prevent risk of a hazard from the critical area, then subject to the provisions of this section, no additional mitigation will be required. Once the critical area and its buffer have properly been delineated through a critical areas assessment and any conditions of approval have been established to ensure protection of the critical area function, no further critical areas mitigation assessment is required, except as necessary to ensure that long-term protection of critical areas and buffers is met in practice through compliance with the provisions of this section. The applicant shall ensure the protection of critical area by performing a site assessment on the entire parcel.

2. If, however, based on a site assessment by a qualified expert, unique features of the particular critical area or its buffer or of the proposed development, the qualified expert determines that additional buffers and/or mitigation measures beyond these buffers are necessary to adequately protect the function of the critical area or to prevent risk of a hazard from the critical area, such additional mitigation requirements may be imposed, provided the qualified expert can demonstrate, based on best available science, why that additional mitigation or buffering is required to adequately protect the critical area function or to prevent hazard from a critical area.

3. If the applicant proposes to reduce buffers or to alter the critical area or its required buffer, then the applicant shall demonstrate, based on best available science, why such buffer and/or critical area modification, together with such alternative mitigation proposed in the critical areas assessment, is sufficient to provide equal or better protection of the critical area function or provide no increased risk of a hazard from the critical area.

4. The critical areas assessment and the conditions of approval shall make adequate provision for long-term protection related to critical areas and buffers, and shall fully address the requirements of this chapter.

However, critical areas and/or buffers identified as protected critical areas (PCAs) as defined in this chapter do not require any provisions for public access, and appropriate restrictions may be included in the easement or title documents. Critical areas and/or buffers identified as PCAs are, however, subject to periodic inspection by the director, upon prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.

5. Protected Critical Areas (PCAs).

a. For proposed land divisions, critical areas and their associated buffers identified through the site assessment and city review process shall be designated as PCAs and placed in separate tracts or easements and protected through protective covenants shown on the face of the recorded plat. (See BMC 14.15.160, Protected critical area (PCA) requirements.)

b. For development projects or land use activities not involving a new land division, the critical area and its associated buffer identified through the site assessment process shall instead be identified as a PCA by either easement, open space designation or permit conditions, all including restrictive covenants and recorded with the auditor on a site plan to ensure long-term protection. Critical areas and/or buffers identified as PCAs are subject to periodic inspection, upon prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.

6. Open Space – Protected Area. If a portion of a parcel contains a proposed development project that triggers a development permit, and has not had its critical areas and associated buffers delineated because it was outside the project or area affected by the project, then further critical areas assessment may be required in the future prior to any change of use, or new development permit for that portion of the site.

B. Mitigation. All proposed alterations to critical areas or associated buffers shall require mitigation sufficient to provide for and maintain the functional values of the critical area or to prevent risk from a critical area hazard and shall give adequate consideration to the reasonable economically viable use of the property. Mitigation of one critical area impact should not result in unmitigated impacts to another critical area. Mitigation may include, but is not limited to: buffers, setbacks, limits on clearing and grading, best management practices for erosion control and maintenance of water quality, or other conditions appropriate to avoid or mitigate identified adverse impacts.

C. Preferred Mitigation Sequence. Mitigation includes avoiding, minimizing or compensating for adverse impacts to regulated critical areas or their buffers. The preferred sequence of mitigation is defined below:

1. Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

2. Minimize the impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project or activity;

4. Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

5. Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;

6. All proposed mitigation shall be included in the critical areas assessment. The critical areas mitigation shall include the following:

a. Description of proposed mitigations (critical areas lost/critical areas gained);

b. Analysis of avoidance, minimization, reduction, and compensation;

c. Functional analysis of mitigation/analysis of prevention of risk hazard;

d. Proposed applicant or landowner monitoring or inspection measures and schedule, including specification of method and frequency of submittal of reports on results; and

e. Contingency plan.

D. Mitigation requirements shall be identified in written conditions of approval and shall be included in an approved mitigation plan.

E. Financial Assurance. The approved mitigation plan shall be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. For all projects with an estimated mitigation cost of $4,000 or over, the financial assurance may be required to assure compliance with the mitigation plan if the complete mitigation proposed in the site assessment cannot be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. Financial assurance shall be in the form of either a surety bond, performance bond, assignment of savings account or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the city attorney, shall be in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of the uncompleted actions or construction, and shall be assigned in favor of the city of Burlington. The term of the financial assurance shall remain in place until the required mitigation is complete.

F. Monitoring of Critical Areas Mitigation. On a regular basis, but no less frequently than once every two years, the city shall survey a sampling of projects and activities for which critical area site assessments were required, including mitigation plans, potentially impacting fish-bearing streams and/or Category I, II or III wetlands. The sample shall be taken from permits or approvals issued more than 10 months prior to the sampling date. The selected sites shall be inspected for critical area and buffer size and condition and for compliance with any required mitigation or other conditions of approval. Results of such sampling shall be included in the permanent record for the project or activity, shall be reported to the city council, and shall also be utilized for enforcement purposes. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.160 Protected critical area (PCA) requirements.

A. PCA Identification and Recording.

1. PCA Identification. Approval of development projects which trigger a development permit and other land use activities that can cause adverse impacts to critical areas and/or their buffers shall require the identification and designation of PCAs by the community development director. This section is intended to apply to unique critical area elements such as buffers or wellhead protection areas that can cause adverse impacts; location in the floodplain unless adjacent to a wetland or riparian corridor does not require recording of a PCA. PCAs shall include all critical areas and associated buffers on the proposed project site which have been identified through the site assessment process.

2. PCA Recording. All PCAs shall be recorded with the county auditor in accordance with the procedures established under this section. The applicant shall be responsible for all fees and other costs associated with recording of PCAs.

3. For each project or activity that requires recording of PCAs, the following information shall be recorded with the auditor and be readily available to the public upon request:

a. Recorded documents signed by the landowner and the director which stipulates any special conditions of approval, protective covenants, binding conditions, or other requirements such as use restrictions, required mitigation, and/or landowner maintenance or monitoring requirements established at the time of approval;

b. Required final plat map or site plan clearly showing the locations of PCAs, existing vegetation and permanent buffer edge markers;

c. Additional information necessary to document the critical areas inventory at the time of approval, including descriptions of identified critical areas, their locations, functions and values, and existing critical areas or buffer vegetation;

d. Identification of any local responsibilities beyond those required by this chapter;

e. Reference to the file containing the complete record of information pertaining to approval of the project or activity.

4. Permanent Buffer Edge Markers. Except as provided under subsection (A)(4)(a) of this section, the outer edges of all PCAs, with the exception of aquifer recharge areas, may be required, and if required shall be clearly marked on site by the applicant or landowner with permanent rebar stakes and critical area markers. Critical area markers may be either approved critical area signs or inexpensive steel posts painted a standard color approved by the director that is clearly identifiable as a critical area marker. Installation of permanent markers shall be the responsibility of the landowner.

a. The director may waive or modify the requirement for permanent buffer edge markers; provided, that any such decision shall be based on a site-specific determination that future verification of PCA locations will not be substantially more difficult without the placement of permanent markers and that such waiver or modification will not result in reduced long-term protection of critical areas. The determination shall be included in the permanent record.

b. Where such permanent markers are required, the director shall specify their frequency of placement and general location. Permanent markers shall be placed to locate the edge of the PCA to an approximate accuracy of within five percent of the specified buffer width or within five feet, whichever is larger. The spacing intervals of the markers shall be such as to provide comparable accuracy of line-of-sight determination of buffer edges. The locations of all required stakes/markers shall be shown on the plat map or site map recorded with the auditor.

B. Protected Critical Area (PCA) Designations for New Land Divisions.

1. For land divisions where site assessments have occurred pursuant to this chapter, all PCAs shall be placed into separate tracts or easements, whose uses shall be regulated by the provisions of this chapter and any conditions of approval, including protective covenants and binding agreements as provided for under subsection (A) of this section. Area within a PCA can be included in total acreage for development purposes end may be used in lot area or density calculations. PCAs may be owned and maintained by the owner of the lot of which they are a part or transferred to the homeowners association or land trust. Wetlands and buffers in the Gages Slough corridor may be donated to the city in exchange for park impact fee credit.

2. Recording. PCA designations shall be recorded with the auditor as part of the plat approval process.

The auditor file number referencing the agreement shall be on the face of the plat and its provisions shall run with the land.

3. PCA Descriptions. The location of PCAs shall be clearly identified on site plans and on preliminary and final plat maps. PCAs shall be labeled using the letters A through Z, or another labeling system approved by the community development director. Where more than one lot is involved, each lot shall carry independent labeling as described in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

4. Ingress, Egress and Use. Owners of PCAs shall grant ingress and egress by the community development director or his or her agent for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation. As part of an approved land division, the use limitations required of a designated and regulated critical area according to the provisions of this chapter, including the conclusions of the critical areas site assessment report and any conditions of approval, protective covenants and other binding conditions, shall be clearly stated on the face of the recorded plat.

C. PCAs on Preexisting Lots.

1. For development proposals and other land use activities that can adversely impact critical areas on preexisting lots, not part of a proposed land division or other form of multiple lot development, PCAs shall be identified on a scaled site plan showing the location of the PCA, structures (existing and proposed) and their distances from the PCA and lot lines to show relative location within the subject parcel(s). The project or activity shall be conditioned for critical area protection and the resulting information recorded with the auditor as defined under subsection (A) of this section. The site plan may be prepared by the applicant and all distances and locations of structures may be measured from the established PCA boundary to within plus or minus five feet.

2. Ingress and Egress. The city shall be granted access to PCAs for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation.

D. PCA Mapping, Labeling, and Area Calculations.

1. All PCAs shall be mapped. The area shall be delineated on the final plat map or on a site plan to an accuracy of plus or minus five feet horizontal and monumented in the field by a qualified expert.

2. During construction phases of development, clear temporary marking using flagging and staking shall be maintained along the outer limits of the delineated PCA or the limits of the proposed site disturbance outside of the PCA. Prior to the start of construction activity, and as necessary during construction, temporary markings shall be inspected and approved by the community development director or designee. The person responsible for inspecting the temporary flagging shall provide written confirmation to be included in the record as to whether or not the flagging has been installed consistent with the permit requirements prior to commencement of the permitted activity.

3. All PCAs shall include the necessary labeling to show calculated area (in square feet or acreage), and type and/or class of critical area within each lot. This information shall be noted on the face of the approved plat or site plan.

4. Sign, Marker and Fence Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the landowner to maintain the required PCA markers, signs or fences in working order throughout the duration of the development project or land use activity. Maintenance includes any necessary replacement. Removal of required signs, markers or fences without prior written approval of the director shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.170 Incentives.

The following incentives are intended to minimize the burden to individual property owners from application of the provisions of this chapter and assist the city in achieving the goals of this chapter:

A. Open Space. Any property owner on whose property a critical area or its associated buffer is located and who proposes to put the critical area and buffer in a separate open space tract may apply for current use property tax assessment on that separate tract pursuant to chapter 84.34 RCW.

B. Conservation Easement. Any person who owns an identified critical area or its associated buffer may place a conservation easement over that portion of the property by naming a qualified designee under RCW 64.04.130 as beneficiary of the conservation easement. This conservation easement can be used in lieu of the creation of a separate critical areas tract to qualify for open space tax assessment described in subsection (A) of this section.

The purpose of the easement shall be to preserve, protect, maintain, restore and limit future use of the property affected. The terms of the conservation easement may include prohibitions or restrictions on access and shall be approved by the property owner and the qualified designee. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

WETLANDS


14.15.180 Wetlands identification and rating.

A. Identification and Delineation. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the city meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Wetland delineations are valid for five years; after such date the city shall determine whether a revision or additional assessment is necessary.

B. Rating. Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington Department of Ecology wetland rating system, as set forth in the Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington: 2014 Update (Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029, effective January 2015) or as revised and approved by Ecology, which contains the definitions and methods for determining whether the criteria below are met.

1. Category I. Category I wetlands are: (a) relatively undisturbed estuarine wetlands larger than one acre; (b) wetlands of high conservation value that are identified by scientists of the Washington Natural Heritage Program/DNR; (c) bogs; (d) mature and old-growth forested wetlands larger than one acre; (e) wetlands in coastal lagoons; (f) interdunal wetlands that score eight or nine habitat points and are larger than one acre; and (g) wetlands that perform many functions well (scoring 23 points or more). These wetlands: (a) represent unique or rare wetland types; (b) are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; (c) are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or (d) provide a high level of functions.

2. Category II. Category II wetlands are: (a) estuarine wetlands smaller than one acre, or disturbed estuarine wetlands larger than one acre; (b) interdunal wetlands larger than one acre or those found in a mosaic of wetlands; or (c) wetlands with a moderately high level of functions (scoring between 20 and 22 points).

3. Category III. Category III wetlands are: (a) wetlands with a moderate level of functions (scoring between 16 and 19 points); (b) can often be adequately replaced with a well-planned mitigation project; and (c) interdunal wetlands between 0.1 and one acre. Wetlands scoring between 16 and 19 points generally have been disturbed in some ways and are often less diverse or more isolated from other natural resources in the landscape than Category II wetlands.

4. Category IV. Category IV wetlands have the lowest levels of functions (scoring fewer than 16 points) and are often heavily disturbed. These are wetlands that we should be able to replace, or in some cases to improve. However, experience has shown that replacement cannot be guaranteed in any specific case. These wetlands may provide some important functions, and should be protected to some degree. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.185 Wetland buffers.

A. Standard Wetland Buffer Widths. The standard buffer widths in Table 14.15.185-1 have been established in accordance with the best available science. They are based on the category of wetland and the habitat score as determined by a qualified wetland professional using the Washington State wetland rating system for western Washington.

1. Buffer Conditions.

a. These buffer widths assume that the buffer is vegetated with a native plant community appropriate for the ecoregion. If the existing buffer is unvegetated, sparsely vegetated, or vegetated with invasive species that do not perform needed functions, the buffer should either be planted to create the appropriate plant community or the buffer should be widened to ensure that adequate functions of the buffer are provided.

b. Measurement of Wetland Buffers. All buffers shall be measured perpendicular from the wetland boundary as surveyed in the field. The buffer for a wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland. Only fully vegetated buffers will be considered. Lawns, walkways, driveways, and other mowed or paved areas will not be considered buffers or included in buffer area calculations.

c. Buffers on Mitigation Sites. All mitigation sites shall have buffers consistent with the buffer requirements of this chapter to the extent feasible. Buffers shall be based on the expected or target category of the proposed wetland mitigation site.

d. Overlapping Critical Area Buffers. If buffers for two contiguous critical areas overlap (such as buffers for a stream and a wetland), the wider buffer applies.

e. Buffer Maintenance. Except as otherwise specified or allowed in accordance with this chapter, wetland buffers shall be retained in an undisturbed or enhanced condition. In the case of compensatory mitigation sites, removal of invasive nonnative weeds is required for the duration of the required maintenance and monitoring timeline, which ranges from five to 10 years depending on location.


Table 14.15.185-1. Width of buffers needed to protect wetlands in western Washington considering impacts of proposed land uses.

	Category of Wetland	Land Use with Low Impact*	Land Use with Moderate Impact*	Land Use with High Impact*

	IV	25 ft	40 ft	50 ft

	III	75 ft	110 ft	150 ft

	II	150 ft	225 ft	300 ft

	I	150 ft	225 ft	300 ft

* See Table 14.15.185-2 below for types of land uses that can result in low, moderate, and high impacts to wetlands.


Table 14.15.185-2. Types of proposed land use that can result in high, moderate, and low levels of impacts to adjacent wetlands. 

	Level of Impact from Proposed Change in Land Use	Types of Land Use Based on Common Zoning Designations

	High	•    Commercial

•    Urban

•    Industrial

•    Institutional

•    Retail sales

•    Residential (more than 1 unit/acre)

•    Conversion to high-intensity agriculture (dairies, nurseries, greenhouses, growing and harvesting crops requiring annual tilling and raising and maintaining animals, etc.)

•    High-intensity recreation (golf courses, ball fields, etc.)

•    Hobby farms

	Moderate	•    Residential (1 unit/acre or less)

•    Moderate-intensity open space (parks with biking, jogging, etc.)

•    Conversion to moderate-intensity agriculture (orchards, hay fields, etc.)

•    Paved trails

•    Building of logging roads

•    Utility corridor or right-of-way shared by several utilities and including access/maintenance road

	Low	•    Forestry (cutting of trees only)

•    Low-intensity open space (hiking, bird-watching, preservation of natural resources, etc.)

•    Unpaved trails

•    Utility corridor without a maintenance road and little or no vegetation management

B. Increased Wetland Buffer Widths. Buffer widths shall be increased on a case-by-case basis when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values. This determination shall be supported by appropriate documentation showing that it is reasonably related to protection of the functions and values of the wetland. The documentation must include but not be limited to the following criteria:

1. The wetland is used by a plant or animal species listed by the federal government or the state as endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, monitored or documented priority species or habitats, or essential or outstanding habitat for those species or has unusual nesting or resting sites such as heron rookeries or raptor nesting trees; or

2. The adjacent land is susceptible to severe erosion, and erosion-control measures will not effectively prevent adverse wetland impacts; or

3. The adjacent land has minimal vegetative cover or slopes greater than 30 percent.

C. Decreased Wetland Buffer Widths. Buffer widths shall be decreased on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city. This determination shall be supported by appropriate documentation showing that it still protects the functions and values of the wetland. The documentation must include but not be limited to the following criteria:

1. Buffer averaging to improve wetland protection may be permitted when all of the following conditions are met:

a. The wetland has significant differences in characteristics that affect its habitat functions, such as a wetland with a forested component adjacent to a degraded emergent component or a “dual-rated” wetland with a Category I area adjacent to a lower-rated area.

b. The buffer is increased adjacent to the higher-functioning area of habitat or more-sensitive portion of the wetland and decreased adjacent to the lower-functioning or less-sensitive portion as demonstrated by a critical areas report from a qualified wetland professional.

c. The total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging.

d. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than either three-quarters of the required width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III, and 25 feet for Category IV, whichever is greater.

2. Buffer averaging to allow reasonable use of a parcel may be permitted when all of the following are met:

a. There are no feasible alternatives to the site design that could be accomplished without buffer averaging.

b. The averaged buffer will not result in degradation of the wetland’s functions and values as demonstrated by a critical areas report from a qualified wetland professional.

c. The total buffer area after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging.

d. The buffer at its narrowest point is never less than either three-quarters of the required width or 75 feet for Category I and II, 50 feet for Category III and 25 feet for Category IV, whichever category is applicable.

D. Allowed Buffer Uses. The following uses may be allowed within a wetland buffer in accordance with the review procedures of this chapter; provided they are not prohibited by any other applicable law and they are conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to the buffer and adjacent wetland:

1. Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation or restoration activities aimed at protecting the soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife.

2. Passive recreation. Passive recreation facilities designed and in accordance with an approved critical area report, including:

a. Walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways are limited to minor crossings having no adverse impact on water quality. They should be generally parallel to the perimeter of the wetland, located only in the outer 25 percent of the wetland buffer area, and located to avoid removal of significant trees. They should be limited to pervious surfaces no more than five feet in width for pedestrian use only. Raised boardwalks utilizing nontreated pilings may be acceptable.

b. Wildlife-viewing structures.

3. Educational and scientific research activities.

4. Normal and routine maintenance and repair of any existing public or private facilities within an existing right-of-way; provided, that the maintenance or repair does not increase the footprint or use of the facility or right-of-way.

5. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling of soil, planting of crops, chemical applications, or alteration of the wetland by changing existing topography, water conditions, or water source.

6. Drilling for utilities/utility corridors under a buffer, with entrance/exit portals located completely outside of the wetland buffer boundary; provided, that the drilling does not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column is disturbed.

7. Enhancement of a wetland buffer through the removal of nonnative invasive plant species. Removal of invasive plant species shall be restricted to hand removal. All removed plant material shall be taken away from the site and appropriately disposed of. Plants that appear on the Washington State Noxious Weed Control Board list of noxious weeds must be handled and disposed of according to a noxious weed control plan appropriate to that species. Revegetation with appropriate native species at natural densities is allowed in conjunction with removal of invasive plant species.

8. Storm water management facilities. Storm water management facilities are limited to storm water dispersion outfalls and bioswales. They may be allowed within the outer 25 percent of the buffer of Category III or IV wetlands only; provided, that:

a. No other location is feasible; and

b. The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the wetland; and

c. Storm water management facilities are not allowed in buffers of Category I or II wetlands.

9. Nonconforming Uses. Repair and maintenance of nonconforming uses or structures, where legally established within the buffer, provided they do not increase the degree of nonconformity.

E. Signs and Fencing of Wetlands and Buffers.

1. Temporary Markers. The outer perimeter of the wetland buffer and the clearing limits identified by an approved permit or authorization shall be marked in the field with temporary “clearing limits” fencing in such a way as to ensure that no unauthorized intrusion will occur. The marking is subject to inspection by the community development director prior to the commencement of permitted activities. This temporary marking shall be maintained throughout construction and shall not be removed until permanent signs, if required, are in place.

2. Permanent Signs. As a condition of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter, the city may require the installation of permanent signs along the boundary of a wetland or buffer.

a. Permanent signs shall be made of an enamel-coated metal face and attached to a metal post or another nontreated material of equal durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of one per lot or every 50 feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. The signs shall be worded as follows or with alternative language approved by the community development director:

Protected Wetland Area

No Dumping - Do Not Disturb

Thank you

b. The provisions of subsection (E)(2)(a) of this section may be modified as necessary to assure protection of sensitive features or wildlife.

3. Fencing.

a. The applicant shall be required to install a permanent fence around the wetland or buffer when domestic grazing animals are present or may be introduced on site.

b. Fencing installed as part of a proposed activity or as required in this subsection shall be designed so as to not interfere with species migration, including fish runs, and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes impacts to the wetland and associated habitat. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.190 Wetlands initial project review.

A. A site visit shall be conducted to confirm the presence of wetland indicators listed in the critical areas checklist or identified on critical areas map references as being within 300 feet of a proposed project or activity. A positive confirmation by the community development director that site indicators are present or that the proposed project may impact the wetland area will then require a professional site assessment.

B. The following map references shall be used to assist in making a determination:

1. Wetlands mapped under the National Wetland Inventory by the U. S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service;

2. Areas mapped as hydric soils under the Soil Survey of Skagit County Area, Washington, by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service;

3. A water of the state as defined under WAC 222-16-030 and maintained in the Washington State Department of Natural Resources Stream Type Maps; and

4. Wetlands previously identified through the methodology specified under this title for another project. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.200 Wetlands site assessment requirements.

If a wetlands site assessment is required, it shall meet the following requirements:

A. A wetland reconnaissance shall be performed by a qualified wetlands professional. The reconnaissance shall identify the presence of wetlands within 300 feet of the project or activity area. If this wetland reconnaissance demonstrates no wetlands within 300 feet of the activity area, then no further study is required.

B. A wetland delineation shall be performed as part of a site assessment where a wetland reconnaissance confirms the presence of a wetland or the applicant chooses to perform delineation instead of a wetland reconnaissance. The delineation shall be performed by a qualified wetland professional trained in conducting delineations in accordance with the methodology specified under this title.

C. If the site of a proposed development includes, is likely to include, or is adjacent to a wetland, a wetland report, prepared by a qualified professional, shall be required. The expense of preparing the wetland report shall be borne by the applicant.

D. Minimum Standards for Wetland Reports. The written report and the accompanying plan sheets shall contain the following information, at a minimum:

1. The written report shall include at a minimum:

a. The name and contact information of the applicant; the name, qualifications, and contact information for the primary author(s) of the wetland critical area report; a description of the proposal; identification of all the local, state, and/or federal wetland-related permit(s) required for the project; and a vicinity map for the project.

b. A statement specifying the accuracy of the report and all assumptions made and relied upon.

c. Documentation of any fieldwork, performed on the site, including field data sheets for delineations, rating system forms, baseline hydrologic data, etc.

d. A description of the methodologies used to conduct the wetland delineations, rating system forms, or impact analyses including references.

e. Identification and characterization of all critical areas, wetlands, water bodies, shorelines, floodplains, and buffers on or adjacent to the proposed project area. For areas off site of the project site, estimate conditions within 300 feet of the project boundaries using the best available information.

f. For each wetland identified on site and within 300 feet of the project site provide: the wetland rating, including a description of and score for each function, per wetland ratings of this title; required buffers; hydrogeomorphic classification; wetland acreage based on a professional survey from the field delineation (acreages for on-site portion and entire wetland area including off-site portions); Cowardin classification of vegetation communities; habitat elements; soil conditions based on site assessment and/or soil survey information; and to the extent possible, hydrologic information such as location and condition of inlet/outlets (if they can be legally accessed), estimated water depths within the wetland, and estimated hydroperiod patterns based on visual cues (e.g., algal mats, drift lines, flood debris, etc.). Provide acreage estimates, classifications, and ratings based on entire wetland complexes, not only the portion present on the proposed project site.

g. A description of the proposed actions, including an estimation of acreages of impacts to wetlands and buffers based on the field delineation and survey and an analysis of site development alternatives, including a no-development alternative.

h. An assessment of the probable cumulative impacts to the wetlands and buffers resulting from the proposed development.

i. A description of reasonable efforts made to apply mitigation sequencing pursuant to mitigation sequencing to avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts to critical areas.

j. A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and compensation, proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity.

k. A conservation strategy for habitat and native vegetation that addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.

l. An evaluation of the functions of the wetland and adjacent buffer. Include reference for the method used and data sheets.

2. A copy of the site plan sheet(s) for the project must be included with the written report and must include, at a minimum:

a. Maps (to scale) depicting delineated and surveyed wetland and required buffers on site, including buffers for off-site critical areas that extend onto the project site; the development proposal; other critical areas; grading and clearing limits; areas of proposed impacts to wetlands and/or buffers (include square footage estimates).

b. A depiction of the proposed storm water management facilities and outlets (to scale) for the development, including estimated areas of intrusion into the buffers of any critical areas. The written report shall contain a discussion of the potential impacts to the wetland(s) associated with anticipated hydroperiod alterations from the project. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.210 Alteration of wetlands.

A. A regulated wetland or its required buffer can only be altered if the wetlands site assessment shows that the proposed alteration does not degrade the quantitative and qualitative functioning of the wetland, or any degradation can be adequately mitigated to protect the wetland function. Any alteration approved pursuant to this section shall include mitigation necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed alteration on the wetland as described in BMC 14.15.220, Wetland mitigation standards.

B. Storm water discharges to wetlands shall be controlled and treated to provide all known and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment as mandated in the State Water Quality Standards, chapter 173-201A WAC, as required by state law and implemented in chapter 14.05 BMC, Surface Water Management. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.220 Wetland mitigation standards.

A. Mitigation Sequencing. Before impacting any wetland or its buffer, an applicant shall demonstrate that the following actions have been taken. Actions are listed in the order of preference:

1. Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action.

2. Minimize impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation, by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts.

3. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.

4. Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations.

5. Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments.

6. Monitor the required compensation and take remedial or corrective measures when necessary.

B. Requirements for Compensatory Mitigation.

1. Compensatory mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall be used only for impacts that cannot be avoided or minimized and shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions. Compensatory mitigation plans shall be consistent with Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans – Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011b, Olympia, WA, March 2006 or as revised), and Selecting Wetland Mitigation Sites Using a Watershed Approach (Western Washington) (Publication No. 09-06-32, Olympia, WA, December 2009).

2. Mitigation ratios shall be consistent with subsection (G) of this section.

3. Mitigation requirements may also be determined using the credit/debit tool described in Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised) consistent with subsection (H) this section.

C. Compensating for Lost or Affected Functions. Compensatory mitigation shall address the functions affected by the proposed project, with an intention to achieve functional equivalency or improvement of functions. The goal shall be for the compensatory mitigation to provide similar wetland functions as those lost, except when either:

1. The lost wetland provides minimal functions, and the proposed compensatory mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions shown to be limiting within a watershed through a formal Washington state watershed assessment plan or protocol; or

2. Out-of-kind replacement of wetland type or functions will best meet watershed goals formally identified by the city, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types.

D. Preference of Mitigation Actions. Mitigation for lost or diminished wetland and buffer functions shall rely on the types below in the following order of preference:

1. Restoration (reestablishment and rehabilitation) of wetlands:

a. The goal of reestablishment is returning natural or historic functions to a former wetland. Reestablishment results in a gain in wetland acres (and functions). Activities could include removing fill material, plugging ditches, or breaking drain tiles.

b. The goal of rehabilitation is repairing natural or historic functions of a degraded wetland. Rehabilitation results in a gain in wetland function but does not result in a gain in wetland acres.

2. Creation (establishment) of wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of nonnative species. Establishment results in a gain in wetland acres. This should be attempted only when there is an adequate source of water and it can be shown that the surface and subsurface hydrologic regime is conducive to the wetland community that is anticipated in the design.

a. If a site is not available for wetland restoration to compensate for expected wetland and/or buffer impacts, the approval authority may authorize creation of a wetland and buffer upon demonstration by the applicant’s qualified wetland scientist that:

i. The hydrology and soil conditions at the proposed mitigation site are conducive for sustaining the proposed wetland and that creation of a wetland at the site will not likely cause hydrologic problems elsewhere;

ii. The proposed mitigation site does not contain invasive plants or noxious weeds or that such vegetation will be completely eradicated at the site;

iii. Adjacent land uses and site conditions do not jeopardize the viability of the proposed wetland and buffer (e.g., due to the presence of invasive plants or noxious weeds, storm water runoff, noise, light, or other impacts); and

iv. The proposed wetland and buffer will eventually be self-sustaining with little or no long-term maintenance.

3. Enhancement of significantly degraded wetlands in combination with restoration or creation. Enhancement should be part of a mitigation package that includes replacing the altered area and meeting appropriate ratio requirements. Enhancement is undertaken for specified purposes such as water quality improvement, flood water retention, or wildlife habitat. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands or associated buffers shall demonstrate:

a. How the proposed enhancement will increase the wetland’s/buffer’s functions;

b. How this increase in function will adequately compensate for the impacts; and

c. How all other existing wetland functions at the mitigation site will be protected.

4. Preservation. Preservation of high-quality, at-risk wetlands as compensation are generally acceptable when done in combination with restoration, creation, or enhancement; provided, that a minimum of 1:1 acreage replacement is provided. Ratios for preservation in combination with other forms of mitigation generally range from 10:1 to 20:1, as determined on a case-by-case basis, depending on the quality of the wetlands being altered and the quality of the wetlands being preserved.

Preservation of high-quality, at-risk wetlands and habitat may be considered as the sole means of compensation for wetland impacts when the following criteria are met:

a. The area proposed for preservation is of high quality. The following features may be indicative of high-quality sites:

i. Category I or ll wetland rating (using the wetland rating system for western Washington).

ii. Rare wetland type (for example, bogs, mature forested wetlands, estuarine wetlands).

iii. The presence of habitat for priority or locally important wildlife species.

iv. Priority sites in an adopted watershed plan.

b. Wetland impacts will not have a significant adverse impact on habitat for listed fish, or other ESA listed species.

c. There is no net loss of habitat functions within the watershed or basin.

d. Mitigation ratios for preservation as the sole means of mitigation shall generally start at 20:1. Specific ratios should depend upon the significance of the preservation project and the quality of the wetland resources lost.

e. Permanent preservation of the wetland and buffer will be provided through a conservation easement or tract held by a land trust, or land in public ownership.

f. The impact area is small (generally less than one-half acre) and/or impacts are occurring to a low-functioning system (Category III or IV wetland).

All preservation sites shall include buffer areas adequate to protect the habitat and its functions from encroachment and degradation.

E. Location of Compensatory Mitigation. Compensatory mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same subdrainage basin and on the site of the alteration except when all of subsections (E)(1) through (4) of this section apply. In that case, mitigation may be allowed off site within the subwatershed of the impact site. When considering off-site mitigation, preference should be given to using alternative mitigation, such as a mitigation bank, an in-lieu fee program, or advanced mitigation.

1. There are no reasonable opportunities on site or within the subdrainage basin (e.g., on-site options would require elimination of high-functioning upland habitat), or opportunities on site or within the subdrainage basin do not have a high likelihood of success based on a determination of the capacity of the site to compensate for the impacts. Considerations should include: anticipated replacement ratios for wetland mitigation, buffer conditions and proposed widths, available water to maintain anticipated hydrogeomorphic classes of wetlands when restored, proposed flood storage capacity, and potential to mitigate riparian fish and wildlife impacts (such as connectivity).

2. On-site mitigation would require elimination of high-quality upland habitat.

3. Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the altered wetland.

4. Off-site locations shall be in the same subdrainage basin unless:

a. Established watershed goals for water quality, flood storage or conveyance, habitat, or other wetland functions have been established by the city and strongly justify location of mitigation at another site; or

b. Credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank are used as compensation, and the use of credits is consistent with the terms of the certified bank instrument; or

c. Fees are paid to an approved in-lieu fee program to compensate for the impacts.

The design for the compensatory mitigation project needs to be appropriate for its location (i.e., position in the landscape). Therefore, compensatory mitigation should not result in the creation, restoration, or enhancement of an atypical wetland. An atypical wetland refers to a compensation wetland (e.g., created or enhanced) that does not match the type of existing wetland that would be found in the geomorphic setting of the site (i.e., the water source(s) and hydroperiod proposed for the mitigation site are not typical for the geomorphic setting). Likewise, it should not provide exaggerated morphology or require a berm or other engineered structures to hold back water. For example, excavating a permanently inundated pond in an existing seasonally saturated or inundated wetland is one example of an enhancement project that could result in an atypical wetland. Another example would be excavating depressions in an existing wetland on a slope, which would require the construction of berms to hold the water.

F. Timing of Compensatory Mitigation. It is preferred that compensatory mitigation projects be completed prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. At the least, compensatory mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the action or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing fisheries, wildlife, and flora.

1. The community development director may authorize a one-time temporary delay in completing construction or installation of the compensatory mitigation when the applicant provides a written explanation from a qualified wetland professional as to the rationale for the delay. An appropriate rationale would include identification of the environmental conditions that could produce a high probability of failure or significant construction difficulties (e.g., project delay lapses past a fisheries window, or installing plants should be delayed until the dormant season to ensure greater survival of installed materials). The delay shall not create or perpetuate hazardous conditions or environmental damage or degradation, and the delay shall not be injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. The request for the temporary delay must include a written justification that documents the environmental constraints that include implementation of the compensatory mitigation plan. The justification must be verified and approved by the city.

G. Wetland Mitigation Ratios1:

	Category and Type of Wetland	Creation or Reestablishment	Rehabilitation	Enhancement

	Category I: Bog, Natural Heritage Site	Not considered possible	Case by case	Case by case

	Category I: Mature Forested	6:1	12:1	24:1

	Forested I: Based on Functions	4:1	8:1	16:1

	Category II	3:1	6:1	12:1

	Category III	2:1	4:1	8:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	3:1	6:1

H. Credit/Debit Method. To more fully protect functions and values, and as an alternative to the mitigation ratios found in the joint guidance “Wetland Mitigation in Washington State Parts I and II” (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a and b, Olympia, WA, March 2006), the community development director may allow mitigation based on the “credit/debit” method developed by the Department of Ecology in “Calculating Credits and Debits for Compensatory Mitigation in Wetlands of Western Washington: Final Report” (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-011, Olympia, WA, March 2012, or as revised).

I. Compensatory Mitigation Report. The report must include a written report and plan sheets that must contain, at a minimum, the following elements. Full guidance can be found in Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 2: Developing Mitigation Plans (Version 1) (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011b, Olympia, WA, March 2006, or as revised).

1. The written report must contain, at a minimum:

a. The name and contact information of the applicant; the name, qualifications, and contact information for the primary author(s) of the compensatory mitigation report; a description of the proposal; a summary of the impacts and proposed compensation concept; identification of all the local, state, and/or federal wetland-related permit(s) required for the project; and a vicinity map for the project.

b. Description of how the project design has been modified to avoid, minimize, or reduce adverse impacts to wetlands.

c. Description of the existing wetland and buffer areas proposed to be altered. Include acreage (or square footage), water regime, vegetation, soils, landscape position, surrounding land uses, and functions. Also describe impacts in terms of acreage by Cowardin classification, hydrogeomorpbic classification, and wetland rating, based on wetland ratings of this chapter.

d. Description of the compensatory mitigation site, including location and rationale for selection. Include an assessment of existing conditions: acreage (or square footage) of wetlands and uplands, water regime, sources of water, vegetation, soils, landscape position, surrounding land uses, and functions.

e. A description of the proposed actions for compensation of wetland and upland areas affected by the project. Include overall goals of the proposed mitigation including a description of the targeted functions, hydrogeomorphic classification, and categories of wetlands.

f. A description of the proposed mitigation construction activities and timing of activities.

g. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect wetlands after the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs (for remaining wetlands and compensatory mitigation wetlands).

h. A bond estimate for the entire compensatory mitigation project, including the following elements: site preparation, plant materials, construction materials, installation oversight, maintenance twice per year for up to five years, annual monitoring field work and reporting, and contingency actions for a maximum of the total required number of years for monitoring.

i. Proof of establishment of notice on title for the wetlands and buffers on the project site, including the compensatory mitigation areas.

2. The scaled plan sheets for the compensatory mitigation must contain, at a minimum:

a. Surveyed edges of the existing wetland and buffers, proposed areas of wetland and/or buffer impacts, location of proposed wetland and/or buffer compensation actions.

b. Existing topography, ground-proofed, at two-foot contour intervals in the zone of the proposed compensation actions if any grading activity is proposed to create the compensation area(s). Also existing cross-sections of on-site wetland areas that are proposed to be altered, and cross-section(s) (estimated one-foot intervals) for the proposed areas of wetland or buffer compensation.

c. Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions, including an analysis of existing and proposed hydrologic regimes for enhanced, created, or restored compensatory mitigation areas. Also, illustrations of how data for existing hydrologic conditions were used to determine the estimates of future hydrologic conditions.

d. Conditions expected from the proposed actions on site, including future hydrogeomorphic types, vegetation community types by dominant species (wetland and upland), and future water regimes.

e. Required wetland buffers for existing wetlands and proposed compensation areas. Also, identify any zones where buffers are proposed to be reduced or enlarged outside of the standards identified in this chapter.

f. A plant schedule for the compensation area, including all species by proposed community type and water regime, size and type of plant material to be installed, spacing of plants, typical clustering patterns, total number of each species by community type, timing of installation.

g. Performance standards (measurable standards reflective of years post-installation) for upland and wetland communities, monitoring schedule, and maintenance schedule and actions by each biennium.

J. Buffer Mitigation Ratios. Impacts to buffers shall be mitigated at a 1:1 ratio. Compensatory buffer mitigation shall replace those buffer functions lost from development.

K. Protection of the Mitigation Site. The area where the mitigation occurred and any associated buffer shall be located in a critical area tract or a conservation easement or land in public ownership.

L. Monitoring. Mitigation monitoring shall be required for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met, but not for a period less than five years. If a scrub-shrub or forested vegetation community is proposed, monitoring may be required for 10 years or more. The project mitigation plan shall include monitoring elements that ensure certainty of success for the project’s natural resource values and functions. If the mitigation goals are not obtained within the initial five-year period, the applicant remains responsible for restoration of the natural resource values and functions until the mitigation goals agreed to in the mitigation plan are achieved.

M. Wetland Mitigation Banks.

1. Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

a. The bank is certified under state rules;

b. The city determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

c. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the certified bank instrument.

2. Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the certified bank instrument.

3. Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the certified bank instrument. In some cases, the service area of the bank may include portions of more than one adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

N. In-Lieu Fee. To aid in the implementation of off-site mitigation, the city may develop an in-lieu fee program. This program shall be developed and approved through a public process and be consistent with federal rules, state policy on in-lieu fee mitigation, and state water quality regulations. An approved in-lieu fee program sells compensatory mitigation credits to permittees whose obligation to provide compensatory mitigation is then transfered to the in-lieu program sponsor, a governmental or nonprofit natural resource management entity. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used when subsections (N)(1) through (6) of this section apply:

1. The approval authority determines that it would provide environmentally appropriate compensation for the proposed impacts.

2. The mitigation will occur on a site identified using the site selection and prioritization process in the approved in-lieu fee program instrument.

3. The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the approved in-lieu fee program instrument.

4. Land acquisition and initial physical and biological improvements of the mitigation site must be completed within three years of the credit sale.

5. Projects using in-lieu fee credits shall have debits associated with the proposed impacts calculated by the applicant’s qualified wetland scientist using the method consistent with the credit assessment method specified in the approved instrument for the in-lieu fee program.

6. Credits from an approved in-lieu fee program may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the approved in-lieu fee instrument.

O. Advance Mitigation. Mitigation for projects with pre-identified impacts to wetlands may be constructed in advance of the impacts if the mitigation is implemented according to federal rules, state policy on advance mitigation, and state water quality regulations.

P. Exceptions to Mitigation Requirements. Requirements for mitigation do not apply under the following circumstances:

1. When a wetland alteration is intended exclusively for the enhancement or restoration of an existing regulated wetland and the proposal will not result in a loss of wetland function and value, subject to the following conditions:

a. The enhancement or restoration project shall not be associated with a development activity.

b. An enhancement or restoration plan shall be submitted for site plan review. The restoration or enhancement plan must include the information required under this title.

2. When a wetland is a part of a development activity that is permitted by the Corps of Engineers NWP permitting crossing of wetlands as part of road construction. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS


14.15.230 Aquifer recharge areas.

A. Intent. This section establishes areas determined to be critical in maintaining both ground water quantity and quality. This section specifies regulatory requirements to be enacted when development within these areas is proposed to occur and provides a methodology by which the level of review and any mitigation required is determined. The intent of this section is to:

1. Define minimum regulatory requirements to protect ground water quality and quantity for existing and future use; and

2. Identify the practices, alternatives, or mitigations that can minimize the adverse impacts of proposed projects; and

3. Ensure adequate design, construction, management, and operations to protect ground water quality and quantity.

B. Existing and future beneficial uses of ground water shall be maintained and protected and degradation of ground water quality that would interfere with or become injurious to beneficial uses shall be avoided or minimized.

C. Wherever ground waters are determined to be of a higher quality than the criteria established for said waters under this section, the existing water quality shall be protected, and contaminants that will reduce the existing quality thereof shall not be allowed to enter such waters, except in those instances where it can be demonstrated that:

1. An overriding consideration of the public interest will be served; and

2. All contaminants proposed for entry into said ground water(s) shall be provided with all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment prior to entry.

D. It is the intent of this regulation to be consistent with and implement the requirements of chapters 90.48 and 90.54 RCW, and chapters 173-160, 173-200, 173-201A, 246-290 and 246-291 WAC, as the same may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.240 Aquifer recharge area designations.

Two categories are designated for aquifer recharge areas. These categories are designated to assist the city in determining the level of assessment necessary to evaluate specific proposed land use actions. The categories are based on the determination that certain areas require additional scrutiny of the potential impacts of a proposed land use with consideration given to hydrogeologic vulnerability. All designated areas are subject to change as data and information are updated or become available.

A. Designation Categories.

1. Category I areas are those so designated because of the need to provide them special protection due to a specific preexisting land use, or because they are identified by the local, state or federal government as areas in need of special aquifer protection where a proposed land use may pose a potential risk which increases aquifer vulnerability.

Category I includes areas served by ground water which have been designated as a “Sole Source Aquifer Area” under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act; areas identified within a “closed” or “low-flow” stream watershed designated by the Department of Ecology pursuant to chapter 90.22 RCW; areas identified by the Department of Ecology as sea water intrusion areas; and areas designated as “Wellhead Protection Areas” pursuant to WAC 246-290-135(4) and the ground water contribution area in WAC 246-291-100(2)(e). Wellhead protection areas shall, for the purpose of this regulation, include the identified recharge areas associated with either Group A public water supply wells, those Group B wells with a wellhead protection plan filed with the Skagit County health department, or plats served by five or more individual wells where the average lot size is equal to or less than two acres for which a wellhead protection plan has been completed and filed with the Skagit County health department. Category I areas are shown on the Aquifer Recharge Area map.

2. Category II is designated as areas not identified as Category I areas.

3. When any portion of the proposed project area lies partly within a Category I area, the proposed project shall be subject to the level of scrutiny provided for Category I area. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.250 Aquifer recharge applicability and prohibited activities.

A. Applicability. All development projects are subject to the provisions of this section except for the following:

1. Existing activities that currently and legally exist at the time this chapter became effective. However, expansions or changes in use are subject to this section and the review process contained herein.

2. Single-family residential building permits, including accessory building permits, which are outside Category I areas.

3. Residential short plats outside Category I areas where each lot is two and one-half acres or greater.

4. Single-family residential building permits where a site assessment report was required to be completed for the land division, in which case, to meet the conditions of this exemption, the applicant must comply with the recorded plat notes and the applicable mitigations contained in the site assessment report.

B. Prohibited Activities. The following activities are prohibited in Category I areas due to the probability and/or potential magnitude of their adverse effects on ground water:

1. Landfill activities as defined in chapters 173-304 and 173-351 WAC.

2. Class V injection wells, including:

a. Agricultural drainage wells;

b. Untreated sewage waste disposal wells;

c. Cesspools;

d. Industrial process water and disposal wells; and

e. Radioactive waste disposal.

3. Radioactive disposal sites. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.260 Aquifer recharge initial project review.

A. General Procedures. Applicants for all development projects not allowed under this title shall be required, through a site assessment report prepared pursuant to this title, to evaluate potential impacts to aquifer recharge areas, and appropriate mitigation measures to reduce or eliminate the potential for adversely impacting aquifer recharge areas shall be identified. The level of study and report detail required will be determined by the city based on the type of land use being proposed, the designated aquifer recharge area category, and the vulnerability of the underlying aquifer(s) to contamination. The goal of this section is to require applicants to identify and characterize vulnerability only to the level necessary to determine appropriate mitigation measures necessary, to either reduce potential adverse impacts to established parameters or eliminate potential adverse impacts to underlying aquifer(s).

B. Scoping. The level of study which will be required shall be based on an initial project review that may include staff from the county health department, State Health Department, State Department of Ecology, and a hydrogeologist.

Elements for the report that are required at a minimum and other elements that may be required as part of the scope for the study are listed in this title. Subsequent findings from the study or other information made available after the initial project review may obligate the applicant to additional evaluation, development of a mitigation plan, and/or development of a ground water monitoring plan. The following outlines the review process:

1. The required scope of the site assessment report shall be determined by the city following consultation with the county health department and appropriate state agencies. The scope of site assessment required may be conveyed to the applicant and/or his or her representative in writing.

2. The site assessment report shall be submitted and renewed by city. The city may consult with the county health department and appropriate state agencies as necessary and may approve the site assessment report as submitted, require additional evaluation, or require development of a mitigation plan. If additional information is required beyond the initial site assessment report, the applicant may be notified in writing.

3. When, to the satisfaction of the city, all information is provided and appropriate mitigation measures have been identified in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the permit review process may move forward. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.270 Aquifer recharge site assessment report.

A. The scope of the site assessment report shall be based on the initial project review specified in this title. The scope of the report may be reduced by utilizing appropriate mitigation measures, or if the water quality or quantity issue(s) are already known.

B. The site assessment report shall be prepared by or under the direction of and signed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state of Washington, trained and qualified to analyze geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems; or by a geologist or hydrogeologist who earns his or her livelihood from the field of geology and/or hydrogeology and has received a degree in geological sciences from an accredited four-year institution of higher education and who has relevant training and experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems.

C. Site Assessment Report Requirements. A site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this code. In addition, a site assessment report shall include:

1. A description of the project including those activities, practices, materials, or chemicals that have a potential to adversely affect the quantity or quality of underlying aquifer(s).

2. Identification of appropriate mitigation measures and description of how they will prevent degradation of underlying aquifer(s).

3. A site plan or another appropriately scaled map showing the approximate location of known or geologically representative well(s) (abandoned and active), spring(s), and surface watercourses within 1,000 feet of the subject project property. All well logs available through the health department for identified wells within 1,000 feet of the project property shall be included.

4. A description of the site-specific hydrogeologic characteristics regarding impact to the quantity or quality of underlying aquifer(s). At a minimum this will include a description of the lithology, depth to and static water level of known underlying aquifer(s), and depiction of ground water flow direction and patterns on the appropriate map.

5. Identification of the initial receptors of potential adverse impacts located hydraulically downgradient from the project within 1,000 feet or as otherwise required by the scoping process identified above.

D. Additional Site Assessment Elements. After the initial project review, one or more of the site assessment elements listed below may be required based upon the proposed project activity, aquifer recharge area classification, complexity of underlying hydrogeologic conditions, and/or the perceived potential to adversely impact hydraulically downgradient receptors. One or more of these additional elements may also be required if the applicant chooses to demonstrate that certain mitigation measures are not necessary to protect the quantity or quality of the underlying aquifer(s), or that the project does not pose a detrimental risk to hydraulically downgradient receptors.

1. Lithologic characteristics and stratigraphic relationships of the affected aquifer(s) and overlying geologic units (includes soil types) including thickness, horizontal and vertical extent, permeability, and infiltration rates of surface soils.

2. Delineation of identified structural features such as faults, fractures, and fissures.

3. Aquifer characteristics including determination of recharge and discharge areas, transmissivity, storage, hydraulic conductivity, porosity, and estimate of ground water flow direction, velocity and patterns for the affected aquifer(s).

4. Estimate of precipitation, evaporation, and evapotranspiration rates for the project area.

5. Preparation of appropriate hydrogeologic cross sections depicting at a minimum underlying lithology and stratigraphy, aquifer(s), and potential or probable contaminant pathways from a chemical release.

6. Contaminant fate and transport including probable migration pathways and travel time of potential contaminant release(s) from the site through the unsaturated zone to the aquifer(s) and through the aquifer(s), and how the contaminant(s) may be attenuated within the unsaturated zone and the aquifer(s). Includes consideration of advection, dispersion, and diffusion of contaminants in the ground water.

7. Delineation of areas potentially affected by contaminant migration on the ground surface and/or through the affected aquifer(s).

8. Determination of background or existing ground water quality underlying the project area.

9. Development of a ground water monitoring program to measure potential impacts of the development to underlying aquifer(s).

10. Development of a spill plan and/or contingency plan describing the specific actions, which will be taken if a release of a contaminant(s) occurs, or if ground water monitoring results indicate a contaminant(s) from the site has entered the underlying aquifer(s).

11. The degree of continuity between ground water and nearby surface water including potential impact to “closed” or “low-flow” streams (as described in this title) from proposed ground water withdrawals, and potential impacts to surface water quality from site runoff or contaminated ground water discharge.

12. In conjunction with the Department of Ecology seawater intrusion policy and subsequent policies or ordinances, applicable projects shall be required to determine appropriate pumping rates and schedules that maintain dynamic drawdown levels above mean sea level.

13. Applicable projects such as special use permits, short plats, or long plats shall test existing and/or test wells for nitrate levels and where appropriate calculate the nitrate loading rate at full build-out of the project. If the calculated nitrate loading in the intended water supply equals or exceeds five mg/L nitrate as nitrogen, the proposal will need to develop a mitigation plan. The point of compliance shall be determined based on project specifics. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.280 Aquifer recharge area mitigation.

A. The city in consultation with the county health department shall review development proposals to assess aquifer(s) vulnerability and establish needed mitigation. Where determined to be necessary through the site assessment process, development approvals shall include conditions designed to prevent significant degradation of water quality or reduction in water quantity in aquifer recharge areas. The project shall not cause degradation of the ground water quality below the standards described in chapter 173-200 WAC or Department of Ecology’s seawater intrusion policy.

B. Wellhead Protection Mitigation. Where a wellhead protection plan that addresses the project area exists, the city and/or health officer shall use the recommendations contained in the wellhead protection plan as a basis for formulating mitigations. In the absence of such a mitigation plan, the county health department and Public Utility District No. 1 shall jointly develop recommended mitigations, for review by the city, a summary of which shall be signed by the applicant and recorded with the applicant’s property title. All new development shall be required to connect to the Public Utility District No. 1 Water System. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS


14.15.300 Geologically hazardous area designation.

A. Geologically hazardous areas include erosion hazards, landslide hazards, mine hazards, volcanic hazards and seismic hazards, and shall be designated consistent with the definitions provided in WAC 365-190-080(4).

B. Geologically hazardous areas shall be classified as “known or suspected risk,” or “unknown risk.” (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.310 Geologically hazardous area initial project review.

A site visit shall be conducted by the director to determine whether: (A) “Areas of known or suspected risk” identified below are or may be present within 300 feet of the project or activity; (B) the proposed project or activity is or may be within a distance from the base of an adjacent landslide hazard area equal to the vertical relief of said hazard area; (C) the proposed activity may result in or contribute to an increase in hazard; and (D) whether the project or hazard areas pose a risk to life, property, or other critical areas on or off the project area sufficient to require a site assessment. Areas of known or suspected risk:

A. Erosion Hazard Indicators.

1. Those project areas located within 300 feet of map unit delineations No. 51 Dystic Xerorthents, No. 99 Mundt and No. 117 Saxon or mapped as moderate to severe, severe or very severe erosion hazard or as having severe rill and inter-rill erosion hazard as identified in the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Survey of Skagit County Area, WA (1989) or most currently adopted.

2. Those project areas that fall within any soil sloping greater than or equal to 30 percent.

3. The project area falls within areas designated in the Department of Ecology, Coastal Zone Atlas, Washington, Volume Two Skagit County (1978 or most currently adopted) as U (Unstable), UB (Unstable Bluff), URS (Unstable Recent Slide), or UOS (Unstable Old Slide).

4. Those project areas that may be considered to have an erosion hazard as a result of rapid stream incision or stream bank erosion.

B. Landslide Hazard Indicators.

1. The project area falls within or 300 feet from areas designated in the Department of Ecology, Coastal Zone Atlas, Washington, Volume Two, Skagit County (1978 or most currently adopted) as U (Unstable), UB (Unstable Bluff), URS (Unstable Recent Slide), or UOS (Unstable Old Slide);

2. The project area falls within or 300 feet from slopes having the following characteristics: gradients of 15 percent or greater intersecting geologic contacts with permeable sediments overlying low permeability sediment or bedrock and springs or ground water seepage are present;

3. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any area having a 40 percent slope or steeper and with a vertical relief of 10 feet or more;

4. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas of historic failure such as areas designated as quaternary earth slumps, earthflows, mudflows, lahars, debris flows, rock slides, landslides or other slope failures on maps or technical reports published by the U.S. Geological Survey such as topographic or geologic maps, or the Geology and Earth Resources Division of the Washington Department of Natural Resources, or other documents authorized by government agencies;

5. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas potentially unstable as a result of rapid stream incision, stream bank erosion, and undercutting by wave action shall be addressed as a flood hazard consistent with this chapter;

6. Areas that have shown movement during the Holocene epoch or which are underlain or covered by wastage debris of that epoch;

7. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any slopes that are parallel or sub-parallel to planes of weakness (such as bedding planes, joint systems, and fault planes) in subsurface materials;

8. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any slopes with a gradient greater than 80 percent and subject to rock fall during seismic shaking;

9. The project area falls within or 300 feet from any areas that show evidence of or are at risk from snow avalanches.

C. Seismic Hazards. Seismic hazard areas shall include areas that are subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, soil liquefaction or surface faulting.

1. The project includes structures (as defined in the International Building Code) proposed to be located in any of the areas described in subsection (A) or (B) of this section or located in areas to have a potential for soil liquefaction and soil strength loss during ground shaking as identified on the U.S. Geologic Survey Relative Slope Stability Map of the Port Townsend Quadrangle, Puget Sound Region, Washington (1985 or most currently adopted), or as identified in the field. A geologic hazard site assessment is not required for soil liquefaction and soil strength loss resulting from seismic activity unless other criteria provided in this section apply. The building official shall require evaluation using the provisions set forth in the adopted building code.

2. The structures or critical facilities are proposed to be located on a Holocene fault line. (No critical facilities shall be located on a Holocene fault line as indicated on investigative maps or described in studies by the United States Geologic Survey, Geology and Earth Resources Division of the Washington Department of Natural Resources or other documents authorized by government agencies, or as identified in the field.) All developments on a Holocene fault line shall require a disclosure statement indicating the property is located on an active fault and may be geologically hazardous.

D. Volcanic Hazards. The project area is located in a volcanic hazard zone for Glacier Peak, Washington (Open-File Report 95-499); or in a volcanic hazard area of Mount Baker, Washington (Open-File Report 95-498). A site assessment is not required for volcanic hazard areas unless other criteria provided in this section apply.

E. Other Geologic Hazard Indicators.

1. The project area falls within or 300 feet from an alluvial fan as designated on the Skagit County Alluvial Fan Study Orthophoto Maps;

2. The project area falls within or 300 feet from a mine hazard area as designated on the Department of Natural Resources Map: Coal Measures of Skagit County (1924) or within 300 feet of any other current or historic mine operations determined to be geologic hazards as described in this title, geologically hazardous areas;

3. Areas of Unknown Geologic Hazards. As part of any development application where no current information is available to confirm that the items identified in this section are present on the project area, the critical areas review required by this chapter shall provide a description of the known and visible site features and be used by the city in evaluating whether a geologically hazardous area site assessment is required pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.320 Geologically hazardous area site assessment requirements.

A. Site Visit Determination. A determination shall be made as follows:

1. No Site Assessment. Where the city determines that the project or activity area has no potential for impacting adjacent ownership and property, other types of critical areas, public property (such as roads and other facilities) or living quarters of any kind, including any existing or proposed off site, no additional site assessments shall be required prior to approval under the provisions of this chapter.

2. Site Assessment Required. If the city determines during the site visit that the proposed development activity falls within 300 feet of an “Area of Known or Suspected Risk” and the geologic condition may pose a risk to life and property on or off the project area, then a geologically hazardous area site assessment of the project area by a qualified professional as described in subsection (B) of this section shall be required as part of the complete development permit application.

B. Geologically Hazardous Area Site Assessment. Site assessment reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional. Portions of the report relating to recommended design or mitigation shall be prepared under supervision of a licensed professional engineer. A qualified professional shall mean an engineer, licensed in the state of Washington, with training and experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic, and ground water flow systems in Washington State; or by a geologist who earns his or her livelihood from the field of geology and/or geotechnical analysis, with training and experience analyzing geologic, hydrologic and ground water flow systems in Washington State, who has received a relevant degree from an accredited four-year institution of higher education.

The geologically hazardous area site assessment report shall classify the type of hazard in accordance with this title. The site assessment report shall include the following as appropriate:

1. A site plan must be prepared in accordance with the development permit requirements. The site plan shall depict the height of slope, slope gradient and cross section of the site. The site plan shall indicate the location of all existing structures, proposed structures and any significant known geologic features on the subject site. The site plan shall also include the location of springs, seeps, or other surface expressions of ground water. The site plan shall also depict any evidence of surface water or storm water runoff;

2. A detailed description of the project, its relationship to potential geologic hazard(s), and its potential impact upon the hazard area(s), the subject property and adjacent properties. The description shall make a determination if a geologically hazardous area(s) is present on the subject site.

The narrative shall include a full discussion of the geologic factors and conditions on the subject site resulting in the qualified professional’s conclusions;

3. An assessment of the geologic characteristics and engineering properties of the soils, sediments, and/or rock of the subject property and potentially affected adjacent properties. Soils analysis shall be accomplished in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System;

4. A description of load intensity including surface water and ground water conditions, public and private sewage disposal systems, fills and excavations and all structural development;

5. An assessment describing the extent and type of vegetative cover to include tree attitude;

6. For potential landslide hazards: estimate slope stability and the effect construction and placement of structures will have on the slope over the estimated life of the structure. Quantitative analysis of slope stability or slope stability modeling may be required by the city;

7. Additional site assessment standards may be required if necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.

C. Site Assessment Conclusions.

1. Where the qualified professional determines that a geologically hazardous condition is not present on the subject site and/or will not occur as a result of the proposed project, will have no potential for impacting adjacent ownership and property, other types of critical areas, public property (such as roads and other facilities) or living quarters of any kind, including any existing or proposed off site, no additional site assessments shall be required prior to approval under the provisions of this chapter. The qualified professional shall be required to certify that a geologic hazard is not present on the subject parcel.

2. Properties containing geologically hazardous conditions shall require a geologically hazardous area mitigation plan. Essential public facilities shall not be sited within designated geologically hazardous areas (Exception: volcanic hazard areas). No residential structures shall be located in geologically hazardous areas or their buffers that cannot be fully mitigated. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.330 Geologically hazardous area mitigation standards.

The mitigation plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer or geologist under supervision of a professional engineer and include a discussion on how the project has been designed to avoid and minimize the impacts. The plan shall also make a recommendation for the minimum building setback from any bluff or slope edge and/or other geologic hazard shall be based upon the geotechnical analysis required under this title. Mitigation plans shall include the location and methods of drainage, locations and methods of erosion control, a vegetation management and/or restoration plan and/or other means for maintaining long-term stability of geologic hazards. The plan shall also address the potential impact of mitigation on the hazard area, the subject property and affected adjacent properties. The mitigation plan must be approved by the city and be implemented as a condition of project approval.

Within designated geologic hazards, mitigation plans shall address the appropriate items listed below as required by the site assessment. One or more of the following mitigation standards shall be included as components of a mitigation plan pursuant to the requirements of this title, site assessment report. Other mitigation standards, other than those listed below, may be required depending on the geologic hazard and the site conditions.

A. Mitigation Standards.

1. A temporary erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this title, surface water management, as amended.

2. A drainage plan for the collection, transport, treatment, discharge and/or recycle of water in accordance with the requirements of this title, surface water management, as amended.

3. All proposals involving excavations and placement of fills shall be subject to structural review under the appropriate provisions as found in the International Building Code.

4. Critical facilities shall not be sited within designated geologically hazardous areas. (Exception: volcanic hazard areas.)

5. Surface drainage shall not be directed across the face of a landslide hazard (including ravines). If drainage must be discharged from the hazard area into adjacent waters, it shall be collected above the hazard and directed to the water by tight line drain and provided with an energy dissipating device at the point of discharge.

6. All infiltration systems such as storm water detention and retention facilities, and curtain drains utilizing buried pipe or French drain, are prohibited in geologically hazardous areas and their buffers unless a site assessment report indicates such facilities or systems will not affect slope stability and the systems are designed by a licensed civil engineer. The engineer shall also certify that the system and/or facilities are installed as designed.

7. Vegetation Removal and Replanting. Removal of vegetation in landslide hazard, erosion hazard and coastal bluff hazard areas shall be minimized. Any replanting that occurs shall consist of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that is compatible with the existing surrounding vegetation, meets the objectives of erosion prevention and site stabilization, and does not require permanent irrigation for long-term survival.

8. A minimum buffer with a width of 30 feet shall be established from the top, toe and all edges of all landslide hazardous areas. Existing native vegetation shall be maintained in accordance with mitigation recommendations within the buffer area. Any modifications to the buffer requirement shall be based on the report and recommendations of the professional geologist under supervision of a licensed professional engineer. The buffer may be reduced to a minimum of 10 feet when an applicant demonstrates to the director that the reduction will adequately protect the proposed development, adjacent developments and uses and the subject critical area. The buffer may be increased by the community development director for development adjacent to a ravine which is designated as unstable on the Coastal Zone Atlas, Washington, Volume Two Skagit County (1978 or most current edition) or where a larger buffer is necessary to prevent risk of damage to proposed and existing development (as in the case where the area potentially impacted by a landslide exceeds 30 feet). Normal nondestructive pruning and trimming of vegetation for maintenance purposes, or thinning of limbs of individual trees to provide a view corridor, shall not be subject to these buffer requirements.

9. Seismic Hazard Areas. Structural development proposals shall meet all applicable provisions of the International Building Code.

The city shall evaluate documentation submitted including the site assessment report, and condition permit approvals to minimize the risk on both the subject property and affected adjacent properties. All conditions on approvals shall be based on known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control and treatment. Evaluation of geotechnical reports may also constitute grounds for denial of the proposal.

B. Alterations of the Buffer and/or Geologically Hazardous Area. Alterations of the buffer and/or geologically hazardous area may occur for development meeting the following criteria:

1. No reasonable alternative exists; and

2. A site assessment report is submitted and certifies that:

a. There is a minimal hazard as proven by evidence of no landslide activity in the past in the vicinity of the proposed development and a qualitative analysis of slope stability indicates no significant risk to the development proposal and adjacent properties; or the geologically hazardous area can be modified or the development proposal can be designed so that the hazard is eliminated or mitigated so that the site is as safe as a site without a geologically hazardous area;

b. The development will not significantly increase surface water discharge or sedimentation to adjacent properties beyond predevelopment conditions;

c. The development will not decrease slope stability on adjacent properties; and

d. Such alterations will not adversely impact other critical areas.

C. Noncompliance and Failed Mitigation Plans.

1. Projects found to be in noncompliance with the mitigation conditions issued as part of the development approval are subject to enforcement actions necessary to bring the development into compliance with this chapter.

2. Mitigation plans which do not fulfill the performance required based on the site assessment/geotechnical report findings or otherwise fail to meet the intent of this chapter shall be revised and the subject development brought into compliance with the revised mitigation plan.

3. Mitigation Plan Certification. Upon completion of the project, a qualified professional shall certify that the mitigation plan has been properly implemented. The certification shall be required prior to final approval of the project by the director. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS


14.15.350 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area designations.

A. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (HCAs) shall be designated and classified as provided for in the definition section of this chapter. The map and species references indicated are intended to serve only as a guide during development review. In all cases, actual presence or absence for the listed species or habitat shall prevail.

B. In addition to the HCAs, additional species and habitats of local importance may be designated by the community development director based on declining populations, sensitivity to habitat manipulation or special value including but not limited to commercial, game or public appeal.

C. In order to nominate an area or a species to the category of habitats and species of local importance, an individual or organization must:

1. Demonstrate a need for special consideration based on:

a. Declining population,

b. Sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or

c. Commercial or game value or other special value, such as public appeal.

2. Propose relevant management strategies considered effective and within the scope of this chapter; and

3. Provide species habitat location(s) on a map (scale 1:24,000). Submitted proposals will be reviewed by the community development director and forwarded to the Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Natural Resources, and/or other county and state agencies or experts for comments and recommendations regarding accuracy of data and effectiveness of proposed management strategies. A public hearing will be held for proposals found to be complete, accurate, and potentially effective and within the scope of this chapter. Approved nominations will become designated “Habitats/Species of Local Importance” and will be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

D. The following species and habitats have been designated on a site-specific basis according to the official Species and Habitats of Local Significance Map:

1. Great blue heron nest sites;

2. Vaux’s swifts communal roosts;

3. Pileated woodpecker nest sites;

4. Osprey nest sites;

5. Townsend big-eared bat communal roosts;

6. Cavity nesting ducks breeding areas;

7. Trumpeter swan concentrations;

8. Harlequin duck breeding areas;

9. Waterfowl concentrations. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.360 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas initial project review.

A. A site visit shall be conducted to determine whether HCAs identified on a critical area checklist or on available map resources or whether HCAa not previously identified are present within 200 feet of the project or activity site.

B. Habitat conservation areas are designated by definition in this title and are referenced as follows:

1. An area with which anadromous fish, endangered, threatened or sensitive species have a primary association and/or their habitat such as those designated and mapped by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, Priority Habitats and Species Program;

2. A water of the state as defined under WAC 222-16-030;

3. A Critical Biological Area as designated and mapped by the Department of Ecology Coastal Zone Atlas dated June 1978 and/or the maps;

4. Designated species and habitats of local importance;

5. Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat;

6. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a government or tribal entity;

7. Areas with which anadromous fish species have a primary association; and

8. State Natural Arm Preserves and Natural Resource Conservation Areas.

C. If the director determines through the site visit described in subsection (A) of this section that a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area (HCA) may be present within 300 feet of the proposed project or activity area, then a site assessment/habitat management plan shall be required as part of the complete application. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.370 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area site assessment requirements.

Site assessment/habitat management plans shall be prepared by a qualified fish and wildlife biologist with experience assessing the relevant species and habitats and include, at a minimum, the following requirements:

A. Site plan prepared in accordance with the permit requirements indicating all fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas falling within 300 feet of the subject property. This site plan may be prepared by the applicant subject to review by the qualified fish and wildlife biologist;

B. Project narrative describing the proposal including, but not limited to, associated grading and filling, structures, utilities, adjacent land uses, description of vegetation both within and adjacent to the habitat conservation area, and when deemed necessary by the administrative officer, surface and subsurface hydrologic analysis;

C. Impact analysis identifying and documenting the presence of all habitat conservation areas and discussing the project’s effects on the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

D. Regulatory analysis including a discussion of any federal, state, tribal, and/or local requirements or special management recommendations which have been developed for species and/or habitats located on the site;

E. Mitigation report including a discussion of proposed measures of mitigating adverse impacts of the project and an evaluation of their potential effectiveness. Measures may include but are not limited to: establishment of buffer zones, preservation of critically important plants, and trees, limitation of access to habitat area, seasonal restrictions of construction activities, establishment of a timetable for periodic review of the plan and/or establishment of performance or maintenance bonds;

F. Management and maintenance practices including a discussion of ongoing maintenance practices that will assure protection of all fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas on site after the project has been completed. This section should include a discussion of proposed monitoring criteria, methods and schedule;

G. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in this title. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.380 Fish and wildlife habitat conservation area mitigation standards.

Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be protected in accordance with local determination of appropriate conditions considering the site-specific recommendations from agencies with jurisdictions over the specific area, which may include but not be limited to the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW), Department of Ecology, federally recognized Indian tribes located within Skagit County, WDFW Management Recommendations for Washington Priority Habitats and Species, and site-specific information supplied by the applicant.

Development proposals shall be reviewed for potential impacts to fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. The determination of potential impacts shall be dictated by site conditions and be made in consultation with the Washington State Departments of Ecology, Fish and Wildlife and Natural Resources and federally recognized Indian tribes located in Skagit County. If it is determined that a proposed project may have an adverse effect on a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, the applicant shall implement a habitat management plan including mitigation measures in conformity with the performance standards outlined below.

A. Riparian Performance Standards. Riparian buffer areas shall be established from the ordinary high water mark. The intent of riparian buffers is to protect five basic riparian forest functions that influence in-stream and near-stream habitat quality. These are:

1. Recruitment of large woody debris (LWD) to the stream: LWD recruitment creates habitat structures necessary to maintain salmon/trout productive capacity and species diversity.

2. Shade. Shading by the forest canopy maintains cooler water temperatures and influences the availability of oxygen for salmon/trout.

3. Bank Integrity (Root Reinforcement). Bank integrity helps maintain habitat quality and water quality by reducing bank erosion and creating habitat structure and instream hiding cover for salmon and trout.

4. Runoff Filtration. Filtration of nutrients and sediments in runoff (surface and shallow subsurface flows) helps maintain water quality.

5. Wildlife Habitat. Functional wildlife habitat for riparian-dependent species is based on sufficient amounts of riparian vegetation to provide protection for nesting and feeding.

B. Standard Riparian Buffers. Riparian areas have the following standard buffer requirements (Note: Riparian areas do not extend beyond the toe of the slope on the landward side of existing dikes or levees unless specifically exempt from Federal Vegetation Management requirements):

	Water Type	Riparian Buffer

	Type 1 and 2	200 feet

	Type 3	100 feet

	Type 4 and 5	50 feet

Once buffers are established, they shall not be altered except as allowed below. Riparian buffers not currently meeting the minimum standards shall be restored; provided, that such restoration does not conflict with other provisions of this chapter. In implementing buffer widths other than the standard riparian buffers identified above, the director shall provide opportunity for review and comment from appropriate federal, state or tribal natural resource agencies to ensure the use of best available science. These comments shall be included in the public record along with the basis and rationale for requirement or approval of any such nonstandard buffers.

1. Increasing Buffer Widths. The city may increase the standard buffer widths on a case-by-case basis, or to establish nonriparian buffer widths, when such buffers are necessary to protect priority fish or wildlife (e.g., great blue heron nesting colonies, osprey or cavity nesting ducks) using the HCA. This determination shall be supported by appropriate documentation from the Departments of Ecology and Fish and Wildlife, showing that the increased buffer width is reasonably related to the protection of the fish and/or wildlife using the HCA.

2. Decreasing Buffer Widths. Decreasing standard buffers will be allowed only if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

a. A decrease is necessary to accomplish the purposes of the proposal and no reasonable alternative is available; and

b. Decreasing width will not adversely affect the fish and wildlife habitat functions and values; and

c. If a portion of a buffer is to be reduced, the remaining buffer area will be enhanced, using native vegetation, artificial habitat features, vegetative screening and/or barrier fencing as appropriate to improve the functional attributes of the buffer and to provide equivalent or better protection for fish and wildlife habitat functions and values; and

d. The buffer width shall not be reduced below 50 percent of the standard buffer width unless no other reasonable alternative exists and that no net loss of HCA riparian functional values will result, based on a functional assessment provided by the applicant utilizing a methodology approved by the city.

C. Allowed Uses in HCAs or Buffers.

l. Docks. Docks designed to facilitate low-impact uses, such as education and/or private, noncommercial recreation may be permitted within fish and wildlife HCAs under the following conditions:

a. The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area;

b. The activity will not significantly degrade surface water or ground water;

c. The intrusion into the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and its buffers is fully mitigated; and

d. An opportunity for review and comment by federal, state and tribal natural resource agencies shall be provided.

2. Limited park or recreational access to a fish and wildlife habitat area or its required buffer; provided, that all of the following are satisfied:

a. The access is part of a public park or a recreational resort development that is dependent on the access for its location and recreational function;

b. The access is limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the recreational function;

c. The access and the balance of the development is consistent with other requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code and the Burlington shoreline master program; and

d. The proponent obtains a written approval from the city council for the limited access and associated mitigation.

3. Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved; provided, that such activity shall not result in a decrease in riparian functional values and shall not prevent or inhibit the buffer’s recovery to at least prealtered condition or function. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the activity does not retard the overall recovery of the buffer, include removal of noxious vegetation, pedestrian trails, viewing platforms, and storm water management facilities such as grass-lined swales.

4. In the riparian buffer, removal of hazardous, diseased or dead trees and vegetation when necessary to control fire, or to halt the spread of disease or damaging insects consistent with the State Forest Practices Act, chapter 76.09 RCW, or when the removal is necessary to avoid a hazard such as landslides or pose a threat to existing structures may be permitted with prior written approval. Any removed tree or vegetation shall be replaced with appropriate species. Replacement shall be performed consistent with accepted restoration standards for riparian areas within one calendar year. The community development director may approve alternative tree species to promote fish and wildlife habitat.

Prior to commencement of tree or vegetation removal and/or replacement, the landowner must obtain written approval from the director.

Performance-Based Riparian Standards*

(These standards must be exceeded before additional activity can be permitted within the riparian zone)

Watertype Performance standards

Type l & 2

(Fish Bearing)

Maintain 95 percent of total LWD recruitment expected to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

Maintain 85 percent of the trees which are greater than 24-inch DBH within 100 feet of stream; and

Maintain an average of 75 percent canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge)

The applicant may further request some limited timber harvest of up to 30 percent of the merchantable timber within the outer 100 feet of any 200-foot required buffer provided the harvest:

a. Does not reduce the LWD and canopy requirements; and

b. The applicant will increase the total buffer size by 50 feet to mitigate for the limited timber harvest in the required buffer to provide additional wildlife habitat. The additional 50-foot buffer shall retain a minimum of 50 percent of the total number of trees with 25 percent of the total trees left having a diameter at breast height (DBH – 4 1/2 feet) greater than 12 inches; and

c. No more than 50 percent of the dominant trees in the outer 100 feet may be harvested.

Type 3

(Fish Bearing)

Maintain 85 percent of total LWD recruitment expected to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

Maintain 85 percent of the trees which are greater than 18-inch DBH within 100 feet of stream; and

Maintain an average of 75 percent canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge).

Type 4 & 5

(Non-fish Bearing)

Maintain 50 percent of total LWD recruitment expccted to enter the stream from a mature stand; and

Maintain 85 percent of the trees which are greater than 24-inch DBH within 50 feet of stream; and

Maintain an average of 75 percent canopy cover (based on canopy densitometer readings at stream edge).

*Note: Applicants electing to employ performance based mitigation in accordance with the above matrix shall include appropriate analysis and justification in their site assessment/habitat management plan.

D. Bald eagle habitats shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292); a cooperative habitat management plan shall be developed in coordination with the Department of Fish and Wildlife whenever activities that alter habitat are proposed near a verified nest territory or communal roost.

E. Wetlands that are identified as a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area shall be protected according to the provisions in this title, referencing increasing buffer widths. If the wetland buffer widths, standard buffer widths conflict with this section, the buffer widths providing the greatest protection shall apply.

F. All other fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, including habitats/species of local significance, shall be protected on a case-by-case basis by means of a habitat management plan based on the PHS program, initial project review and site assessment/habitat management plan.

G. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in this title. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

FLOOD HAZARD AREA


14.15.390 Flood hazard area designations.

Flood hazard areas shall be designated as those areas identified as A, AE, AO, AH, A1-10, A12, A14, A16, A18, A21-22, V1 and V4 zones on the official flood insurance rate map for the city of Burlington as amended. Cumulatively these zones represent the floodway and 100-year floodplain. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.400 Development in floodplains – General.

The following provisions shall apply to all lands within the floodplain:

A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

B. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of the over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

C. Construction Materials and Methods. All development requiring a floodplain permit shall be constructed utilizing materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and methods which minimize flood damage, which methods shall include anchoring adequately to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

D. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

E. Utilities. New and replacement water and sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from sewage systems into floodwaters.

On-site sewage disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

F. Subdivisions. Subdivisions shall be designed to minimize flood damage, including:

1. Public utilities and facilities which are resistant to flood damage;

2. A drainage system designed to minimize flood damage;

3. One-hundred-year flood elevation data provided on all subdivisions;

4. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

G. Elevation or Floodproofing of Structures. New and substantially improved residential structures shall have the lowest floor including basement elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. The application for a permit to develop in the affected area must include the elevations of the 10-, 50-, and 100-year floods, where such data are available.

New and substantially improved nonresidential structures, excluding structures listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places, shall either be elevated to at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

1. Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to a height of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation;

2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certification shall be provided to the official;

4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (G)(6) of this section;

5. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as constructed to one foot below that level);

6. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided,

b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade,

c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

H. Buildings utilizing crawlspace construction, where any portion of the crawlspace is below the grade on all sides, shall meet the following requirements as excerpted from FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, which is hereby adopted by reference.

1. Crawlspace construction is not permitted in V zones.

2. Crawlspace construction is not permitted in zones AO and A1-A30 where velocities exceed five feet per second, unless it can be shown through engineering analysis that the structural components will resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

3. The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

4. The height of the crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. The height measured from the crawlspace grade to the top of the next higher floor shall not exceed five feet at any point.

5. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace, within a reasonable time, after a flood event.

I. Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection (B) of this section.

J. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on their wheels, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions.

K. Prohibition against Encroachment. The cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point.

L. The applicant must record a notice on title that the property contains land within the riparian habitat zone and/or 100-year floodplain before a permit may be issued. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.410 Development in special flood risk zone.

A. Development other than the following is prohibited in the special flood risk zone; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing construction or fill in wetlands:

1. Minor structures and additions for which a building permit is not required and which create no new residences;

2. Minor fills and excavations of less than 12 cubic yards or which will not raise the level of land above that of the surrounding area;

3. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding at comparable grade of bridges, streets and accessways;

4. Underground improvements;

5. Maintenance, repair, alteration and like replacement of existing improvements;

6. Other minor development which causes no significant impoundment or displacement of floodwaters, such as signs and small unenclosed structures;

7. Elevated structures which allow floodwaters to flow underneath and which meet the following criteria:

a. All structures shall be elevated so that the lowest supporting member is located no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided below.

b. Solid walls are prohibited below the base flood elevation to keep the area free of obstruction unless they are designed to break away. A breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.

c. All structures shall be securely anchored on piling, columns, or foundation walls oriented to the axis of the flow path. Said support elements shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as capable of withstanding all applied loads of the 100-year flood flow.

d. There shall be no fill used for structural support.

B. Regardless of method of construction, operation, development, substantial improvement, or expansion of residential health care facilities are prohibited in the special flood risk zone.

C. New multifamily residential structures are prohibited in the special flood risk zone.

D. Subdivision of new residential lots, including short plats and full subdivisions, shall be prohibited unless the applicant can demonstrate that there will be a positive effect on the special flood risk area, including but not limited to the following:

1. New structures shall be located further away from the slough than prior to subdivision.

2. New structures shall fully comply with this chapter.

3. New structures shall be located outside the special flood risk zone boundary, while some yards may encroach into the special flood risk zone.

4. New structures shall be located so that the proposed project will not affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and will comply with BMC 14.15.400(K). Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by a registered professional engineer.

E. The following criteria shall be met in order to approve a proposed structure exceeding $250,000 in value:

1. The proposed structure does not have a significant adverse impact on flood hazard.

2. All physically feasible alternatives to locating in the special flood risk zone have been evaluated and there is no viable choice other than to locate in the special flood risk zone.

3. Mailed notice shall be sent to adjacent property owners, if public notification is not already required by BMC Title 14A.

4. Impact on the character of the existing neighborhood.

F. Developments for which a floodplain approval is required are prohibited between the riverward toe of dikes and levees along the Skagit River and the locations described as follows:

1. Lying within the area mapped, attached to the ordinance codified in this section, extending the distance shown from the landward toe of dikes and levees along the Skagit River in the corridor between the Railroad Bridge on the east and the city limits on the west;

2. Except as provided in subsection (F)(1) of this section, a line 100 feet landward of the landward toes of said dikes and levees.

This prohibition shall not apply to improvements to the dikes and levees themselves or improvements designed to aid in floodfighting, or interim uses involving no fill, asphalt or permanent structures when approved by the community development director in consultation with Dike District No. 12 and the public works director, with a temporary land use permit reviewed at six-month intervals. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.420 Development in the floodway.

Development for which a floodplain approval is required is prohibited in the floodway, other than utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers and levee construction to maintain the structural integrity of critical infrastructure. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.430 Critical facility.

Construction of new critical facilities shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or more above the 100-year flood elevation. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).

COMPLIANCE


14.15.440 Compliance with critical area regulations.

No permit for a development proposal shall be issued unless it also complies with the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.450 Construction.

In any case where the provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of the underlying zoning, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.460 Severability.

The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person, owner, or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons, owners or circumstances. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.470 State Environmental Policy Act.

This chapter establishes minimum standards which are to be applied to specific land use and platting actions in order to prevent further degradation of critical areas in the city, and is not intended to limit the application of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). Projects subject to SEPA shall be reviewed and may also be conditioned or denied. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14.15.480 Liability disclaimer.

Since floods more severe than the 100-year flood occur on rare occasions, reliance on this chapter will not altogether guarantee freedom from flood damage, nor shall this chapter create liability on the part of the city for such damage. It is further noted that other data regarding 100-year floodplain elevations may exist which indicate a more severe threat than the data established by FEMA. Information on these other data sources shall be kept and made available at Burlington City Hall. (Ord. 1853 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).1

Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with 1:1 replacement through creation or reestablishment. See Table 1a, Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 1: Agency Polices and Guidance – Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a, Olympia, WA, March 2006 or as revised). See also subsection (D)(4) of this section for more information on using preservation as compensation. 


Title 14A LAND USE DECISIONS

Chapters:

14A.01    General Provisions

14A.05    Processing Land Use Actions – Decision Making Framework


Chapter 14A.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

14A.01.010    Title.

14A.01.020    Application.

14A.01.030    Purpose.

14A.01.040    Authority.

14A.01.050    Adoption by reference.

14A.01.060    Definitions.

14A.01.070    Liability.

14A.01.080    Severability.


14A.01.010 Title.

This title shall be called “Land Use Decisions.” (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.020 Application.

This title shall apply to land use decisions made by the city of Burlington. This title consolidates the review and decisions procedures for land use decisions identified in BMC Title 18, Shoreline Master Program; Title 17, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance; Title 16, Subdivisions; Title 15, Building and Construction; and Title 14, Environmental Regulations. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to identify land use decisions to be made by the city, the person or department responsible for making such decisions, the criteria to be applied when making such a decision, and the applicable notice, hearing and appeal procedures. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.040 Authority.

This chapter is authorized pursuant to chapters 36.70B, 36.70C and 43.21C RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.050 Adoption by reference.

Statutes, codes or regulations identified or adopted herein shall be the existing version of that statute, code or regulation and any subsequent amendment to the same, unless expressly stated otherwise. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.060 Definitions.

For the purpose of this title, the words listed in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.

“C”

“Closed record appeal” means an administrative appeal on the record to the city council, following an open record hearing on a project permit application. When the appeal is on the record, the city council’s review shall be based on the record, with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only oral or written appeal argument based on the record.

“Community development director” means the city administrator or designee.

“Comprehensive plan” means the comprehensive plan for the city of Burlington and any amendments thereto adopted pursuant to chapter 36.70A RCW.

“Conditional use” allows certain uses listed as conditional in the zoning code, or for the establishment of uses not listed as permitted or conditional in any zone, if certain conditions can be met.

“D”

“Development code” means BMC Titles 14, 14A, 15, 16, 17 and 18.

“Director” means the community development director.

“E”

“Environmental review” means the procedural requirements of the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), chapter 43.21C RCW.

“H”

“Hearing examiner” means a person who may review and interpret land use regulations, conducts hearings, makes decisions and recommendations on land use applications, hears administrative appeals on permits, decisions or determinations made by city officials, and reviews and hears other matters as provided for in the Burlington Municipal Code and other ordinances. The hearing examiner serves in a role similar to that of a judge. The hearing examiner ensures that parties receive proper due process; and issues final decisions on some land use applications and makes recommendations to the city council on others.

“L”

“Land division decision” means a review or approval required by BMC Title 16.

“Land use action” means an action taken by the appropriate city of Burlington review authority concerning the use and/or development of land or street right-of-way governed by the provisions of this title, including project permits as defined in this section.

“O”

“Open record hearing” means a hearing, conducted by the planning commission, hearing examiner or city council that creates the city’s record through testimony and submission of evidence and information. An open record hearing may be held prior to a decision on a project permit, known as an “open record predecision hearing.” An open record hearing may be held on an appeal, to be known as an “open record appeal hearing,” if no open record predecision hearing has been held on the project permit application.

“Owner” means any person having title to and/or responsibility for, a building or property, including a lessee, guardian, receiver or trustee and the owner’s duly authorized agent.

“P”

“Party of record” means all persons, agencies or organizations who have submitted written comments in response to a notice of application, made oral comments in a formal public hearing conducted on the application, or requested in writing to be a “party of record.” In all cases the permit applicant and property owner shall be considered parties of record. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no person shall be a party of record who has not furnished an accurate post office mailing address.

“Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, municipal corporation, and government, and the individual’s or entity’s heirs, successors and assigns.

Plan Review. Plan review by the planning department is required for most land use actions to assure that all land use permits and approvals comply with the use, development and all other standards of this title and related land use standards, rules, policies and procedures.

“Plot plan” is a scaled map of a site and adjacent public rights-of-way showing locations and dimensions of various existing and proposed features, such as buildings, curbs, driveways, sidewalks, trees, grades and drainage patterns.

“Project permit” or “project permit application” is defined as any land use or environmental permit or license required from a local government for a project action, including but not limited to:

1. Administrative permits;

2. Building permits;

3. Building site plans;

4. Conditional use permits;

5. Critical area permits or approvals;

6. Environmental determinations;

7. Planned unit developments;

8. Preliminary and final subdivisions and short subdivisions;

9. Shoreline substantial development permits or exemptions;

10. Site plan review;

11. Site-specific zoning map amendments that do not require a corresponding comprehensive plan amendment; or

12. Variances.

A project permit does not include appeals, the adoption or amendment of a comprehensive plan or subarea plan, area wide amendments to the zoning map, or text amendments to the development code.

“Public meeting” means an informal meeting, hearing, workshop or other public gathering of people to obtain comments on a permit, plan or regulation for a proposed land use permit before the city’s decision. A public meeting may include, but is not limited to, community meeting or a meeting of the planning commission, a task force or neighborhood group, on plans, proposals, projects or issues. A public meeting does not include an open record hearing. The proceedings at a public meeting may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the record.

“U”

Use – Establish or Change.

“Use” means the activity or purpose for which land or structures or combination of land and structures are designed, arranged, occupied, or maintained together with any associated site improvement. This definition includes the construction, erection, placement, movement or demolition of any structure or site improvement and my physical alteration to land itself including any grading, leveling, paving or excavation. “Use” also means any existing or proposed configuration of land, structures, and site improvements, and the use thereof.

“Z”

Zoning Exceptions and Changes.

1. Variance. Allows relief from the dimensional or performance standards of the zoning code, such as front, side or rear setbacks.

2. Rezone. This is a zoning map amendment. It changes the list of permitted uses of a specific site or sites under single ownership as well as the height, setback and other limitations, such as changing from residential to commercial or industrial. Rezones may be considered site specific or area wide. Rezones may or may not require corresponding changes to the comprehensive plan.

3. Zoning Text Amendment. This is a change to the text of the code, such as adding a use to the list of uses permitted in a zone. Zoning text amendments may or may not require corresponding changes to the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.070 Liability.

It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of compliance upon the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title. Nothing contained in this title is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title, to comply with the provisions of this title, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents. This title is not intended to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by its terms. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.01.080 Severability.

If any portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 14A.05 PROCESSING LAND USE ACTIONS – DECISION MAKING FRAMEWORK

Sections:

14A.05.010    Title.

14A.05.020    Application.

14A.05.030    Purpose.

14A.05.040    Authority.

14A.05.050    Project permit applications – Consideration – Requirements.

14A.05.060    Classification of land use actions.

14A.05.070    Applications – Generally.

14A.05.080    Review criteria for decisions.

14A.05.090    Notice requirements, type and content of notice – General.

14A.05.100    Notice of application requirements and comment period.

14A.05.110    Public hearing requirements.

14A.05.120    Notice of decision requirements and content of notice.

14A.05.130    Standards to ensure performance and compliance with conditions.

14A.05.140    Conditional use applications, when required, submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

14A.05.150    Variance applications, when required, submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

14A.05.160    Site plan review, when required, application submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

14A.05.170    Reclassification of property including rezone and zoning ordinance text amendments, initiation of amendments, review criteria and conditions of approval.

14A.05.180    Amendments to the comprehensive plan, review criteria and conditions of approval.

14A.05.190    Appeal procedures.


14A.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Processing Land Use Actions – Decision Making Framework.” (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all land use actions including project permits as defined in BMC 14A.01.060. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to identify the process for accepting and reviewing land use applications to determine consistency with applicable state regulations, the zoning map and Burlington Municipal Code requirements, the comprehensive plan and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.040 Authority.

This chapter is authorized pursuant to chapters 36.70A, 36.70B and 43.21C RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.050 Project permit applications – Consideration – Requirements.

A. Each proposed project permit, as defined in BMC 14A.01.060, shall file an application for a project permit. No project shall proceed without a valid project permit issued by the city. Applications shall contain all documents and information required by the applicable provisions of the BMC.

B. Within 28 days after receiving a project permit application, the planning department shall mail or provide in person a written determination to the applicant, stating either:

1. That the application is complete; or

2. That the application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

The notice of complete application described above shall be combined with and issued simultaneously with the notice of application. The notice should also identify other local, state, or federal government agencies that may have jurisdiction over some aspect of the application.

C. A project permit application is complete for purposes of this section when it meets the procedural submission requirements of the land use regulations in effect on the date of application, and is sufficient for continued processing even though additional information may be required or project modifications may be undertaken subsequently. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the city from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice of completeness or subsequently if new information is required or substantial changes in the proposed action occur.

D. The determination of completeness may include the following as optional information:

1. A preliminary determination of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation;

2. A preliminary determination of consistency with the comprehensive plan and development regulations; or

3. Other information the planning department chooses to include.

E. Applications shall automatically be deemed complete unless the applicant is notified within 28 days that the application is incomplete as required by subsection (B) of this section.

F. Within 14 days after an applicant has submitted to the city additional information identified by the city as being necessary for a complete application, the planning department shall notify the applicant whether the application is complete or what additional information is necessary.

G. Consistency of a proposed project with the applicable development regulations or plans is determined by considering four factors as follows:

1. Type of land use allowed;

2. Level of development allowed, such as units per acre or other measures of density;

3. Infrastructure, such as the adequacy of public facilities and services to serve the proposed project; and

4. Compliance with specific development standards.

H. Project review shall be used to identify specific project design and conditions relating to compliance with applicable regulations.

I. Any public meeting or required open record hearing may be combined with any public meeting or open record hearing that may be held on the project by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency, subject to the public notification requirements of this chapter.

J. SEPA appeal hearings shall be combined with the hearing on the underlying project or any appeal of the underlying project or permit except where independent review is provided for by BMC 14.10.250. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.060 Classification of land use actions.

Land use actions governed by this title are classified into four categories as set forth below. Projects requiring more than one type of decision should, whenever possible, be consolidated under the higher classification.

A. Type I decisions are administrative decisions which require no notice or hearing. These decisions are made by the appropriate administrative official based upon the application materials received and the specific criteria identified in this chapter. Type I decisions which are not categorically exempt from SEPA shall be processed as Type II decisions.

Type I decisions include the following:

1. Building permit including plan review (see BMC Title 15).

2. Boundary line adjustments (chapter 16.60 BMC).

3. Binding site plans (chapter 16.30 BMC).

4. Site plan review (BMC 14A.05.160).

5. Code interpretations and other administrative decisions (chapter 17.01 BMC).

6. Temporary uses for less than one year where SEPA is not required.

7. Permits to establish or change uses that are permitted outright (chapter 17.01 BMC).

8. Final short subdivision approvals (chapter 16.20 BMC).

9. Final long subdivision approval, except that city council approval shall be required pursuant to BMC 16.20.060.

10. Minor adjustments to approved land use and conditional use permits.

11. Shoreline exemptions (chapter 18.09 BMC).

12. Any other land use action or project permit approval identified by Burlington Municipal Code as a Type I review.

B. Type II decisions are administrative decisions that require notification but do not require a hearing. These decisions are made by the appropriate administrative official based upon the application materials received and the specific criteria identified in this chapter.

Type II decisions include the following:

1. Accessory dwelling units (BMC 17.15.070).

2. Shoreline substantial development permits (chapter 18.09 BMC).

3. Preliminary short subdivision approval (chapter 16.10 BMC).

4. Permits and land use actions normally classified as Type I decisions which are not categorically exempt from SEPA.

5. SEPA threshold determinations not associated with a land use action.

6. Shoreline variances (chapter 18.09 BMC).

7. Any other land use action or project permit approval identified by Burlington Municipal Code as a Type II review.

C. Type III decisions are quasi-judicial decisions made by the hearing examiner pursuant to the criteria identified in this chapter, the staff report provided by the planning department and evidence presented at time of hearing before the hearing examiner.

Type III decisions include the following:

1. Reasonable use exemptions (chapter 14.15 BMC).

2. Variances (BMC 14A.05.150 and 17.95.140).

3. Appeals of Type I decisions.

4. Appeals of Type II decisions.

5. Preliminary long subdivision approval (chapter 16.10 BMC).

6. Site specific zoning map amendments consistent with and not requiring an amendment to the comprehensive plan (BMC 14A.05.170 and 17.125.080).

7. Conditional use permits (BMC 14A.05.140).

8. Shoreline conditional use permits (chapter 18.09 BMC).

9. Any other land use action or project permit approval identified by Burlington Municipal Code as a Type III review.

D. Type IV decisions are legislative decisions made by the city council and limited quasi-judicial final decisions pursuant to the criteria identified in this chapter, in its capacity to establish policy and manage public lands, pursuant to existing legislative standards and based on the hearing examiner’s or planning commission’s record, public meeting and recommendation, and an open and/or closed record public hearing by the city council, the staff report provided by the planning department and evidence presented at time of hearing before the city council.

Type IV decisions include the following:

1. Final approval of site specific zoning map amendments (BMC 14A.05.170 and 17.125.080).

2. Essential public facility conditional use permits (chapter 17.105 BMC).

3. Zoning text amendments (BMC 14A.05.170 and chapter 17.125 BMC).

4. Area wide zoning map amendments (BMC 14A.05.170 and 17.125.070).

5. Comprehensive plan adoption and amendment (BMC 14A.05.180 and chapter 17.125 BMC).

6. Final decision as to appeals or adjustments of impact fees pursuant to chapter 15.12 BMC.

7. Zoning map and text amendments which are not consistent with, and require, a corresponding change to the comprehensive plan.

8. Appeals of decisions on Type III project permit applications.

9. Any other land use action or project permit approval identified by Burlington Municipal Code as a Type IV review. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.070 Applications – Generally.

A. Applications for project permits and other land use actions shall be made by the property owner, lessee, contract purchaser, or a city agency, or by an authorized agent thereof.

B. All applications for project permits or other land use actions shall be made to the director on a form provided by the community development department.

C. Applications shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable filing fees, if any, as adopted by city council resolution in the current city fee schedule.

D. All project permit or land use actions necessary for a project shall, whenever possible, be included in the same application.

E. All applications shall contain the submittal information required by the applicable sections of this title and related sections of BMC Title 18, Shoreline Master Program; Title 17, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance; Title 16, Subdivisions; Title 15, Buildings and Construction; Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places; and Title 14, Environmental Regulations. The director may require additional material from the applicant such as maps, text, or models when the director determines that such material is needed to accurately assess the proposed project.

F. An application shall be deemed abandoned and void if the applicant has failed without reasonable justification to supply all required information or data within 60 days of a written request for it; provided, that the director may extend, in writing, the period for such submission if it is determined that the delay was not the fault of the applicant.

G. Final Decision.

1. The city shall issue its notice of final decision on an application within 120 days after the city notifies the applicant that the application is complete (determination of completeness) unless the project permit is requested under BMC Title 16, in which case a final decision shall be issued within 90 days. The following time periods shall be excluded:

a. Any period during which the applicant has been requested by the city to correct plans, perform studies, or provide additional required information. The period shall be calculated from the date the city notifies the applicant of the need for additional information until the earlier of the date the city determines whether the additional information satisfies the request for information or 14 days after the date the information has been provided to the local government;

b. If the city determines that the information submitted by the applicant under BMC 14A.05.050(B) is insufficient, it shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies and the procedures shall apply as if a new request for studies had been made;

c. Any period during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared following a determination of significance pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 14.10 BMC, subject to an agreement between the city and the applicant in writing to a time period for completion of an environmental impact statement;

d. Any period for administrative appeals of project permits, if an open record appeal hearing or a closed record appeal is allowed. The time period for an open record appeal hearing shall not exceed 90 days and 60 days for a closed record appeal. The parties to an appeal may agree to extend these time periods;

e. Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the local government.

2. If the city is unable to issue its final decision within the time limits provided for in this section, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the project applicant. The notice shall include a statement of the reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of final decision.

3. The time limits established by subsection (G)(1) of this section do not apply if the application:

a. Is initiated by the city or a department of the city;

b. Requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan, an area wide zone change or a text change to the development code;

c. Requires approval of the siting of an essential public facility;

d. Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete under BMC 14A.05.050 and 15.06.050; or

e. Another time period is prescribed by state law and the city is enjoined from using the time periods identified in this section. In such cases the time period prescribed by state law shall be used.

H. The applicant or authorized agent shall attend all public meetings and/or public hearings or the matter shall be continued until the applicant or authorized agent is available to attend. A single person or entity shall be designated by the applicant to receive determinations and notices required by this chapter. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.080 Review criteria for decisions.

A. General Compliance. Compliance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, standards and procedures, including the provisions of this title, is required prior to approval of a land use action. This includes, but is not limited to, voluntary mitigation agreements entered into pursuant to SEPA and BMC Title 14, and development agreements entered into pursuant to chapter 36.70B RCW and chapter 17.125 BMC.

B. Site Plan Review. See BMC 14A.05.160.

C. Conditional Use Permits. See BMC 14A.05.140.

D. Variances. See BMC 14A.05.150

E. Subdivisions and Short Subdivisions. See BMC Title 16.

F. Environmental Compliance. See BMC Title 14.

G. Site Specific Zoning Map Amendment. See BMC 14A.05.170 and 17.125.080.

H. Area Wide Zoning Map Amendment. See BMC 14A.05.170 and 17.125.070.

I. Zoning Code Text Amendment. See BMC 14A.05.170 and chapter 17.125 BMC.

J. Comprehensive Plan Amendment. See BMC 14A.05.180 and chapter 17.125 BMC. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.090 Notice requirements, type and content of notice – General.

A. Process for Notification. If public notice is required, notice shall be in accordance with subsection (D) of this section. The general intent is to give the broadest notice on application (notice of application). When notice of application is required, it shall be given to the public and city departments and agencies with jurisdiction as provided in this section. If the city is using the optional DNS process or has made a determination of significance under SEPA and chapter 14.10 BMC, Environmental Policy, concurrently with the notice of application, the notice of application shall be combined with the optional DNS notice required by WAC 197-11-355(2) or the determination of significance and scoping. Nothing in this section prevents a determination of significance and scoping notice from being issued prior to the notice of application. The next step is notice of public meeting and/or notice of public hearing, whichever applies to the project. This is followed by notice of decision/opportunity for appeal or opportunity to request further consideration.

B. Types of Public Notice. The types of notice required are as set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The characteristics of required notice are set forth as follows:

1. Post a large sign on the site. The sign shall be a four-foot by four-foot half sheet of plywood. There shall be precise specifications about what goes on the sign, and they shall all be of a standard design except for the specifics about the project. These shall be furnished by the applicant. The processing of the application will not begin until the large sign is in place. The large sign shall be located so as to be clearly visible from the adjacent street or sidewalk, and shall remain posted until final city action on the application has been completed. For sites that are not highly visible, location of the large sign shall be approved by the director or alternative means of notification provided to include mailed notice. Projects limited to interior remodeling are exempt from the large sign requirement. Large sign standards shall be adopted by administrative rule.

2. Publication of a notice in the official newspaper or newspaper of general circulation. The legal publication of notice shall be easily identifiable; language should be simple and descriptive, not bureaucratic.

3. Individually mailed notices to owners and occupants in a 600-foot radius of the site. The notices shall provide a brief description of the proposed project and its location and identify any opportunities for comment, appeal, public hearings, and the means for obtaining additional information.

4. A periodic land use bulletin maintained on the department’s website. This should include application notices, meeting and hearing dates, and permit decisions. The land use bulletin need not include information concerning Type I permits.

5. Notice to parties of record. Parties of record shall receive direct notification of all related notices, meeting and hearing dates, and decisions.

6. Open meeting notice. This shall include posting in city hall and the library and mailing to the news media and interested persons.

7. Mailed notice to adjacent property owners. Property owners within 600 feet of a site where a Type III use is proposed shall be sent a notice of application. This shall also apply to Type II accessory dwelling unit and short plat applications.

C. Types of Notice Required.

Table 14A.05.090

	Permit Type	Website Land Use Bulletin	Mailed Notice of Application	Mailed Notice of Decision	Publish in Newspaper	Large Sign	Mail Notice of Application to Property Owners within 600 Feet	Notice of Public Meeting or Hearing

	I	 	X1	X	 	 	 	 

	II	X	X	X	X	X2	X3	 

	III	X	X	X	X	X2	X	X

	IV	X	X4	X4	X4	X2,4	X4	X

1.    Notice to applicant and property owner(s) only.

2.    Sign not required for projects which are limited to interior remodels and changes or for SEPA non-project actions.

3.    Only for preliminary short subdivision decisions.

4.    Only required for site-specific permit decisions without a corresponding preliminary decision processed as a Type I, II or III permit. Notice for amendments to the comprehensive plan, area wide changes to the zoning map or text changes to the development code are subject to notice requirements set forth in chapter 36.70A RCW, chapter 17.125 BMC, SEPA requirements set forth in chapter 14.10 BMC and other applicable provisions of the BMC.

D. Contents of Notice.

1. Notice of application shall include:

a. The notice shall provide a description of the proposed land use action and its nature and location.

b. The date of application, the date of the notice of completeness (BMC 14A.05.050 and 15.06.050) for the application, the date of the notice of application;

c. If applicable, a list of any studies requested, identify any permits not included in the application to the extent known by the city, identify existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposed project, and the location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

d. Except for the large sign requirement, each notice shall also include a list of the land use decisions sought. The planning director shall specify detailed requirements for large signs;

e. If applicable, a statement indicating that a hearing or meeting will take place, and if scheduled at the time of the notice, the date, time, place and type of hearing; if no hearing is scheduled at the time of the notice, instructions on how to obtain information concerning the date, time, and place of any applicable hearing;

f. A statement of the preliminary determination, if one has been made at the time of notice of those development regulations that will be used for project mitigation and of consistency as provided in BMC 14A.05.050;

g. If the optional DNS process is being used, the notice required by WAC 197-11-355(2); and

h. Any other information deemed appropriate by the community development director.

2. Notice of open public hearing shall include subsections (D)(1)(a), (e), (g) and (h) of this section.

E. When a land use permit includes more than one decision component, notice requirements shall be consolidated and the broadest applicable notice requirements imposed. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.100 Notice of application requirements and comment period.

A. Notice of Application. When a land use permit application requiring a Type II, III or IV decision is submitted, the director shall provide notice of application and an opportunity for public comment as described in this chapter, within 14 days after the determination of completeness as provided in BMC 14A.05.050 and 15.06.050. No notice or public comment period shall be required for Type I decisions.

B. Comment Period. The director shall provide a 14-day public comment period prior to making a threshold determination of nonsignificance (DNS) or issuing a decision or recommendation on a proposed Type II, III or IV land use action; provided, that the comment period shall be extended to 30 days if a written request for extension is submitted within the initial 14-day comment period or if otherwise required by state law. The comment period shall begin on the date notice of application is issued by the city. Comments shall be filed with the director by 5:00 p.m. of the last day of the comment period. When the last day of the comment period is a Saturday, Sunday or federal or city holiday, the comment period shall run until 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.110 Public hearing requirements.

Public hearings are required as listed below for the following land use permit components prior to a recommendation, final environmental impact statement or land use decision being made. Notice of hearing shall be provided no later than 14 days prior to the hearing. Procedures for matters before the hearing examiner shall be pursuant to chapter 17.120 BMC. Procedures for matters before the city council shall be adopted by administrative rule.

A. Draft Environmental Impact Statement. An open public hearing is required before the planning director to take comments for inclusion in the final environmental impact statement.

B. Conditional Use Permit. One open public hearing is required, before the hearing examiner.

C. Zoning and Sign Variance and Reasonable Use Exceptions. An open public hearing is required before the hearing examiner.

D. Preliminary Long Subdivision. See BMC Title 16 for detailed requirements. One open public hearing is required, before the hearing examiner.

E. Site Specific Rezone. For site specific rezones that are consistent with and implement the comprehensive plan, an open public hearing is required before the hearing examiner. The recommendation of the hearing examiner shall be submitted to the city council for a closed record hearing.

F. Zoning Text and Map Amendments Which Are Not Site Specific, Involve More Than One Project or Site or Which Are Not Consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. An open public hearing is required before the planning commission and recommendations are submitted to the city council. The council may hold additional public hearings or meetings. The council may reject, adopt or amend by ordinance the recommendations of the planning commission.

G. Comprehensive Plan Adoption and Amendment. A public hearing is required before the planning commission. The council may adopt by ordinance the plan or any part of the plan. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.120 Notice of decision requirements and contents of notice.

Decisions on project permits and land use decisions shall be in writing and include written findings and conclusions in support of the decision. A copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties of record. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.130 Standards to ensure performance and compliance with conditions.

Whenever a new development project is approved and substantial public and private improvements are required, the city shall use the following methods to ensure performance and compliance with the requirements of the land use permit:

A. Development agreement pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.220 to perform at a later date.

B. Performance bond or other security for defined time period with a 15 percent contingency fund.

C. Cash deposit or interest-bearing savings account, or other acceptable instrument of credit with a 15 percent contingency fund.

D. Covenants and/or easements that are filed with the Skagit County auditor’s real property records.

E. Conditional building permits with specified compliance requirements linked to called inspections.

F. Preannexation development agreements pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.220.

G. Agreement to participate in a local improvement district or other public improvement project at a later date. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.140 Conditional use applications, when required, submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

A. A conditional use permit is required when the use proposed is listed as requiring a conditional use in the regulations for the zone in which it is located. A conditional use permit is also required for uses which are not listed as conditional or permitted in any zone. The community development director is authorized to waive the conditional use permit requirement for unlisted uses if the director determines the use is substantially the same as another use permitted in the zone in which the proposed use will be located.

B. An application shall be required for approval of a conditional use permit. Applications for conditional use permit approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with this title. A complete application shall include:

1. Vicinity map;

2. Name, address, phone number of property owner;

3. Name, address, phone number of engineer or agent;

4. A site plan drawn to scale showing all of the following:

a. Boundaries and dimensions of property;

b. Adjacent public streets;

c. Easements, existing and proposed;

d. Location and size of all existing and proposed utilities;

e. Location of buildings, including setbacks;

f. Location and layout of off-street parking;

g. Location and height of fences;

h. Location and size of signs;

i. Landscape detail;

5. Elevation drawings showing the height of all proposed buildings.

C. The site plan shall be adopted and made part of the permit. All subsequent permits authorizing development, building, site improvements or construction activity shall be in accordance with the approved site plan. Adjustments to the site plan may be approved as follows:

1. Minor Adjustments. Minor adjustments to previously approved conditional use permits may be approved by the community development director. Minor adjustments shall be limited to those adjustments which may affect the precise dimensions or siting of buildings and improvements, but which do not affect the basic character, arrangement or function of the buildings and improvements, or the site coverage of the development, open space requirements, or impacts associated with the development. Dimensional adjustments shall not vary more than 10 percent from the original approval. Requests for minor adjustments shall be processed as a Type I permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.

2. Major Adjustments. Major adjustments to previously approved conditional use permits may be approved by the hearing examiner. Any adjustment or modification which would deviate from the originally approved dimensions by more than 10 percent, or which the director determines is not consistent with the definition of a minor adjustment, shall be considered a major adjustment. Requests for major adjustments shall be processed as a Type III permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.

3. The cumulative effect of multiple minor adjustments shall be considered and the director shall not approve a request for a minor adjustment if, when considered together with the effect of previously approved adjustments, the adjustment would be classified as a major adjustment.

4. The application requirements and approval criteria for adjustments to conditional use permits shall be the same as those applicable to new conditional use permit applications; provided, that the director may waive those application requirements that relate solely to aspects of the project that are not affected by and do not affect the proposed adjustments.

D. Approval Criteria. Conditional use permits shall only be approved if consistent with all of the following criteria:

1. The use will have no more adverse effect on the health, safety or comfort of persons living or working in the area, and will be no more injurious, economically or otherwise, to property or improvements in the surrounding area, than would any use generally permitted in the district. Among matters to be considered are traffic flow and control, access to and circulation within the property, off-street parking and loading, refuse and service areas, utilities, screening and buffering, signs, yards and other open spaces, height, bulk and location of structures, location of proposed open space uses, hours and manner of operation, and noise, lights, dust, odor, fumes and vibration; and

2. The proposal is in accordance with the goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan; and

3. The proposal complies with all the requirements of this title; and

4. The proposal can be constructed and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in design, character, and appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and provides a high quality of development; and

5. The proposal will not adversely affect the public infrastructure.

E. Conditional use permit decisions shall include written findings of fact demonstrating compliance with each of the approval criteria enumerated above.

F. Conditions of Approval. In order to mitigate any adverse impact or address a finding of fact associated with the proposal, conditions may be imposed which increase requirements in the standards, criteria, or regulations of this title or other city legislation or adopted policies. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.150 Variance applications, when required, submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

A. The purpose of a variance is to permit a deviation from the specific height, bulk, setback, dimensional, or performance standards of this title where the strict application of such standards would deprive a property of the rights and privileges enjoyed by other properties in the same zone and vicinity. Variances shall only be authorized in those instances where the hardship imposed on the property is the result of special circumstances inherent in the subject property related to size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings. Variance requests shall be processed as a Type III application in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.

B. Application Requirements. Applications for variances shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with this title. A complete application shall include:

1. A written statement identifying the specific dimensional or performance standard of the zoning code from which the applicant is requesting to deviate and addressing, individually, each of the approval criteria enumerated in this section.

2. A site plan drawn to scale and illustrating the following:

a. Adjacent streets and alleys;

b. Boundaries and dimensions of site and setbacks;

c. Location and dimensions of buildings;

d. Location and dimensions of parking areas; and

e. Location and dimensions of feature needing variance.

C. Approval Criteria. The hearing examiner may approve a variance only if the request conforms to all of the following approval criteria. The hearing examiner must enter findings of fact and conclusions which support the following criteria and any conditions:

1. There are unique physical conditions including narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the particular lot; and that, as a result of such unique physical conditions, practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships arise in complying with the provisions of this title; and

2. Because of such physical conditions, the development of the lot in strict conformity with the provisions of this title will not allow a reasonable and harmonious use of such lot; and

3. The variance, if granted, will not alter the character of the neighborhood, or be detrimental to surrounding properties in which the property is located; and

4. The special circumstances and conditions associated with the variance are not a result of the actions of the applicant or previous owners; and

5. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district; and

6. The approval of the variance will be consistent with the purpose of this title and the zoning district in which the property is located; and

7. The variance will not allow an increase in the number of dwelling units permitted by the zoning district; and

8. The authorization of such variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive plan; and

9. The variance shall not allow a land use which is not permitted under the zoning district in which the property is located; and

10. The variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and

11. The variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by other properties in the area; and

12. The variance shall not change any regulations or permit deviations from any conditions established by permits, contract rezones, or shown on the face of a binding site plan or plat.

D. Conditions of Approval. In authorization of a variance, the hearing examiner may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as may be deemed necessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this title and in the public interest.

E. Critical areas reasonable use exceptions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of BMC 14.15.140. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.160 Site plan review, when required, application submittal requirements, review criteria and conditions of approval.

A. Site plan review under this section shall be required for each of the actions listed below.

1. All development requiring more than five parking spaces;

2. All development requiring the preparation of a landscaping plan; or

3. Temporary uses for not more than one year.

B. Applications for site plan approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with this title. A complete application shall include:

1. Vicinity map;

2. Name, address, phone number of property owner;

3. Name, address, phone number of engineer or agent;

4. A site plan drawn to scale showing all of the following:

a. Boundary lines and dimensions for the property and all proposed lot lines. Future building locations in phased developments shall be indicated.

b. Natural features of the site, including existing significant trees, wetlands areas and special flood risk areas.

c. Location, dimensions and names of all existing or platted streets or alleys, easements, railroad rights-of-way, on or adjacent to the property.

d. Location and dimensions of all existing structures, improvements or utilities to remain, and structures to be removed.

e. Approximate location and size of storm water retention or detention facilities and storm drains.

f. Location and dimensions of all proposed structures and parking lots, to include parking and loading areas, pedestrian circulation and related access ways. Individual parking spaces shall be shown.

g. Service areas for waste disposal, recycling, loading and delivery and location of mail boxes.

h. Location and dimensions of any proposed signs;

5. Landscaping plans consistent with the requirements of chapter 17.80 BMC.

6. Elevation drawing showing the height of all proposed buildings.

C. Approval Criteria. No land use permit application shall be approved unless the proposal complies with all applicable Burlington Municipal Code requirements.

D. Conditions of Approval. Conditions may be attached to a land use permit if deemed necessary to enforce the requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code or to ensure consistency with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.170 Reclassification of property including rezone and zoning ordinance text amendments, initiation of amendments, review criteria and conditions of approval.

A. Initiation of Amendments.

1. Site Specific Zoning Map Amendments.

a. Owner(s) of a property may submit an application requesting a reclassification of the property;

b. The hearing examiner shall conduct a public hearing on the reclassification of property, and make a recommendation to the city council.

2. Zoning Code Text Amendments Consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.

a. The city council, upon its own motion, may request the planning commission to conduct a public hearing to amend any portion or all of this title;

b. The planning commission may upon its own motion call for a public hearing to amend any portion or all of this title;

c. Any resident or property owner of the city may petition the city to request an amendment to the text of this title.

3. Area wide rezones, changes to the text of the zoning code which are not consistent with the comprehensive plan, and all other code and map amendments requiring corresponding changes to the comprehensive plan shall be processed in accordance with the applicable procedures identified in chapter 17.125 BMC.

B. Review Criteria. When the hearing examiner is considering recommendations for reclassifications, or when the city council is considering approval of reclassifications, the hearing examiner or the city council shall investigate the request for reclassification and shall consider, among other questions, the following:

1. Is the request compatible with the city’s comprehensive plan and development goals?

2. Are public utilities, public facilities and other services currently adequate to serve the proposed district?

3. Would the proposal adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of the adjacent area of the area being considered?

4. Is the reclassification or land development needed at this time?

5. What are the economic impacts of the proposed action?

6. Are the arguments of support or opposition by local citizens valid?

7. Have conditions of the area substantially changed since the original zoning to justify a rezone?

C. Amendments to Rezone Requests. A requested rezone may be changed, conditioned or modified by the city council without requiring additional hearings subject to the following:

1. The modification or change shall not result in a more intense zone than the one requested.

2. The area of the request shall not be enlarged, however, the area may be lessened. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.180 Amendments to the comprehensive plan, review criteria and conditions of approval.

Amendments to the comprehensive plan, comprehensive plan map, and all other zoning text and map amendments which require corresponding changes to the comprehensive plan shall be made pursuant to the provisions of chapter 17.125 BMC. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


14A.05.190 Appeal procedures.

Procedures shall apply to appeals of land use actions by the city.

A. Type I Decisions.

1. A final decision regarding a Type I land use action may be appealed by any interested party. Final decisions may be appealed only if, within 14 calendar days after written notice of the decision is mailed, a written appeal is filed with the director.

2. Submittal Requirements. Appeals shall be submitted on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the following:

a. The specific permit number or decision being appealed;

b. The name of the applicant and property owner;

c. If multiple parties file an appeal, the appeal shall designate a single representative or contact person;

d. The specific aspects of the decision being appealed, the reasons why each aspect is in error as a matter of fact or law, and the evidence relied on to prove the error; and

e. Any applicable appeal fee identified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council.

3. Appeal Decision. The hearing examiner shall hear appeals of Type I land use actions in a closed record hearing. Appeals of Type I land use actions shall be processed as a Type III decision except that notice of the appeal hearing and appeal decision need only be provide to the property owner and applicant.

B. Type II Decisions.

1. A final decision regarding a Type II land use action may be appealed by any party of record. Final decisions may be appealed only if, within 14 calendar days after written notice of the decision is mailed, a written appeal is filed with the director.

2. Submittal Requirements. The appeal shall contain the following information:

a. The specific permit number or decision being appealed;

b. The name of the applicant and property owner;

c. If multiple parties file an appeal, the appeal shall designate a single representative or contact person;

d. The specific aspects of the decision being appealed, the reasons why each aspect is in error as a matter of fact or law, and the evidence relied on to prove the error; and

e. Any applicable appeal fee identified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council.

3. SEPA. An appeal of a SEPA threshold determination associated with a Type II land use action shall be considered together with the appeal of the associated land use action.

4. Appeal Decision. The hearing examiner shall hear appeals of Type II land use actions in a closed record hearing. Appeals of Type II land use actions shall be processed as a Type III decision. Notice of the appeal hearing and appeal decision shall be provided to all parties of record.

C. Type III Decisions.

1. Appeal Decisions. Hearing examiner decisions on appeals of Type I and II decisions shall be appealed to superior court in accordance with the provisions of chapter 36.70C RCW.

2. Permit Decisions. Hearing examiner decisions on Type III project permit applications may be appealed to the city council by any party of record. Hearing examiner decisions may be appealed only if, within 14 calendar days after written notice of the decision is mailed, a written appeal is filed with the director.

3. SEPA Decisions. An appeal of a SEPA threshold determination associated with a Type III land use action shall be considered together with the appeal of the associated land use action by whichever authority is charged with considering the appeal of the associated land use action.

4. Submittal Requirements. Appeals filed with the city council shall contain all of the following information:

a. The specific permit number or decision being appealed;

b. The name of the applicant and property owner;

c. If multiple parties file an appeal, the appeal shall designate a single representative or contact person;

d. The specific aspects of the decision being appealed, the reasons why each aspect is in error as a matter of fact or law, and the evidence relied on to prove the error; and

e. Any applicable appeal fee identified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council.

5. City Council Action. Within 30 days of receiving an appeal the city council shall hold a closed record hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall either:

a. Decline to consider the appeal; or

b. Consider the appeal and uphold the hearing examiner’s decision; or

c. If, based solely on the record created by the hearing examiner, the city council finds that the examiner’s decision is in error as a matter of fact or law, the city council may reverse the examiner’s decision. If the city council reverses the hearing examiner’s decision, it shall make specific findings identifying the aspects of the hearing examiner’s decision which are in error.

D. Type IV Decisions. Type IV decisions shall be appealed to superior court pursuant to chapter 36.70C RCW, the Growth Management Hearings Board pursuant to RCW 36.70A.280, the Shoreline Hearings Board pursuant to chapter 90.58 RCW, or other applicable statutory authority in accordance with Washington State law. An appeal of a SEPA threshold determination associated with a Type IV land use action shall be considered together with the appeal of the associated land use action. (Ord. 1854 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION1

Chapters:

15.01    General Provisions

15.04    Uniform Codes

15.06    Requirements for Building Permit Applications

15.08    Fire Code

15.10    Addresses

15.12    Transportation, Parks, and Fire Impact Fees

15.14    Overnight Lodging Establishments1

Prior legislation: Ords. 668, 969, 970, 1039, 1040, 1211, 1293, 1294, 1296, 1309, 1347, 1397, 1403, 1404, 1495, 1504, 1508, 1523, 1533, 1554, 1555, 1578, 1611, 1625, 1627, 1635, 1650, 1651, 1654, 1669, 1680, 1683, 1695, 1707, 1708, 1716, 1718, 1724, 1734, 1739, 1746, 1754, 1764, 1767, 1776, 1777, 1783, 1785, 1795, 1800, 1808, 1815, 1817, 1830 and 1842. 


Chapter 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

15.01.010    Title.

15.01.020    Application.

15.01.030    Purpose.

15.01.040    Authority.

15.01.050    Adoption by reference.

15.01.060    Definitions.

15.01.070    Liability.

15.01.080    Minimum requirements.

15.01.090    Violations and penalty.

15.01.100    Appeal.

15.01.110    Severability.


15.01.010 Title.

This title shall be known as “Buildings and Construction.” This chapter shall be called “General Provisions.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.020 Application.

This title shall be applicable as is set forth in the following chapters. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this title is to identify the international, uniform, and fire codes adopted by the city; to establish regulations for the construction, maintenance, and operation of buildings and structures; to establish a uniform system of addressing; and to establish provisions for the collection and assessment of transportation, park, and fire impact fees. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.040 Authority.

The provisions of this title are authorized pursuant to chapters 19.27 and 36.70A RCW, RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090 and other applicable laws and regulations as well as the authority identified in the chapters contained within this title. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.050 Adoption by reference.

Statutes, codes or regulations identified or adopted herein shall be the existing version of that statute, code or regulation and any subsequent amendment to the same, unless expressly stated otherwise. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.060 Definitions.

The words listed in this title shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms relating to pollutants and to hazardous wastes, materials, and substances, where not defined in this title, shall be as defined in chapters 173-303 and 173-340 WAC, the International Building Code or fire code. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.

“A”

“Act” means the Growth Management Act, as codified in chapter 36.70A RCW, as now in existence or as hereafter amended.

“B”

“Boundary line adjustment” or “lot boundary adjustment” shall have the same meaning as set forth in BMC Title 16.

“Building official” means the building official who is responsible for the enforcement of the building code, residential code, mechanical code, fuel gas code, plumbing code, energy conservation code, housing code, abatement of dangerous buildings code, all special hazards codes which may now or hereafter be adopted, of the city. Building official shall also be known as a department head.

“Building permit” means an official document or certification which is issued by the building official and which authorizes the construction, alteration, enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation, erection, demolition, moving or repair of a building or structure.

“C”

“Capital facilities” means streets, roads, highways, sidewalks, street and road lighting systems, traffic signals, domestic water systems, storm and sanitary sewer systems, parks and recreational facilities, and schools. “Capital facilities” also means any buildings, structures, equipment, and physical improvements necessary to provide public services.

“Capital facilities plan” means the capital facilities element of the city’s comprehensive plan. The capital facilities plan (CFP) is a general plan for providing the facilities and services necessary to serve the projected population and employment growth identified in the land use element of the comprehensive plan and is used as the basis for the development, and annual revision of, the capital improvement plan (CIP).

“Capital improvement plan” (CIP) means the detailed six-year financing plan required by WAC 365-196-415(1)(d). The capital improvement plan is a component of the comprehensive plan and is revised and updated annually as a means to address changing budgetary conditions and is used to implement the capital facilities plan.

“Certificate of occupancy” means a written document issued by the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that, in the opinion of the building official, the project bas been completed in accordance with the building and zoning codes. This document gives the owner permission from the authorities to occupy and use the premises for the intended purpose.

“City” means the city of Burlington.

“City administrator” means the duly appointed city administrator or his/her designee under the authority of the mayor.

“City engineer” means the officially appointed and acting public works director for the city, also referred to herein as a department head.

“Community development director” means the city administrator or designee.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Burlington.

“County” means Skagit County.

“D”

“Developer” means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, state agency, or other person undertaking development activity, and their successors and assigns.

Development or Development Activity. “Development” means any activity that results in a use or modification of land or its resources. Development activities include, but are not limited to: dredging, drilling, dumping, filling, earth movement, grading, clearing or removal of vegetation; storage of materials or equipment; building or construction; the placement of manufactured homes; land division, boundary line adjustments, lot segregations, subdivision and short subdivisions; binding site plans; land use permit approvals; variances; shoreline development or substantial development; and activities or uses allowed through conditional use permits; or any change in use of land that creates additional demand and need for public streets and roads, publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and fire protection facilities.

“Development approval” means any written authorization from the city, other than a building permit, which authorizes the commencement of a development activity, including, but not limited to, plat approval, binding site plan approval, boundary line adjustment, and a conditional use permit.

“Director” means the community development director.

“Dwelling unit” means any building or portion thereof which contains complete living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation for not more than one family.

“E”

“Encumbered” means to reserve, set aside, or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations, or other liabilities incurred for public facilities.

“F”

“Family” means a person, or two or more persons, related by blood or marriage or law living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling. In addition, the following shall be included in the definition of “family” pursuant to the requirements of state and/or federal law:

1. Adult family homes licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150;

2. Foster homes for the placement of the disabled, or expectant mothers in a residential setting including, but not limited to, foster family homes licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW, community group care facilities licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and crisis residential centers pursuant to chapter 13.32A RCW;

3. Consensual living arrangements of the disabled protected pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments; and

4. A housekeeping unit as defined by chapter 17.01 BMC.

“Feepayer” is a person, corporation, partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity, or department or bureau of any governmental entity or municipal corporation, commencing a development activity which creates the demand for planned facilities, and which requires development approval and/or the issuance of a building permit. “Feepayer” includes an applicant for an impact fee credit.

“Fire chief” means the duly appointed chief of the Burlington fire department or his/her designee, also referred to herein as a department head.

“Fire code official” means the officially appointed and acting fire official or designee.

“Fire impact fee” means the impact fee designated to pay for a proportionate portion of fire protection facilities identified in the capital improvement plan.

“H”

“Hearing examiner” means the official designated under the provisions of chapter 17.120 BMC.

“I”

“Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed by the city on development activities pursuant to this chapter as a condition of granting development approval and/or a building permit in order to pay for the planned facilities needed to serve new growth and development activity. “Impact fee” does not include a reasonable permit fee, an application fee, the administrative fee for collecting and handling impact fees, the cost of reviewing independent fee calculations, or the administrative fee required for an appeal pursuant to this chapter.

“Impact fee account” or “account” means the account or accounts established for the planned facilities for which impact fees are collected. The accounts shall be established pursuant to this chapter, and comply with the requirements of RCW 82.02.070.

“Independent fee calculation” means the impact calculation and/or economic documentation prepared by the feepayer to support the assessment of an impact fee other than by the use of the impact fees adopted herein and on file in the office of the finance director, or the calculations prepared by the public works director/city engineer in the case of traffic impact fees, the parks and recreation director in the case of park impact fees and/or the fire chief in the case of fire impact fees, where none of the impact fee categories or impact fee amounts in this chapter accurately describe or capture the impacts of the development activity on public streets and roads, publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and fire protection facilities. All independent fee calculations shall be prepared by the respective department director(s) as specified above, and shall be submitted to the city administrator/community development director for review and recommendation to city council for final determination.

“Interest” means the average interest rate earned by the city of Burlington in the last fiscal year, if not otherwise defined.

“L”

“Land use permit” is a consolidated development approval or permit issued pursuant to BMC Title 14A.

“Legally existing” means a use or structure which was established in compliance with all applicable rules, regulations, and laws in effect at the time of its establishment, including the requirement to obtain permits, authorizations, or approvals.

“Level of service (LOS)” means the quantity and quality of service which the city council has determined to be appropriate and desirable for the city. A measure of the LOS may include, but is in no way limited to, maximum levels of congestion on city streets and roads, maximum commute times, maximum wait at stops, maximum fire department response time, minimum fire suppression capabilities, minimum park space per capita for a variety of types of parks, minimum distance from residences to parks, and any other factors the city council may deem appropriate.

“M”

“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling built in accordance with regulations adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and RCW 43.22.335. This term includes modular homes as defined in this chapter but does not include mobile homes. This term also does not include recreational vehicles, park models, trailers, and other similar vehicles which are licensed for use on public roads, capable of being licensed for use on public, or designed and constructed to be licensed for use on public roads. Only structures which are certified by the state of Washington or federal government for use as a permanent habitable dwelling are included in this definition.

“Manufactured home park” or “mobile home park” means an area of land occupied or designed for the occupancy of two or more manufactured homes.

“Mobile home” means a factory built dwelling unit that does not meet current state or federal standards for factory built dwellings, modular homes, or manufactured homes. This definition does not include manufactured or modular homes as defined in this chapter or site built homes constructed in accordance with city building code requirements. Mobile homes may not be placed within the city of Burlington; however, existing legally established mobile homes shall be considered a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the nonconforming standards set forth in chapter 17.100 BMC.

“Modular home” means factory built housing as defined by RCW 43.22.450(3) which has been approved by the Department of Labor and Industries in accordance with RCW 43.22.455.

“O”

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property or a person with an unrestricted written option to purchase property, provided that if the real property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.

“P”

“Parks director” means the parks and recreation director of the city parks and recreation department, also referred to herein as a department head.

“Parks impact fee” means the impact fee designated to pay for publicly owned parks, open space and recreation capital facilities, projects and equipment listed within the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan (adopted annually by resolution of city council in the form of the six-year CIP).

“Peak p.m. hour” means the consecutive 60-minute periods during the 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. peak period during which the highest volume of trips on the city’s street system occurs.

“Planned facilities” shall mean public streets, roads and associated transportation equipment, facilities and infrastructure, publicly owned parks, open space, parks and recreation equipment and facilities, and fire protection equipment and facilities included in the capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan, capital facility plan, and/or six-year capital improvement plan (CIP) for Burlington.

“Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project or users of the project, that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupant or users of the project, and are not listed in the capital facilities plan or capital facilities element of the comprehensive plan (six-year city capital improvement plan (CIP)) adopted by resolution of the city council annually and used in the fee calculation.

“Public services” means fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, recreation, environmental protection, and other governmental services.

“Public works director/city engineer” means the director of the department of public works/city engineer or his/her designee.

“R”

“Residential structure” means a house, apartment, mobile home, manufactured home or modular home containing one or more dwelling units.

“S”

“Square footage” means the square feet of the gross floor area of a development or structure.

“State” means the state of Washington.

“System improvements” means planned facilities that are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. In the instance of transportation impact fees, “system improvements” are those public facilities that are included in the city of Burlington’s capital facilities plan or capital improvement plan, and form the basis of calculating the city’s traffic/transportation impact fees.

“T”

“Traffic/transportation impact fees” means the impact fee designated to pay for public streets and roads, capital facilities and equipment identified in the city’s capital facilities plan or capital improvement plan.

“V”

“Voluntary agreement” means an agreement between the developer and the city or as authorized by RCW 82.02.020.

“W”

“Way-of-travel” means a roadway of whatever sort, including, but not limited to, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, lanes, loops, places, tracts and ways, which is capable of carrying vehicular traffic.

Ways-of-travel include:

1. Alley.

2. Avenue.

3. Boulevard.

4. Court.

5. Designate.

6. Drive.

7. Lane.

8. Road.

9. Street.

10. Way.

11. “Alley” means a public or private way-of-travel 16 feet or less in width not designated or improved for general travel and used as a secondary means of access to the rear of residential, business or other property.

12. “Avenue” means a way-of-travel which runs generally east and west.

13. “Boulevard” means a way-of-travel that extends north and south through the commercial and industrial district.

14. “Court” means a way-of-travel under two grid blocks long.

15. “Designate” means to name a way-of-travel whether by name or number.

16. “Drive” means a way-of-travel.

17. “Lane” means a way-of-travel one block long.

18. “Place” means a way-of-travel.

19. “Road” means a way-of-travel which heretofore has been designated a road.

20. “Street” means a way-of-travel which generally runs north and south.

21. “Way” means a way-of-travel. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.070 Liability.

It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of compliance upon the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title. Nothing contained in this title is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title, to comply with the provisions of this title, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents. This title is not intended to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by its terms. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.080 Minimum requirements.

The requirements of this title are minimum requirements. They do not replace, repeal, abrogate, supersede or effect any other more stringent requirements, rules, regulations, covenants, standards, or restrictions. Where this title imposes requirements which are more protective of human health or the environment than those set forth elsewhere, the provisions of this title shall prevail.

Approvals and permits granted under this title are not waivers of the requirements of any other laws. Compliance is still required with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including rules promulgated under authority of this title. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.090 Violations and penalty.

All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or omissions that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title, are hereby determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or omissions shall be subject to fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC, criminal penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.100 Appeal.

Appeal of any land use decision made by community development director pursuant to this title may be appealed to the hearing examiner or in some cases the city council as identified in the manner set forth in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.01.110 Severability.

If any portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.04 UNIFORM CODES

Sections:

15.04.010    Title.

15.04.020    Application.

15.04.030    Purpose.

15.04.040    Authority.

15.04.050    Codes and standards designated – Adopted by reference.

15.04.060    Electrical standards and inspection – State responsibility.

15.04.070    Administration and enforcement of chapter provisions.

15.04.080    Uniform codes – Copies on file.

15.04.105    Premises identification.

15.04.110    Violations and penalty.


15.04.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Uniform Codes.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.020 Application.

This chapter shall be applicable to the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, removal, converting or demolishing, equipping, using, occupying, or maintaining any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform codes governing the activities set forth in BMC 15.04.020 to protect the general health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.040 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter are authorized pursuant to chapter 19.27 RCW, chapter 51-51 WAC, and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.050 Codes and standards designated – Adopted by reference.

A. International Building Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, together with all supplements thereto, mandated amendments and subject to modifications set forth by the state of Washington in chapter 51-50 WAC;

B. International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, together with all supplements thereto, excluding Appendix F and subject to the modifications set forth by the state of Washington in chapter 51-51 WAC;

C. International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, together with all supplements thereto, and subject to the modifications set forth by the state of Washington in chapter 51-52 WAC;

D. Uniform Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, together with all supplements and amendments thereto, and subject to the modifications set forth by the state of Washington in chapters 51-56 and 51-57 WAC;

E. International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, together with standards NFPA 58 and NFPA 54;

F. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials;

G. Appendix chapter J, Grading, of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council;

H. The Washington State Energy Code, 2012 Edition, and Reference Standard 29 developed by the Washington State Building Code Council, and set forth in chapter 51-11 WAC, as may be further amended;

I. Installation of Factory Built Housing and Commercial Structures, RCW 43.22.460, together with WAC 296-150C-0540, 296-150F-0540 and the installation of manufactured and mobile homes, RCW 43.22.440 and WAC 296-150M-0650;

J. International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council;

K. International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.060 Electrical standards and inspection – State responsibility.

The city relinquishes to the state all responsibilities for electrical construction standards and electrical inspection, heretofore assumed by the city under the provisions of laws of the state, chapter 19.28 RCW. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.070 Administration and enforcement of chapter provisions.

A. The building official as appointed by the mayor shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B. The building official shall use the edition of the Building Safety Journal/Building Valuation Data Tables as published by the International Code Council that is referenced in the fees Resolution No. 08-2014 or alternative methods such as architect and design engineer’s estimates, contractor bids or other established methods to establish the valuation of all construction as authorized by city council.

C. When submittal documents are required by International Building Code for plan review, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. Such plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the building permit fee, and are in addition to the building permit fee. When submittal documents are revised so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined by International Building Code, an additional plan review fee shall be charged. Plan review fees for planning and engineering reviews shall be based on the fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the city council. Permit applicants shall be responsible for the payment of plan review fees regardless of whether a building permit is issued.

D. Payment of Permit Fees. Upon notification by the city that a permit application has been approved, the applicant shall submit payment to the city for all permit fees for which approval has been received prior to permit application expiration. All permit applications shall expire 180 days from the date the application was submitted. The applicant shall promptly advise the city of any changes that would limit or otherwise hinder the city in contacting the applicant.

E. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

F. Where a plan review has been conducted, and no building permit is issued, it shall be the applicant’s responsibility to pick up all submitted plans and documents within three weeks following payment of the plan review fees. Following such three-week period, the plans and documents may be discarded or destroyed by the city.

G. The community development director may authorize a refund of any fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which was erroneously paid or collected. The community development director may authorize a refund of not more than 80 percent of the building permit fee paid when no work bas been done under a permit issued in accordance with this chapter. Any refund shall be reduced by the actual costs incurred in reviewing the application. The community development director shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon the written application filed by the original permitee. Plan review fees are not refundable. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.080 Uniform codes – Copies on file.

At least one copy of the adopted codes will be kept on file in the office of the building official and is available for public inspection during business hours. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.105 Premises identification.

Section 502, Premises Identification, of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all new buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property, and shall conform to the standards of Burlington Municipal Code Chapter 15.10.

(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.04.110 Violations and penalty.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, in violation of provisions contained within or adopted by this chapter or any of the provisions of this chapter.

B. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.06 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS

Sections:

15.06.010    Title.

15.06.020    Application.

15.06.030    Purpose.

15.06.040    Authority.

15.06.050    Building permit application – Consideration – Requirements.


15.06.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Requirements for Building Permit Applications.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.06.020 Application.

This chapter shall be applicable to all building permit applications. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.06.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the purpose of all building permit applications. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.06.040 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter are authorized pursuant to chapter 19.27 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.06.050 Building permit application – Consideration – Requirements.

A. A valid and fully complete building permit application for a structure that is permitted under the zoning or other land use control ordinances in effect on the date of the application shall be considered under the building permit ordinance in effect at the time of application, and the zoning or other land use controls in effect on the date of application.

B. The requirements for a fully completed application shall consist of the elements required by RCW 19.27.095 (State Building Code Act), Sections 107.1 through 107.3.4 of the International Building Code, subsection (F) of this section, and all of the following:

1. The legal description, or the tax parcel number assigned pursuant to RCW 84.40.160, and the street address if available, and may include any other identification of the construction site by the prime contractor;

2. The property owner’s name, address, and phone number;

3. The prime contractor’s business name, address, phone number, and current state contractor registration number; and

4. Either:

a. The name, address, and phone number of the office of the lender administering the interim construction financing, if any; or

b. The name and address of the firm that has issued a payment bond, if any, on behalf of the prime contractor for the protection of the owner, if the bond is for an amount not less than 50 percent of the total amount of the construction project;

5. Applications for permits to construct a building which requires potable water shall include evidence of an adequate water supply for the intended use of the building consistent with RCW 19.27.097;

6. Any information requested by the city under the provisions of BMC Title 14A for purposes of determining consistency with applicable land use, engineering, zoning, development, or environmental regulations and controls;

7. Any applicable fees established by the fee schedule adopted by the city council;

8. Applications for building permit approval shall be submitted on forms provided by the community development director and shall include any additional information required by the form.

C. The information required on the building permit application by subsections (B)(l) through (4) of this section shall be set forth on the building permit document which is issued to the owner, and on the inspection record card which shall be posted at the construction site.

D. The information required by subsection (B) of this section and information supplied by the applicant after the permit is issued under subsection (E) of this section shall be kept on record in the office where building permits are issued and made available to any person on request. If a copy is requested, a reasonable charge may be made.

E. If any of the information required by subsection (B)(4) of this section is not available at the time the application is submitted, the applicant shall so state and the application shall be processed forthwith and the permit issued as if the information had been supplied, and the lack of the information shall not cause the application to be deemed incomplete for the purposes of vesting under subsection (A) of this section. However, the applicant shall provide the remaining information as soon as the applicant can reasonably obtain such information.

F. The limitations imposed by this section shall not restrict conditions imposed under chapter 43.21C RCW (the State Environmental Policy Act).

G. In addition to the information required by subsection (B) of this section, applications to construct, modify, expand, or repair civil infrastructure, utilities, streets, or sidewalks shall include:

1. A complete set of plans showing plan and profile of all existing and proposed development to a scale acceptable to the city engineer and stamped by a civil engineer licensed in the state of Washington;

2. The plans shall show all utilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, typical cross-sections, construction notes and any other details that are necessary to properly build the project;

3. The submittal shall also include a drainage control plan that meets the minimum technical requirements set forth in BMC Title 14.

4. The plans shall contain all of the information required by, and shall comply with, the applicable provisions of BMC Titles 12, 13, and 14.

H. Except as explicitly modified by this chapter, building and grading permit applications shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.08 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.08.010    Title.

15.08.020    Application.

15.08.030    Purpose.

15.08.040    Authority.

15.08.050    International Fire Code adopted by reference.

15.08.060    Bureau of fire prevention established – Enforcement authority.

15.08.070    Storage of explosives and fireworks.

15.08.080    Storage of flammable/combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gas.

15.08.090    Liquefied petroleum gas storage – District limit establishment.

15.08.100    Explosives and blasting agents – Vehicle transportation route establishment.

15.08.110    Hazardous materials – Vehicle transportation route establishment.

15.08.120    Premises identification.

15.08.130    Violations.


15.08.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “Fire Code.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.020 Application.

This chapter shall be applicable to the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, removal, converting or demolishing, equipping, using, occupying, or maintaining any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish international codes governing the activities set forth in BMC 15.08.020 to protect the general health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.040 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter are authorized pursuant to chapter 19.27 RCW, chapter 51-51 WAC, and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.050 International Fire Code adopted by reference.

The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, including Appendix chapters B through G, mandated state amendments and local administrative rules, and subject to modifications as set forth by the state of Washington in chapter 51-54 WAC, is adopted as the official fire code of the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.060 Bureau of fire prevention established – Enforcement authority.

A. The fire code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief or designee of the Burlington fire department. The bureau of fire prevention shall be known as the Burlington fire department.

B. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall be necessary. The chief of the fire department may deploy technical inspectors within the limits of the fire department’s annual budget appropriations.

C. A report of the fire department shall be made annually to the mayor and the report shall contain such information and recommendations as the chief of the fire department considers necessary to properly advise the city on matters concerning fire prevention. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.070 Storage of explosives and fireworks.

The storage of explosives, fireworks and blasting agents is prohibited in all areas of the city except those areas designated M-1 on the Burlington zoning map and meeting the approval of the fire marshal. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.080 Storage of flammable/combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gas.

The bulk storage, as defined by the fire code, of flammable or combustible liquids and of liquefied petroleum gas in aboveground tanks is prohibited in all areas of the city except areas designated M-1 on the Burlington zoning map and meeting the approval of the fire marshal. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.090 Liquefied petroleum gas storage – District limit establishment.

Reserved. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.100 Explosives and blasting agents – Vehicle transportation route establishment.

Vehicles transporting explosive materials shall be routed, where practicable, to avoid congested traffic and heavily populated areas. The fire chief or chief’s designee is authorized to designate such routes of travel and the times of use. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.110 Hazardous materials – Vehicle transportation route establishment.

Vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall be routed, where practicable, to avoid congested traffic and heavily populated areas. The fire chief or chief’s designee is authorized to designate such routes of travel and the times of use. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.120 Premises identification.

Section 505, Premises Identification, of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Approved numbers or addresses shall be provided for all new and existing buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property and shall conform to the standards of Burlington Municipal Code Chapter 15.10.

(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.08.130 Violations.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, or to transport or store any material or substance, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.10 ADDRESSES

Sections:

15.10.010    Title.

15.10.020    Application.

15.10.030    Purpose.

15.10.040    Authority.

15.10.050    Planning department to assign address numbers.

15.10.060    Numbering system prescribed.

15.10.070    Way-of-travel names.

15.10.080    Building owner to post and maintain address signs.

15.10.090    Enforcement.


15.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Addresses.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.020 Application.

This chapter shall be applicable to all buildings and structures used or constructed within the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform methodology for assigning way-of-travel names and building address numbers under the administration of the planning department and permit center, and to establish the authority to retroactively remedy incorrect addresses, and improve signage for existing building and premises identification. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.040 Authority.

The provisions of this chapter are authorized pursuant to chapter 19.27 RCW, chapter 51-51 WAC, the codes adopted by this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.050 Planning department to assign address numbers.

A. The community development department shall determine the address of any property in the city in accordance with the numbering system established in this chapter.

B. Addresses for new buildings, premises, and tenant spaces shall be assigned as part of the building permit review process. If no associated building permit exists, an address shall be assigned using a Type I review process in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

C. Applications for address assignment shall be made on forms provided by the community development director and shall include all of the information required by the form. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.060 Numbering system prescribed.

A. The numerical designation of all doorways and entrances to buildings, lots, yards and grounds fronting upon the several ways, avenues, streets, drives and places of the city are established in accordance with the following system:

1. Except where otherwise specified, 100 numbers are allotted to each block, the city of Burlington addressing grid map, to be spaced evenly along the grid with 50 numbers on each side of the street or way in each grid line. The grid has been adjusted in areas of the city where the blocks differ in length. Even numbers shall be used on the southerly side of avenues or ways extending in an easterly and westerly direction and on the easterly side of streets or ways extending in a northerly and southerly direction; odd numbers shall be used on the northerly side of avenues or ways extending in an easterly and westerly direction and on the westerly side of streets or ways extending in a northerly and southerly direction.

2. In the case of irregular drives, places, streets, ways or avenues, the frontages shall be numbered as near as may be possible, according to the uniform series of block numbers with which they most nearly correspond.

B. For new buildings, a site plan showing the footprint of the building, all front door entrances, location and name of adjoining street or way and a north arrow is required. The number for new buildings is assigned according to this section as follows:

1. If the project is multifamily with multiple entrances, each building receives an address and numbering is assigned for that building with the first floor having the 100 series, the second floor 200 series, the third floor 300 series.

2. A single entrance for a multiple tenant building receives one common number, with each tenant receiving a separate suite number. Separate entrance doors receive a separate address.

C. New addresses are added to the address database, mapped and copies distributed to emergency service agencies, utilities, the post office and city departments.

D. Whenever the irregularity of plats, the changing direction of streets, avenues, or other highways, the interruption of the continuity of highways or any other condition causes doubt or difference of opinion as to the correct number of any piece of property or any building thereon, the number shall be determined by the department. The planning department shall be guided by the specific provisions of this chapter as far as they are applicable, and on the recommendations of the fire and police departments. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.070 Way-of-travel names.

A. The city council shall designate all public or private ways-of-travel, now existing or hereafter created; provided, that a name shall be designated that is different than any existing way-of-travel name currently in the address system and that will not be easily confused with an existing name.

B. The baseline for ways-of-travel shall be Fairhaven Avenue and shall bear the suffix “E” (east) on the east side of Burlington Boulevard and the suffix “W” (west) on the west side of Burlington Boulevard.

C. The meridian line for ways-of-travel, running generally north-south shall be Burlington Boulevard and shall bear the suffix “N” (north) on the north side of Fairhaven Avenue and the suffix “S” (south) on the south side of Fairhaven Avenue. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.080 Building owner to post and maintain address signs.

A. The owner of any building or other structure shall maintain the street number of each building and structure in a conspicuous place over or near the principal street entrance, or in other conspicuous places so that the address may be easily seen from the street.

B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any new building to obtain and post an approved sign as required by this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the city to provide an approved sign for existing buildings on a one-time basis. The owner of an existing building shall be responsible to post it as provided in this chapter.

C. Exception. Where there are multiple buildings on a site, the department may waive the requirement for posting an address on appurtenant or accessory buildings where individual identification of each building is not essential. Where a property has frontage along more than one named street or for any other property where there may be confusion regarding the address of a building or structure, the department may require the complete address, including street number and street name to be conspicuously posted.

D. Numbers and letters shall be of approved reflective material that is easily legible and shall have a high contrast with the background color. Letters and numbers shall be white reflective material and shall not be less than five inches (76 mm) in height. The sign background shall be blue reflective material. The department shall maintain a list of vendors approved to make address signs.

E. Approved address signs shall be posted prior to approval of a final building permit inspection or occupancy approval. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.10.090 Enforcement.

Should the planning department find that any building, structure or premises is not provided with numbers as herein required, or is not correctly numbered, the planning department shall notify the owner, agent or tenant of the correct street number and shall require that the same shall be properly placed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 30 days unless additional time is provided for in writing by the planning department. Failure to respond to such notification shall be considered a violation of this chapter.

Buildings served by a private road or a common driveway shall post their address number(s) at the head of the road or driveway in a manner that can be easily read from the intersecting street. This posting requirement shall be in addition to the requirement to post the number on the building itself. Where the existing street grid may not adequately allow for the assignment of street addresses which will promote the easy locating of such addresses, or for any other reason consistent with the intent of this chapter, the planning department may assign a name to the private road or common driveway which shall be used for addressing purposes. The city council shall assign a name to the private road or common driveway when there are four or more parcels served by it. In addition, one or more property owners along the road or driveway may be required to post a sign displaying the assigned name at a location near the intersection of the road or driveway with a named public street. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.12 TRANSPORTATION, PARKS, AND FIRE IMPACT FEES

Sections:

15.12.010    Title.

15.12.020    Application.

15.12.030    Purpose.

15.12.040    Authority.

15.12.060    Assessment of impact fees.

15.12.070    Exemptions.

15.12.080    Credits.

15.12.090    Tax adjustments.

15.12.100    Appeals.

15.12.110    Establishment of impact fee accounts.

15.12.120    Impact fees.

15.12.130    Refunds.

15.12.140    Use of funds.

15.12.150    Review.

15.12.160    Independent fee calculations.

15.12.170    Existing authority unimpaired.

15.12.180    Adoption of traffic/transportation, parks and fire impact fees.

15.12.190    Authorization to adopt capital project, facility and equipment lists and impact fee calculation formula or methodology by resolution.


15.12.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Transportation, Parks, and Fire Impact Fees.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all building permits, applications for building permits and development authorized by the city. This includes, but is not limited to, the development of residential, commercial, retail, industrial and office land, including the expansion of existing uses that creates a demand for additional planned facilities, as well as a change in existing use that creates a demand for additional planned facilities. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.030 Purpose.

The city council of the city of Burlington (the “council”) hereby finds and determines that growth and development activity in the city will create additional demand and need for public streets and roads, publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and fire protection facilities in the city, and the council finds that growth and development activity should pay a proportionate share of the cost of such planned facilities needed to serve the growth and development activity and that concurrency requirements of chapter 36.70A RCW need to be complied with. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.040 Authority.

This chapter is authorized pursuant to chapter 36.70A RCW and RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.060 Assessment of impact fees.

A. It is a policy of the city of Burlington to assess transportation, fire and park impact fees in compliance with this title. The city shall collect impact fees as listed in this chapter and based on the most currently adopted traffic/transportation, parks and fire impact fee formula or methodology resolution, from any applicant seeking a building permit from the city. This shall include, but is not limited to, the development of residential, commercial, industrial, retail, and office buildings and/or land, and includes the expansion of existing uses and/or structures that creates a demand for additional planned facilities, as well as a change in existing use that creates a demand for additional planned facilities.

B. Except as may be due to exemptions or credits provided pursuant to this chapter, pursuant to an independent fee calculation pursuant to this title, or impact fees imposed pursuant to this chapter, the city shall not issue a building permit(s) unless and until the impact fees set forth in the schedules in this title, have been paid.

C. Impact fees may also be collected pursuant to the timeline provisions of an adopted development agreement as provided in BMC Title 14A.

D. Collection of impact fees associated with the construction of a single-family home may be deferred until the final building permit inspection if requested by a permit applicant; provided, that:

1. The permit applicant submits a written request to defer impact fees at the time of building permit application on a form provided by the community development director; and

2. Not more than 20 deferrals shall be granted to an applicant in a single calendar year. For purposes of interpreting this requirement, “applicant” shall mean a contractor as identified by his or her contractor registration number; and

3. Impact fees shall be based on the fee schedule in effect at the time a complete building permit application is submitted.

4. No final inspection shall be conducted and no certificate of occupancy shall be granted until all impact fees have been paid. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.070 Exemptions.

A. The following shall be exempted from the payment of impact fees:

1. Replacement and reconstruction of legally existing residential structures. Legally existing residential structures may be replaced or reconstructed on the same site or lot; provided a valid building permit is obtained within 24 months of the demolition or destruction of the existing residential structure and no additional dwelling units are created.

2. Alterations, expansion, enlargement, remodeling, rehabilitation or conversion of a legally existing residential structure where no additional dwelling units are created and the use is not changed.

3. The construction of accessory structures that will not result in an increased use of planned facilities.

4. Miscellaneous appurtenant improvements, including but not limited to fences, walls, swimming pools, and signs.

5. Demolition or moving of a structure.

6. Expansion of a residential structure provided the expansion does not result in the creation of any additional dwelling units.

7. Alteration or replacement of an existing nonresidential structure that does not expand the usable space or change the existing land use.

8. Parking garages and building spaces that are constructed solely to park motor vehicles that are not for sale, lease or rent, or part of a stock in trade are exempt from the requirement to pay any impact fees. The conversion of parking garages or vehicle parking areas exempted by this subsection to other uses requires the payment of impact fees.

9. Temporary uses and structures authorized by this title. Temporary uses, or its successor, are exempt from the requirement to pay any impact fees.

10. Where the development activity is exempt from the payment of impact fees pursuant to RCW 82.02.100, or its successor, in that the property is part of a development activity that mitigated its impacts on all of the system improvements funded by impact fees under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA).

11. Developments owned and/or operated by the city of Burlington.

B. Any claim of exemption shall be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. If a building permit is not required for the development activity, the claim shall be made when the fee is tendered. Any claim not made when required by this section shall be deemed waived.

C. Developments that are not exempt from the requirement to pay impact fees may be entitled to an adjustment as set forth in BMC 15.12.150.

D. The community development director shall be authorized to determine whether a particular development activity falls within an exemption identified in this section, in any other section, or under other applicable law. Determinations of the community development director shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.080 Credits.

A. Credit Available. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, credit against the amount of the impact fees for developer dedications of land necessary for the construction of planned facilities included within the adopted city capital facility plan or for construction of infrastructure or capital facilities included within the adopted capital facilities plan shall be governed by this section. This section allows for the provision of reasonable credit(s) to a feepayer for the value of any dedication of land for, improvements to, or new construction of one or more projects included within the adopted city of Burlington capital facility plan (capital facility element of the comprehensive plan/six-year CIP), on file in the office of the city finance director, by a feepayer, pursuant to RCW 82.02.060(3), as further provided herein. The amount of the credit for a particular improvement or facility shall be limited to the cost of that improvement or facility as set forth in the capital facility plan (capital facility element of the comprehensive plan/six-year CIP), on file in the office of the city finance director, as now or hereafter amended. Credits shall be specific to the type of improvements or dedications made, such that dedications of land for, construction of or improvements to publicly owned parks, open space or recreational facilities shall be applicable only to the parks impact fee; dedications of land for, construction of or improvements to public transportation facilities shall be applicable only to the transportation impact fee; and dedications of land for construction of or improvements to fire protection facilities shall be applicable only to the fire impact fee. Credit shall not include increased housing density.

B. No credit shall be given for project improvements, or any other improvements or infrastructure required as part of approval of a development proposal or as mitigation for development related impacts.

C. Application for Credit – Determination of Suitability of Land, Improvements, Construction. The feepayer applying for credit (hereinafter, “the applicant”) shall direct the request for a credit or credits to the city administrator/community development director, who shall refer the request to the finance director, community development director, director of public works/city engineer, the fire chief and/or the parks and recreation director as applicable. The applicable department head shall first determine the general suitability of the land, improvements, and/or construction for city purposes. The finance director shall then evaluate whether the land, improvements, and/or the facilities constructed are included within the city’s adopted capital facilities plan and shall forward results of said evaluation to the city administrator/community development director. Recommendations regarding the appropriateness and amount of credit provided shall be submitted by the applicable director(s)/department heads to the city administrator/community development director for review. The city administrator shall make a recommendation to city council as to whether the proposed dedication of land and/or equipment or facility(ies) proposed are included within the capital facility plan and also shall recommend the appropriate amount of credit provided. In all cases, the city administrator/community development director shall inform the applicant and city council of his/her recommendation at the next available council meeting. City council shall render a decision as to the amount of credit, if any, provided to an applicant.

D. The value of credit for land provided under this section, including right-of-way and easements, shall be established on a case-by-case basis by an appraiser selected by, or acceptable to, the applicable department director.

E. The feepayer shall pay for the cost of the appraisal or request that the cost of the appraisal be deducted from any credit provided to the feepayer, in the event that credit is awarded.

F. Determination of Credit Amounts. For each request for credit the city shall first determine that the land, improvements, and/or construction would be suitable for city purposes, does not constitute a project improvement, and that the project is listed within the adopted capital facility plan. The value of a credit for structures, facilities or other improvements shall be established by original receipts provided by the applicant for one or more of the same system improvements for which the impact fee is being charged.

G. For donations of land, the applicable appraiser must be licensed and in good standing by the state of Washington for the category of the property appraised. The appraiser must possess an MAI or other equivalent certification and shall not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. A description of the appraiser’s certification shall be included with the appraisal, and the appraiser shall certify that he/she does not have a fiduciary or personal interest in the property being appraised. The appraisal shall be in accord with the most recent version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.

H. The applicant shall be entitled to a credit for a reasonable value of the land, improvements, and/or construction that is made or dedicated, based upon the actual cost of improvements and/or construction, or the agreed upon or actual predevelopment value of land dedicated. In the event an appraisal is necessary to determine the value of land dedicated, an appraiser shall be designated by the city and the full cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the applicant. The city administrator/community development director shall then issue a credit certificate as approved by city council in the amount of the determination of value.

I. Use of Credits. The applicant, upon receipt of a credit certificate, shall have the right to use the certificate to offset any future impact fee assessed for any development activity that will be required to pay impact fees. The administration and application of the credit certificates will be as described in subsection (H) of this section. The application of any credit certificate will be specific to the transportation impact fee, the park impact fee, or the fire impact fee.

J. Credit Certificates – Administration. After city council makes a determination of the amount of the credit, the city administrator/community development director shall issue and provide the applicant with a document hereinafter known as a credit certificate, setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the date of issuance of the credit certificate, the date of expiration of the credit and the credit certificate, the reason for the credit, the legal description of the property donated, and/or the improvement or construction for which was the basis the credit certificate is registered (the “credit holder”). The applicant must sign and date the credit certificate, and return such signed credit certificate to the city finance director for filing in the city’s credit certificate registry before the credit will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return the credit certificate within 60 calendar days shall nullify the credit. The original credit certificate shall be kept registered in the city’s records, and the credit holder shall be provided a duplicate copy. The city finance director shall develop reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of the credit certificate program, including the calculation of credits, procedures for use of credits and application of credits to particular parcels of land which may be by recorded document, and the ability to levy an administrative fee in an amount sufficient to cover actual costs to the city.

K. Transfer of Credit – Partial Use of Credit. Credit certificates may be transferred or sold to third parties by the credit holder; provided, that in order to transfer credits to another party, the current credit holder shall register the transfer with the city finance director in accordance with the procedures for registration of credit transfers developed by the city finance director. Only the credit holder who is reflected on the city’s registration system pursuant to the city’s registration system may utilize the credit. Registration with the city of credit certificates shall be conclusive evidence of credit ownership. To the extent that a credit holder wishes to utilize only a portion of the credit reflected on the credit certificate against impact fees due on a particular project, the city finance director shall develop procedures for reducing the the amount of credit reflected on the credit certificate accordingly or issuing a new credit certificate with the remaining credit amount.

L. Limitations on Utilization of Credits. Utilization of credit against payment of impact fees must in all cases be made prior to payment of the impact fee. No reimbursement of impact fees will be made for credit not utilized at the time the impact fee was due. In no event shall the city be under any obligation to advise any applicant for a building permit or other development approval of the existence or possible existence of the availability of credits. The burden of investigating and determining if credits may be available shall rest solely with such applicant. Credit utilized shall never exceed the amount of the impact fee due.

M. Credit for Significant Past Tax Payments. For each request for a credit for significant past tax payments made for particular improvements or land acquisitions, the feepayer shall submit proof of payments and calculation of past tax payments earmarked for or proratable to the particular improvements or land acquisitions. The city finance director shall establish procedures for determining the amount of credit for significant past tax payment made for particular improvements or land acquisitions.

N. Appeals. Determinations made pursuant to this section shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in this chapter.

O. Expiration of Credits. Credits shall expire, and credit certificates shall become null and void, on a date 10 years from the date of issuance of the original credit certificate by the city administrator/community development director. Transfer of credits or partial use of credits which may involve reissuance of credit certificates shall in no event extend the expiration date of those credits. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.090 Tax adjustments.

Pursuant to and consistent with the requirements of RCW 82.02.060, the capital facilities plan has provided adjustments for future taxes to be paid by the developer which are earmarked or proratable to the planned facilities which will serve the development activity. The impact fees as adopted herein have been reasonably adjusted for taxes and other revenue sources which are anticipated to be available to fund particular planned facilities. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.100 Appeals.

Any feepayer may pay the impact fees imposed by this chapter under protest in order to obtain the development approval and/or a building permit. Appeals regarding the impact fees imposed on any development activity may only be taken by the feepayer of the property where such development activity will occur. No appeal shall be permitted unless and until the impact fees at issue have been paid. The feepayer must first file an appeal with the city administrator/community development director, as follows:

A. The appeal shall be in writing on the form provided by the city and shall specify the reasons for the appeal; and

B. The appeal shall be filed within 21 calendar days of the feepayer’s payment of the impact fees at issue. The failure to timely file such a request shall constitute a final bar to alter seeking such review; and

C. No administrative fee will be imposed for said appeal; and

D. The city council shall review appeals to administrative decisions issued under this chapter and shall issue a determination in writing following conduct of a public hearing; and

E. In the case of appeal of a decision by city council pertaining to issuance of impact fee credits under this chapter and/or independent fee calculations under this chapter, appeals shall be made to Skagit County superior court, in Skagit County, Washington, within 21 days of receipt of a written city council decision. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.110 Establishment of impact fee accounts.

A. The city shall establish separate impact fee accounts for the following: (1) transportation impact fees; (2) parks impact fees; (3) fire impact fees. The accounts shall be interest-bearing accounts.

B. Funds withdrawn from the impact fee accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The interest earned shall be retained in each account and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees were collected.

C. On an annual basis, the city finance director shall provide a report to the council on the impact fee accounts, showing the source and amount of all moneys collected, earned, or received, and the planned facilities that were financed in whole or in part by impact fees.

D. Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within 10 years of receipt, unless the city council identifies in written findings extraordinary and compelling reasons or reasons to hold the impact fees beyond the 10-year period. Under such circumstances, the council shall establish the period of time within which the impact fees shall be expended or encumbered. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.120 Impact fees.

The impact fees set forth in this chapter, and the supporting formula or methodology and analysis under which these impact fees have been developed, are adopted by resolution of the city council on file in the office of the finance director, are based upon the data and assumptions set forth therein, and the information and public input provided to the city council in considering adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Except as otherwise provided in BMC 15.12.070, 15.12.080 or 15.12.160, all development activity in the city will be charged the impact fees set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.130 Refunds.

A. If the city fails to expend or encumber the impact fees within 10 years of when the impact fees were paid or, where extraordinary or compelling reasons exist, such other time periods as established pursuant to this chapter, the current owner of the property on which impact fees have been paid may receive a refund of such impact fees. In determining whether impact fees have been expended or encumbered, impact fees shall be considered expended or encumbered on a first-in, first-out basis.

B. The city shall notify potential claimants by first class mail deposited with the United States Postal Service at the last known address of such claimants. A potential claimant or claimant must be the owner of the property.

C. Owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request for a refund of the impact fees to the community development director within one year of the date the right to claim the refund arises or the date that notice is given, whichever is later.

D. Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made within this one-year period shall be retained by the city and expended on the appropriate planned facilities.

E. Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include any interest earned on the impact fees by the city, calculated at the average interest rate earned by the city on the impact fee account over the preceding fiscal year.

F. When the city seeks to terminate any or all components of the impact fee program, all unexpended or unencumbered funds from any terminated component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant to this section. Upon the finding that any or all impact fee requirements are to be terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination and the availability of refunds in a newspaper of general circulation at least two times and shall notify all potential claimants by first class mail at the last known address of the claimants. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one year. At the end of one year, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended for the appropriate planned facilities. This notice requirement shall not apply if there are no unexpended or unencumbered balances within the impact fee account(s) being terminated.

G. The city shall also refund to the current owner of property for which impact fees have been paid all impact fees paid, including interest earned on the impact fees, if the development activity for which the impact fees were imposed did not occur; provided, that if the city bas expended or encumbered the impact fees in good faith prior to the application for a refund, the city can decline to provide the refund. If the same or subsequent owner of the property proceeds with the same or substantially similar development activity, the owner can petition the city for an offset. The petitioner must provide proof of payment of impact fees previously paid for a development of the same or substantially similar nature on the same property or some portion thereof. The community development director shall determine whether to grant an offset. Determinations of the city shall be in writing and shall be subject to the appeals procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.140 Use of funds.

A. Pursuant to this chapter:

1. Impact fees collected for public streets and roads, impact fees for publicly owned parks, open space and recreational facilities, and impact fees for fire protection facilities shall be used solely for those respective purposes, and only those that will reasonably benefit the development activity.

2. Impact fees shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in existing facilities serving existing developments.

3. Impact fees shall not be used for maintenance or operation.

B. Impact fees may be spent for planned facilities, including but not limited to planning, land acquisition, construction, engineering, architectural, permitting, financing, and administrative expenses, applicable impact fees or mitigation costs, capital equipment pertaining to planned facilities, and any other similar expenses which can be capitalized.

C. Impact fees may also be used to recoup city improvement costs previously incurred by the city to the extent that new growth and development activity will be served by the previously constructed improvements or incurred costs.

D. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been issued for the advanced provision of city improvements for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to serve the development activity. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.150 Review.

The impact fee schedules adopted herein shall be reviewed by the council as it may deem necessary and appropriate in conjunction with the annual update of the capital facilities plan element of the city’s comprehensive plan and/or six-year capital improvement plan.

The city’s cost of administering the impact fee program shall be as set forth in the city’s fee ordinance. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.160 Independent fee calculations.

A. If the public works director/city engineer as pertains to traffic impact fees, and/or the fire chief as pertains to fire impact fees, and/or the parks and recreation director as pertains to parks impact fees believes in good faith that none of the impact fee categories or impact fee amounts set forth in this chapter accurately describe or capture the impacts of a development activity on planned facilities, the applicable director may conduct independent fee calculation recommendations for review by the city administrator/community development director as per the procedures detailed for application of credits under this chapter. The city administrator/community development director may recommend that city council act to impose alternative impact fees on a specific development activity based on these calculations. The alternative impact fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing.

B. If a feepayer opts not to have the impact fee determined according to the schedules set forth in this chapter, then the feepayer shall prepare and submit to the applicable director(s) an independent fee calculation for the development activity for which final plat, binding site plan, or other development approval, or a building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The applicable department head(s) shall review the independent fee calculation and provide an analysis to the city administrator/community development director concerning whether the independent fee calculation should be accepted, rejected, or accepted in part. The city administrator/community development director shall after review of the materials submitted, make recommendation to city council, who may adopt, reject or adopt in part the independent fee calculation based on the analysis prepared by appropriate department head(s) and/or recommended by the city administrator/community development director, and based on the specific characteristics of the development activity, and/or principles of fairness. The impact fees or alternative impact fees and the calculations recommended by the city administrator/community development director shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

C. Any feepayer submitting an independent fee calculation will be required to pay to the city of Burlington a fee to cover the cost of reviewing the independent fee calculation. The fee shall be the actual cost of any additional staff time not to exceed $500.00 spent in review plus the cost of consultant services if the city deems these services to be necessary; provided, however, for independent fee calculations for single residential lots where, in the sole discretion of the city administrator/community development director, the issues involved are easily handled and the fee is clearly excessive, the $500.00 maximum fee may be reduced.

D. While there is presumption that the calculations set forth in the city’s capital facilities plan are valid, in making an independent fee calculation recommendation to city council, the city administrator/community development director shall consider the documentation submitted by the feepayer and the analysis prepared by the appropriate department heads, but is not required to accept such documentation or analysis which the applicable director and/or city administrator/community development director reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable, and may, in the alternative, recommend to city council that it require the feepayer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. The city council is authorized to adjust the impact fees on a case-by-case basis based on the independent fee calculation, the specific characteristics of the development activity, and/or principles of fairness. City council’s decision regarding impact fees and the calculations shall be set forth in writing and shall be mailed to the feepayer.

E. An independent fee calculation determination made by the city council pursuant to this section may be appealed as per this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.170 Existing authority unimpaired.

Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from requiring mitigation of adverse environmental impacts of a specific development pursuant to the State Environmental Policy Act, chapter 43.21C RCW, based on the environmental documents accompanying the underlying development approval process, and/or chapter 58.17 RCW, governing plats and subdivisions; provided, that the exercise of this authority is consistent with BMC 15.12.040 and with RCW 43.21C.065 and 82.20.100. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.180 Adoption of traffic/transportation, parks and fire impact fees.

	A. Traffic/Transportation Impact Fee:

	$2,665 per peak p.m. hour trip based on factors listed in the most current ITE Manual (Institute of Traffic Engineers); or based upon an independent fee calculation as specified in BMC 15.12.160.

	B. Park Impact Fee:

	Single-Family Residence:	$655/unit

	Multifamily Residence:	$655/unit

	Commercial/Industrial Development:	$0.50/square foot

	C. Fire Impact Fee:

	Single-Family Residence:	$253.73/unit

	Multifamily Residence:	$253.73/unit

	Commercial/Industrial Development:	$0.219/square foot

(Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.12.190 Authorization to adopt capital project, facility and equipment lists and impact fee calculation formula or methodology by resolution.

The city council is authorized to adopt by resolution specific capital project, facility and equipment lists and impact fee calculation formula or methodology in support of the fees adopted in this chapter as listed above or as amended in the future. The formula and methodology are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Appendix A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 15.14 OVERNIGHT LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS

Sections

15.14.010    Title.

15.14.020    Application.

15.14.030    Purpose.

15.14.040    Authority.

15.14.050    Definitions.

15.14.060    License required.

15.14.070    Application requirements.

15.14.080    Approval criteria.

15.14.090    Review process.

15.14.100    Maintenance and operations.

15.14.110    General requirements.

15.14.120    License suspension and revocation.

15.14.130    Appeals.

15.14.140    Existing overnight lodging establishments.

15.14.150    Liability.

15.14.160    Severability.

15.14.170    Effective date.


15.14.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Overnight Lodging Establishments.” (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.020 Application.

This chapter shall be applicable to all overnight lodging establishments. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.030 Purpose.

This chapter shall provide for the licensing and inspection of all overnight lodging establishments, and the enforcement of violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.040 Authority.

The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted by the Burlington city council which authorizes the city to perform all or part of the licensing, inspection and enforcement duties. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.050 Definitions.

For the purposes of interpreting this chapter the following definitions shall be used unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word or term is not defined in this section, but is defined in BMC Title 17, the definition in BMC Title 17 shall be used. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The words “shall” and “must” are always mandatory and the words “may” and “should” denote the use of discretion in making a decision.

“Bed and breakfast” means a single-family dwelling, as defined in BMC Title 17, where up to two rooms or lodging units are let as temporary accommodations for travelers or guests by the owner or occupant of the single-family dwelling. Bed and breakfast establishments may provide limited food service to guests.

“Boarding house” or “rooming house” means a dwelling unit, other than a hotel, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation. This term does not include buildings meeting the definition of a hotel, bed and breakfast, single-family home, or multifamily dwelling. Boarding houses are differentiated from overnight lodging establishments by providing accommodations for periods of 30 days or more.

“Building code” means the codes identified in, or adopted by, chapter 15.04 BMC.

“Building official” means the building official for the city of Burlington designated pursuant to the provisions of BMC 2.34.030.

“City” means the city of Burlington, Washington.

“Clean” means without visible or tangible soil or residue including absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, rodents, pests, and other offensive, unsightly or extraneous matter.

“County” means the county of Skagit.

“Department” means the planning and community development department of the city of Burlington.

“Director” or “community development director” means the city administrator or designee.

“Fire code” means the codes identified in, or adopted by, chapter 15.08 BMC and WAC 246-360-220.

“Good repair” means free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, excessive wear and tear, leaks, obstructions and similar defects so as to constitute a good and sound condition.

“Guest” means any individual occupying or registered to occupy an overnight lodging unit.

“Hearing examiner” means the hearing examiner for the city of Burlington as defined in BMC Title 14A, or if no hearing examiner is under contract with the city, the term “hearing examiner” shall mean the board of adjustment.

“Licensee” means an overnight lodging establishment operator to whom the city issues an overnight lodging license.

“Local health jurisdiction” or “health department” means the Skagit County public health department.

“Lodging unit” means one self-contained unit designated by number, letter or some other method of identification.

“Operator” means any person who operates an overnight lodging establishment either as owner, lessee, manager, agent or in any other capacity.

“Overnight lodging establishment” means transient accommodations, bed and breakfasts, and vacation rentals.

“Overnight lodging license” means a license issued by the city authorizing the use or operation of an overnight lodging establishment.

“Person” means individual, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation, company, association or joint stock association, and the legal successor thereof.

“State” means the state of Washington.

“State Department of Health” means the Washington State Department of Health.

“Transient accommodation” means any facility such as a hotel, motel, condominium, resort, or any other facility or place offering three or more lodging units to guests for periods of less than 30 days and may include food service operations in accordance with chapter 246-215 WAC. Only transient accommodations with a valid city license and State Department of Health approval are an authorized use.

“Vacation rental” means a dwelling unit, or a portion of a dwelling unit, used to provide lodging for guests for periods of less than 30 days. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.060 License required.

A. It is unlawful to operate an overnight lodging establishment without a current and valid overnight lodging license.

B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable and valid for a period of one year unless suspended or revoked.

C. Applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the city at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the overnight lodging license. All applications for renewal shall be submitted on forms provided by the director and shall include the applicable fee identified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.070 Application requirements.

Applications for overnight lodging licenses shall be submitted on forms provided by the director. Applications shall include any information identified on the form and all of the following:

A. The name and address of the overnight lodging operator.

B. A floor plan depicting the general layout of the overnight lodging establishment. The floor plan shall clearly illustrate the location of all entrances and exits and the location and identifying number, letter, or name, of each lodging unit.

C. A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the building housing the overnight lodging establishment. If no certificate of occupancy is available, the building official shall verify the building housing the overnight lodging establishment was constructed or established in compliance with any applicable building code requirements in effect at the time of its establishment.

D. A copy of a current, valid transient accommodation license issued by the Washington State Department of Health pursuant to chapter 246-360 WAC, unless the overnight lodging establishment is specifically exempt from state licensing requirements.

E. The applicable fee identified in the fee schedule adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.080 Approval criteria.

A. No overnight lodging license shall be issued or renewed unless all of the following criteria are met:

1. The overnight lodging establishment shall fully comply with the requirements of this chapter;

2. The overnight lodging establishment is in compliance with the building and property maintenance code requirements identified, or referenced, in chapter 15.04 BMC;

3. The overnight lodging establishment shall be in compliance with the fire code requirements identified, or referenced, in chapter 15.08 BMC and WAC 246-360-220;

4. The overnight lodging establishment shall be in compliance with the applicable standards, requirements, and regulations identified, or referenced, in BMC Title 17;

5. The overnight lodging establishment shall be in compliance with the applicable requirements identified in chapter 246-360 WAC;

6. The overnight lodging establishment shall have a current, valid license issued by the State Department of Health pursuant to the provisions of chapter 246-360 WAC, unless the overnight lodging establishment is explicitly exempt from such requirements.

7. The overnight lodging establishment shall be in compliance with chapters 8.04 and 8.06 BMC.

B. Prior to issuing or renewing a license for an overnight lodging establishment the director shall conduct an inspection of the establishment to ensure compliance with requirements of this chapter. This may include an examination of the guest registry to show compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.090 Review process.

A. Applications for overnight lodging licenses, and the renewal of existing overnight lodging licenses, shall be reviewed using a Type I process in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

B. All decisions regarding the issuance or renewal of overnight lodging licenses shall be made in writing and shall be final and conclusive unless appealed.

C. When issuing or renewing an overnight lodging license the director shall provide the operator with a signed certificate including the following information:

1. The name and address of the overnight lodging establishment;

2. The name and address of the overnight lodging operator;

3. A statement indicating the establishment bas been reviewed and inspected for compliance with Burlington Municipal Code requirements;

4. The approval date of overnight lodging license;

5. The expiration date of the overnight lodging license. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.100 Maintenance and operations.

A. A current, valid overnight lodging license shall be displayed on the office or lobby wall inside the overnight lodging establishment so that it is clearly visible to any person or guest. If the overnight lodging establishment does not have an office or lobby, the license shall be displayed in an alternative location that is open, accessible, and visible to all guests.

B. All lodging units shall be equipped, arranged, and maintained as follows:

1. An occupancy level for each lodging unit shall be established based on the number of beds and their intended maximum usage and the maximum occupancy level shall not be exceeded.

2. Floors, ceilings, doors, walls, carpet, windows, electrical switches and fixtures, and locking mechanisms shall be in working condition, free from defects, clean, and in good repair.

3. Wall and ceiling mounted lighting fixtures shall be firmly secured, functional, and in good repair.

4. All wiring, lighting, appliances, and electrical fixtures shall be free from defects, functional, and in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and permitting requirements.

5. Each lodging unit shall be provided with heating and ventilation and all heating and ventilation equipment shall be functional, free from defects, and in good repair.

6. A functioning phone shall be provided in each lodging unit and shall be capable of allowing immediate communication with emergency services.

7. All lodging units shall be free from rodent or insect infestation.

8. All lodging units shall be free from chemical or biological hazards.

9. All lodging units shall be free from mold or mildew.

C. Overnight lodging operators shall maintain a record of all guests. The record shall be consistent with the following requirements:

1. A record of the arrival and departure of guests shall be maintained for at least one year from the date of departure. The record shall include the name, address, driver’s license or government issued ID type and number, and phone number of each guest, and shall indicate the lodging unit used by the guest. In the case of corporate, tour, or other group bookings, the name, address and phone number of the person responsible for the booking, and a rooming list of occupants and their assigned room numbers shall be included in the guest record.

2. The names and addresses of all guests shall be verified by requiring each guest to present a driver’s license, passport, or other government-issued identification.

3. The overnight lodging operator shall permit law enforcement personnel to inspect the guest record where there is reasonable suspicion of criminal conduct, or as otherwise allowed by law.

D. No operator shall knowingly permit an overnight lodging establishment to be used for illegal purposes.

E. No operator shall knowingly provide a lodging unit to a person known to be in violation of a court order if said order is caused to be violated by his/her presence or activity at the overnight lodging establishment.

F. No operator shall permit a lodging unit to be occupied for a period longer than 30 days per BMC Title 17 and chapter 246-360 WAC. Consecutive 30-day periods are not permitted in one establishment.

G. Water, sewer, electrical power, and garbage service shall be provided to the overnight lodging establishment at all times and maintained in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and service provider policies. Failure to continuously maintain such services and utility connections shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

H. Utility accounts shall be in good standing. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.110 General requirements.

A. The following general requirements shall apply to all overnight lodging establishments, operators, overnight lodging licenses, and applications for overnight lodging licenses:

1. No person shall make any material false statement in the application or omit material information required on the application.

2. No license shall enable any person to engage in any dishonest, illegal act, practice or enterprise.

3. Overnight lodging establishments shall be established and maintained in compliance with all applicable zoning, building, fire, health, and sanitation laws and regulations.

4. Operators shall permit the director, building official, or fire marshal to conduct an inspection of the overnight lodging establishment at any time for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as well as fire, building, safety, health, and sanitation laws and regulations; provided, that prior to conducting an inspection reasonable notice shall be provided to the operator.

5. The director shall inspect all overnight lodging establishments prior to issuing or renewing an overnight license.

B. Failure to comply with the general requirements identified in this section shall be grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of an overnight lodging license.

C. Prior to issuing or renewing a business license for an overnight lodging establishment the city may require the applicant to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and obtain an overnight lodging license. All overnight lodging establishments shall comply with this chapter and shall require an overnight lodging license. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.120 License suspension and revocation.

A. Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. The director may suspend or revoke an overnight lodging license for any violation of this chapter. The director should generally adhere to the following progressive enforcement steps, but may, at their discretion, suspend or revoke an overnight lodging license based the severity of the violation, the risk to public health and safety, or a record of previous violations by the operator:

1. Correction Notices. The director may issue correction notices in instances where minor violations of this chapter exist which do not constitute immediate threats to public health or safety. Correction notices shall be in writing, shall identify the issue requiring corrective action, and shall be provided to the operator in person or mailed to the address indicated on the operator’s license application. Correction notices shall also specify a date by which the violation shall be remedied or corrected.

2. Suspension. The director may suspend an overnight lodging license where immediate threats to public health or safety exist, or in instances where the operator has failed to address previous correction notices. Suspensions shall remain in effect until the violations which caused the suspension have been corrected. The director may also issue conditional suspensions which identify specific lodging units, or areas of the overnight lodging establishment, which shall not be available to guests during the period of suspension.

3. Revocation. The director may revoke an overnight lodging license when numerous immediate threats to public health or safety exist, or where the operator has failed to address previous correction notices or suspensions.

B. Notice of Suspension or Revocation. Prior to suspending or revoking an overnight lodging license the director shall provide the operator with a written notice. The notice shall be provided to the operator in person or mailed to the address indicated on the operator’s license application, and shall include the following:

1. The specific violations or reasons for the suspension or revocation;

2. The date upon which the license will be suspended or revoked;

3. If the notice concerns a license suspension, a statement identifying the time period of the suspension;

4. If the notice concerns a conditional suspension, a statement identifying the specific lodging units, or areas of the overnight lodging establishment, which shall not be available to guests;

5. A statement indicating that if the license is suspended or revoked, continued operation of the business is a criminal offense (WAC 246-360-035/RCW 70.62.280); and

6. A statement indicating that future license applications, or renewal requests, may be denied if the operator’s license has been suspended more than once in a given year, or revoked within the preceding five years.

C. It shall be unlawful to display a license which has been suspended or revoked. When a conditional suspension has been issued, the director shall provide the operator with a revised license indicating the conditions to which the license is subject and the operator shall display the revised license during the period of suspension.

D. When an overnight lodging license has been suspended or revoked, the director shall post notices on or near the entrances to the overnight lodging establishment stating that the establishment’s license has been suspended or revoked and indicating that lodging units may not be occupied or provided to guests.

E. In addition to the reasons outlined in chapter 5.04 BMC, a business license for overnight lodging establishment may be revoked under chapter 5.04 BMC if gambling or lewd, boisterous, or disorderly conduct is permitted in or about any such overnight lodging establishment.

F. Repeated Violations. If an overnight lodging establishment’s license has been suspended more than once in the preceding year, or has been revoked in the preceding five years, the director may deny subsequent applications for licenses or license renewals.

G. All decisions regarding the suspension or revocation of overnight lodging licenses shall be made in writing and shall be final and conclusive unless appealed in accordance with the provisions of BMC 15.14.130 and BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.130 Appeals.

A. Decisions regarding applications for overnight lodging licenses, or overnight lodging license renewals, may be appealed using the appeal procedures applicable to Type I decisions identified in BMC Title 14A.

B. Decisions regarding the suspension or revocation of an overnight lodging license may be appealed using the appeal procedures applicable to Type I decisions identified in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.140 Existing overnight lodging establishments.

Within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter the operators of existing overnight lodging establishment shall apply for an overnight lodging license and shall be required to obtain a license with one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.150 Liability.

Whenever a license as provided for in this chapter is issued to a firm or corporation, any member of such firm or any managing officer, agent, or employee of such firm or corporation shall, upon conviction of a violation of the provisions of this title, be liable in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as the principal. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.160 Severability.

If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, clause or phrase of this chapter. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


15.14.170 Effective date.

The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect five days after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 1855 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Title 16 LAND DIVISIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS1

Chapters:

16.01    General Provisions

16.10    Preliminary Plat Review

16.20    Final Plat Review

16.30    Binding Site Plans

16.40    Survey and Design Standards

16.50    Alterations and Vacations

16.60    Boundary Line Adjustments

16.70    Innocent Purchaser and Testamentary Divisions1

Prior legislation: Ords. 1220, 1339, 1378, 1503, 1628, 1770, 1799, 1809 and 1839. 


Chapter 16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

16.01.010    Title.

16.01.020    Application.

16.01.030    Purpose.

16.01.040    Authority.

16.01.050    Exemptions from platting review.

16.01.060    Definitions.

16.01.070    Effect of noncompliance.

16.01.080    Liability.

16.01.090    Violations and penalties.

16.01.100    Appeal.

16.01.110    Severability.


16.01.010 Title.

A. Title. This title shall be called “Land Divisions and Adjustments.”

B. Chapter. This chapter shall be called “General Provisions.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.020 Application.

A. All land divisions, boundary line adjustments, and lot combinations shall be subject to the requirements of this title and the provisions of chapter 58.17 RCW.

B. Land divisions shall be classified as either “exempt” or “nonexempt.” A nonexempt division is a land division or adjustment subject to platting review. Nonexempt divisions include subdivisions and short subdivisions. Only those divisions and adjustments specifically classified by this title as exempt shall be considered exempt.

C. An exemption from platting review shall not be construed as an exemption from other applicable laws, regulations, and Burlington Municipal Code requirements. As specified in this title, some exempt land divisions and adjustments are subject to alternative review and approval requirements. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.030 Purpose.

A. To ensure land divisions and adjustments comply with the requirements of chapter 58.17 RCW.

B. To implement the Burlington comprehensive plan and carry out the requirements of the chapter 36.70A RCW, the Growth Management Act.

C. To ensure the public interest will be served by subdivisions, short subdivisions, and dedications, and to ensure that appropriate provisions have been made for the public health, safety and general welfare, and for open spaces, drainage ways, streets, alleys, other public ways, water supplies, sanitary wastes, fire protection facilities, parks, playgrounds, and sites for schools and school grounds. Subdivisions and short subdivisions meeting all of the requirements of this title shall be construed to serve the public interest and be consistent with the above purposes.

D. Provide a means of conveying information to property owners or prospective buyers regarding restrictions and limitations on the use of land within a subdivision or short subdivision. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.040 Authority.

This title is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B and 58.17 RCW as well as other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.050 Exemptions from platting review.

The following actions are classified as exempt and shall not require platting review:

A. Cemeteries and burial plots when used for that purpose;

B. Divisions made by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent, subject to compliance with chapter 16.70 BMC;

C. Binding site plans, when a binding site plan has been approved by the city and recorded with the auditor subject to compliance with chapter 16.30 BMC;

D. Divisions of land made for the sole purpose of providing sites for public and private utility facilities; provided, that any remaining lots are consistent with applicable zoning regulations, a record of survey depicting the division is recorded, and a covenant or deed restriction is recorded limiting the use of the utility site to utility purposes;

E. Boundary line adjustments which do not create any additional lot, tract, parcel, site, or division, or create a lot, tract, parcel, site, or division which does not comply with the minimum standards for area or dimension prescribed by the zoning code, subject to compliance with chapter 16.60 BMC;

F. Divisions of land due to condemnation, or sale under the threat of condemnation, by any agency or division of government, provided a record of survey depicting the division is recorded;

G. Existing parcels created by the establishment of public road rights-of-way prior to the adoption of applicable state platting laws or city platting regulations;

H. Existing parcels, created by the city or another municipal corporation prior to the effective date of this title, for port purposes, moorage, boat launches, parks, open space, critical area protection, conservation, or other public purposes;

I. Assessor’s combinations and segregations for purposes of taxation only. Such parcels shall not be recognized as separate legal lots for purposes of sale, lease, transfer, building, or permitting. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.060 Definitions.

For the purposes of interpreting this title the following definitions shall be used unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word or term is not defined in this section, but is defined in BMC Title 17, the definition in BMC Title 17 shall be used. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word “shall” is always mandatory and the words “may” and “should” denote the use of discretion in making a decision.

“A”

“Auditor” or “auditor’s office” means the Skagit County auditor.

“B”

“Binding site plan” means a detailed recorded plan that divides land into individual lots for the purpose of facilitating commercial, industrial, or mixed-use development, or for the purpose of creating condominiums or a manufactured home park. Binding site plans are subject to the provisions of chapter 16.30 BMC.

“Binding site plan alteration” means a modification or change to a recorded binding site plan. This term also includes the vacation, or elimination, of a recorded binding site plan, a portion of a binding site plan, or any easement, dedication, or feature created by, or shown on the face of a binding site plan.

“Binding site plan amendment” means a minor modification or amendment to an approved preliminary binding site plan. Binding site plan amendments are submitted after the preliminary approval, but prior to the recording.

“Block” means a group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well-defined and fixed boundaries.

“Boundary line” or “property line” means a lot line as defined in BMC Title 17.

“Boundary line adjustment” or “lot line adjustment” means a division made for the purpose of adjusting boundary lines between platted or unplatted lots or both, which does not create an additional lot, tract, parcel, site, or division, or create a lot, tract, parcel, site, or division that does not comply with the minimum standards for area or dimension prescribed by the zoning code.

“C”

“Certificate of occupancy” means a written document issued by the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that, in the opinion of the building official, the project has been completed in accordance with the building and zoning codes. This document gives the owner permission from the authorities to occupy and use the premises for the intended purpose.

“City” means the city of Burlington.

“City engineer” means the Burlington director of public works or designee.

“Code” means the Burlington Municipal Code.

“Critical area,” for the limited purposes of interpreting this title, shall mean a wetland or fish and wildlife habitat conservation area as defined in chapter 365-190 WAC.

“Critical area buffer,” for the limited purposes of interpreting this title, shall mean the protective buffer or area required by BMC Title 14 for wetlands and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

“D”

“Dedication” means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public uses reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. The intention to dedicate shall be evidenced by the owner by the presentment for filing of a final plat or short plat showing the dedication thereon; and the acceptance by the public shall be evidenced by the approval of such plat for filing by the appropriate governmental unit.

“Director” means the city administrator or designee.

“F”

“Final plat” means the final drawing of a subdivision or short subdivision prepared for filing for record with the auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this title and chapter 58.17 RCW.

“I”

“Illegal lot” means a lot created in violation of the platting or zoning regulations in effect at the time of its creation or subsequent adjustment.

“Innocent purchaser” means the owner of a lot created in violation of the requirements of this title or chapter 58.17 RCW that purchased the property for value and in good faith, and did not have knowledge of the fact that the lot was divided from a larger parcel, or adjusted, in violation of this title or chapter 58.17 RCW.

“L”

“Legal lot” means a lot created in compliance with all of the platting and zoning regulations in effect at the time of its creation or subsequent adjustment. This term shall also include lots which have been certified by the city as legal lots in accordance with provisions of chapter 16.70 BMC.

“Long plat” means the plat of a subdivision.

“Lot” means a fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries. This term shall also include the terms “parcel,” “site,” and “tract.”

“N”

“Natural hazard,” for the limited purpose of interpreting this title, shall mean a critical aquifer recharge area, geologically hazardous area, or frequently flooded area as defined in chapter 365-190 WAC.

“P”

“Plat” means a map or representation of a subdivision or short subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets and alleys or other divisions and dedications.

“Plat alteration” means a modification or change to a recorded plat. This term also includes the vacation, or elimination, of a recorded plat, a portion of a plat, or any easement, dedication, or feature created by or shown on the face of a plat.

“Plat amendment” means a minor modification or amendment to an approved preliminary plat. Plat amendments are submitted after the approval of a preliminary plat, but prior to the recording of a final plat.

“Platting review” means the review process set forth in chapters 16.10 and 16.20 BMC for subdivisions and short subdivisions. Platting review shall consist of both a preliminary and final review process.

“Preliminary plat” means a complete and accurate drawing of a proposed subdivision or short subdivision showing the general layout of the streets, alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements of the proposed subdivision or short subdivision required by this title.

“Preliminary plat approval” means the review and approval process specified in chapter 16.10 BMC for subdivisions and short subdivisions.

“R”

“Record” means to file for recording with the Skagit County auditor.

“S”

“Short plat” means the plat of a short subdivision.

“Short subdivision” means the division, or redivision, of land into nine or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. This term does not include the redivision of a lot within the boundaries of a short plat, within five years of the recording date, if the redivision would have the effect of creating more than nine parcels within the original short plat boundaries.

“Subdivision” means the division, or redivision, of land into 10 or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership. This term shall also include the redivision of a lot within the boundaries of a short plat, if the redivision occurs within five years of the date the short plat was recorded, and the redivision would have the effect of creating more than nine parcels within the original short plat boundaries.

“Surveyor” means a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington.

“T”

“Testamentary division” means a division of land made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.070 Effect of noncompliance.

No building permit or other development permit shall be issued for any lot created, divided, or adjusted in violation of Washington State law, or this title, unless the city finds that the owner of the lot is an innocent purchaser and that the public interest will not be adversely affected in accordance with the provisions of chapter 16.70 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.080 Liability.

It is the specific intent of this title to place the obligation of compliance upon the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title. Nothing contained in this title is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the property owner or party subject to the provisions of the chapters contained within this title, to comply with the provisions of this title, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this code by the city of Burlington officers, employees or agents. This title is not intended to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by its terms. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.090 Violations and penalties.

All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or omissions that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title, are hereby determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or omissions shall be subject to fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC, criminal penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.100 Appeal.

Appeals of decisions made pursuant to this title shall be filed and processed in accordance with the applicable procedures identified in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.01.110 Severability.

If any portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.10 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW

Sections:

16.10.010    Title.

16.10.020    Application.

16.10.030    Purpose.

16.10.040    Authority.

16.10.050    Review process.

16.10.060    Application requirements.

16.10.070    Distribution of applications.

16.10.080    Approval process.

16.10.090    Critical areas and natural hazards.

16.10.100    Dedications.

16.10.110    Effect of preliminary plat approval.

16.10.120    Amendments.


16.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Preliminary Plat Review.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all applications for preliminary plat approval and shall apply to both subdivisions and short subdivisions. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.030 Purpose.

A. Provide a coordinated interdepartmental process for reviewing proposed land divisions and ensuring that subdivisions and short subdivisions comply with all applicable Burlington Municipal Code requirements and Washington State platting laws;

B. Identify the services, facilities, dedications, and improvements necessary to serve proposed subdivisions or short subdivisions;

C. Establish appropriate conditions, restrictions, and requirements for the use and development of the land within the boundaries of a subdivision or short subdivision. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B, and 58.17 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.050 Review process.

A. Preliminary short subdivision applications shall be processed as Type II decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

B. Preliminary subdivision applications shall be processed as Type III decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

C. Unless the applicant requests otherwise, applications for preliminary subdivision or short subdivision approval shall be combined and processed together with any other applications associated with the proposed land division, such as zoning amendments, variances, or critical area approvals. In accordance with chapter 14A.05 BMC, combined applications shall be processed using the procedures applicable to the permit with the highest classification.

D. A preliminary plat shall be approved, disapproved or returned to the applicant for modification or correction within 90 days from date of filing unless the applicant consents to an extension of the time period. If an environmental impact statement is required as provided in RCW 43.21C.030, the 90-day period shall not include the time required for environmental review. This period of time shall be extended by any period after the city has requested information and the applicant has not provided the same. For the purpose of interpreting this provision, “date of filing” shall mean the date the city determines the application is complete in accordance with BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.060 Application requirements.

Applications for preliminary subdivision or short subdivision approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

A. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

B. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy;

C. A soils report;

D. A preliminary drainage report showing how storm water will be managed and identifying areas suitable for storm water infiltration, treatment, and low impact development features;

E. A SEPA checklist or other SEPA documentation and reports if required;

F. Critical areas information or reports, if required, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 14.15 BMC;

G. Written verification from the Skagit Public Utility District indicating they are able and willing to provide water service to the proposed subdivision or short subdivision;

H. A preliminary plat prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. The preliminary plat shall be consistent with the applicable standards and requirements identified in chapter 16.40 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.070 Distribution of applications.

Applications which have been deemed complete in accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 14A and BMC 16.10.060 shall be distributed and reviewed as follows:

A. The building official shall review the application for compliance with requirements of chapter 15.04 BMC and the flood development regulations identified in chapter 14.15 BMC;

B. The fire marshal shall review the application for compliance with the requirements of chapter 15.08 BMC;

C. The city engineer shall review the application for compliance with BMC Titles 12 and 13, and chapter 14.05 BMC.

D. Each official identified above shall review the preliminary plat application and, within 30 days, provide the director with a report; each report shall:

1. Document whether or not the application complies with the municipal code requirements, laws, and other regulations the official is charged with administering; and

2. Recommended conditions of approval. If the official concludes that conditions are necessary in order to ensure the proposal complies with applicable regulatory requirements, recommended conditions of approval shall be included in the report; and

3. Specify the extent and type of improvements, infrastructure, utilities, roads, and dedications necessary to serve the subdivision or short subdivision; and

4. Identify any permits or other regulatory approvals, such as grading permits, flood development permits, and right-of-way permits that will be required prior to beginning the construction phase. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.080 Approval process.

A. Short Subdivisions. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.10.070, the director shall prepare a report documenting, through written findings of fact, whether or not the proposed short subdivision complies with applicable municipal code requirements. If the director finds that the application complies with all applicable municipal code requirements, it shall be approved. If director finds that the application does not comply, or cannot comply, through the application of reasonable conditions of approval, it shall either be denied or returned to the applicant for corrections.

B. Subdivisions. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.10.070, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the hearing examiner. The director shall forward a report outlining the proposed subdivision’s compliance with applicable municipal code requirements to the hearing examiner. Following the receipt of the director’s report and recommendation, and a public hearing, the hearing examiner shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed subdivision as follows:

1. If the proposed subdivision complies with all applicable municipal code requirements it shall be approved; or

2. If, in the hearing examiner’s opinion, the proposed subdivision can be made to comply with all applicable municipal code requirements through the application of reasonable conditions of approval, it shall be approved; or

3. If the proposed subdivision does not comply with all applicable municipal code requirements, or if in the hearing examiner’s opinion, it cannot be made to comply through the application of reasonable conditions of approval, it shall be denied.

4. The hearing examiner’s decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by written findings of fact.

C. Conditions of Approval. Preliminary subdivision or short subdivision applications may be approved with conditions if the conditions are necessary to ensure compliance with applicable municipal code requirements, chapter 58.17 RCW, or to identify specific improvements or actions which must be completed prior to final plat approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.090 Critical areas and natural hazards.

The following standards shall apply to all preliminary plat applications when critical areas, critical area buffers, or natural hazards are present within, or adjacent to, the proposed plat:

A. No lot shall be created through a subdivision or short subdivision which lacks an adequate building site outside of critical areas and critical area buffers, unless restrictive notes are included on the face of the plat permanently prohibiting development of the lot;

B. No lot shall be created through a subdivision or short subdivision which lacks an adequate building site outside the floodway or special flood risk area, unless restrictive notes are included on the face of the plat permanently prohibiting development of the lot, or restricting the use of the lot to flood control structures and improvements;

C. No lot shall be created through a subdivision or short subdivision which lacks an adequate building site unencumbered by natural hazards or natural hazard buffers unless the hazards can be mitigated to an acceptable level through the construction of protective improvements or other means consistent with provisions of chapter 14.15 BMC;

D. Under no circumstances shall a lot be created through a subdivision or short subdivision that necessitates subsequent critical area variances or reasonable use determinations. Restrictive notes shall be included on the face of all plats containing critical areas, critical area buffers, or natural hazards identifying the applicable development regulations and stating that no critical area variances or reasonable use determinations will be granted within the plat boundaries;

E. Critical areas and critical area buffers shall be identified on the face of the plat and placed within protective tracts or easements as required by chapter 14.15 BMC;

F. Natural hazards and any associated setbacks, restrictions, or buffers required by chapter 14.15 BMC shall be shown on the face of the plat;

G. Land within a floodway or special flood risk zone shall be placed within a separate tract or easement if required by chapter 14.15 BMC;

H. Plats shall be subject to any other applicable requirements identified in chapter 14.15 BMC shall be addressed. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.100 Dedications.

Dedications shall be shown on the preliminary plat in accordance with the requirements identified in chapter 16.40 BMC. Dedications proposed by the applicant that are not required by Burlington Municipal Code shall also be shown. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.110 Effect of preliminary plat approval.

A. Following preliminary approval, all improvements and infrastructure required as conditions of the preliminary approval shall be constructed or installed. No application for final plat approval shall be accepted until all of the required improvements and infrastructure have been completed.

B. All work done during the construction phase shall be consistent with the approved preliminary plat and any conditions of approval.

C. All required permits and approvals must be obtained prior to beginning the construction phase, and all subsequent work shall be in strict accordance with the approved permits.

D. A final plat meeting all of the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the city for approval within the following time periods:

1. Subdivisions. A final plat shall be submitted to the city for approval and recorded within the period of time specified in chapter 58.17 RCW.

2. Short Subdivisions. Preliminary short plat approvals shall be valid for a period of two years. A final short plat shall be submitted to the city for approval and recorded prior to the expiration of the preliminary approval.

E. If a final plat meeting the requirements of this title is not submitted to the city and recorded within the allowable period the preliminary approval shall be null and void and any subsequent application shall be subject to the regulatory requirements in effect at the time of reapplication. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.10.120 Amendments.

Approved preliminary plats may be modified or amended subject to the following requirements:

A. Applications to amend an approved preliminary plat must be submitted before a final plat is recorded. Once a final plat has been recorded all subsequent modifications shall be subject to the plat alteration requirements identified in chapter 16.50 BMC.

B. Applications for plat amendments shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the procedures identified in BMC Title 14A.

C. Applications for plat amendments shall be subject to the following approval criteria. No plat amendment shall be approved unless it is consistent with all of the following:

1. Except as explicitly authorized below, the conditions of preliminary approval shall not be eliminated or modified except to correct simple nonsubstantive spelling, grammatical, or mathematical errors;

2. The plat boundaries shall not be expanded and no additional parcels or land area shall be included except to address survey errors;

3. The number of lots in a short plat shall not be increased if the effect of the amendment would result in the creation of 10 or more lots;

4. The overall density permitted within the plat boundaries shall not be increased by more than 10 percent;

5. The amount of open space provided within the plat boundaries shall not be decreased by more than 10 percent;

6. The proposal shall not increase the amount of impervious surface coverage within the plat boundaries by more than 10 percent;

7. The amendment shall be consistent with this title and all other applicable Burlington Municipal Code requirements;

8. The amendments shall be consistent with any studies, reports, or environmental documents prepared in support of the original application.

D. Proposed changes which are not consistent with the criteria identified above shall require a new application for preliminary plat approval.

E. The approval of a plat amendment shall not affect or extend the timelines and expiration dates identified in BMC 16.10.110. Timelines and expiration dates shall be calculated from the date of preliminary plat approval even if a plat amendment is subsequently approved.

F. If multiple plat amendment applications are submitted, the cumulative effect of such amendments shall not violate the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.20 FINAL PLAT REVIEW

Sections:

16.20.010    Title.

16.20.020    Application.

16.20.030    Purpose.

16.20.040    Authority.

16.20.050    Approval required.

16.20.060    Review process.

16.20.070    Application requirements.

16.20.080    Distribution of applications.

16.20.090    Approval process.

16.20.100    Effect of final plat approval.


16.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Final Plat Review.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all applications for final plat approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures and requirements for reviewing applications for final plat approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B, and 58.17 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.050 Approval required.

A. No plat shall be recorded prior to obtaining both preliminary and final plat approval.

B. Applications for final plat approval shall not be accepted without an approved preliminary plat.

C. No application for final plat approval shall be accepted until the construction phase is completed. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.060 Review process.

A. Applications for final short plat approval shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the procedures identified in BMC Title 14A.

B. Applications for final subdivision approval shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the procedures identified in BMC Title 14A, except that city council approval shall be required.

C. Applications for final plat approval shall be submitted within the time periods prescribed by BMC 16.10.110. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.070 Application requirements.

Applications for final plat approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

A. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

B. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy;

C. A copy of the approved preliminary plat and the decision granting preliminary approval;

D. A statement from the city engineer indicating the construction phase is complete and all required utilities, infrastructure, streets, roads, sidewalks, and other improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and any other applicable city requirements;

E. A statement from the Skagit Public Utility District indicating water service bas been extended to serve each lot in the plat, unless the lot is designated on the face of the plat for nonbuilding purposes;

F. A title report provided by a title insurance company licensed in the state of Washington, dated not more than 30 days prior to the application date, confirming that the title of the lands as described and shown on the face of the plat is in the name of the owners signing the certificate;

G. A full set of survey notes consistent with the requirements of chapter 16.40 BMC;

H. A final plat prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. The final plat shall be consistent with the applicable standards and requirements identified in chapter 16.40 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.080 Distribution of applications.

Applications which have been deemed complete in accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 14A and BMC 16.20.070 shall be distributed and reviewed as follows:

A. The building official shall review the application to ensure that any conditions of preliminary plat approval relating to chapter 15.04 BMC and the flood development regulations identified in chapter 14.15 BMC have been met.

B. The fire marshal shall review the application to ensure that any conditions of preliminary plat approval related to chapter 15.08 BMC have been met.

C. The city engineer shall review the application with respect to accuracy, engineering standards, the survey and design requirements of chapter 16.40 BMC, and to ensure that any conditions of preliminary plat approval related to BMC Titles 12 and 13, and chapter 14.05 BMC have been met.

D. Each official identified above shall review the final plat application and provide the director with a report addressing all of the following:

1. Whether or not the application complies with the municipal code requirements, laws, and regulations the official is charged with administering; and

2. Whether or not the conditions specified in the preliminary approval have been satisfied; and

3. Verifying that all improvements, infrastructure, utilities, roads, and dedications required by the preliminary approval have been provided, constructed, or installed; and

4. Verifying that all required permits or other regulatory approvals such as grading permits, flood development permits, and right-of-way permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.090 Approval process.

A. Short Subdivisions. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.20.080, the director shall approve the final plat application, return it to the applicant for corrections, or deny it.

B. Long Subdivisions. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.20.080, the director shall forward the final subdivision plat to the city council. The city council shall, by ordinance, either approve the final plat application or deny it. If the city council approves the final plat, it shall inscribe and execute written approval on the face of the plat and the original plat shall be transmitted to the auditor for recording. Copies of approved final plat shall also be transmitted to the director and city engineer.

C. Approval Criteria. Applications for final plat approval shall be approved, denied, or returned to applicant for corrections based on the following criteria. Applications for final plat approval which meet all of the following criteria shall be approved:

1. The final plat is consistent with the approved preliminary plat; and

2. All of the conditions of approval associated with the preliminary plat have been satisfied; and

3. All of the infrastructure and improvements required as a condition of preliminary plat approval have been constructed or installed; and

4. The city engineer has certified that the final plat is technically correct and accurate, complies with all applicable survey and mapping standards, and all lot corner markers and permanent control monuments have been installed; and

5. The title insurance report submitted with the final plat application confirms that title of the land and the proposed short subdivision is vested in the name of the owners whose signatures appear on the face of the plat certificate; and

6. All other applicable requirements of this chapter have been addressed.

D. Resubmission. Any final plat which is disapproved may, at the applicant’s option, be resubmitted for approval consistent with the following:

1. The deficiencies of the final plat application which caused it to be rejected or returned shall be addressed;

2. The final plat shall be resubmitted prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat in accordance with the applicable timelines identified in BMC 16.10.110;

3. Final plats being resubmitted for approval shall be treated as new final plat applications, shall be subject to the same review fees as new applications, and must be consistent with all of the requirements identified in this chapter;

4. If the final plat application was denied with prejudice against resubmission, a new application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted, in which case the application shall be considered a new and separate application and shall be subject to all of the applicable regulatory requirements in effect at the time of submittal;

5. Final plat applications may not be resubmitted after the expiration of the preliminary approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.20.100 Effect of final plat approval.

A. Once a final plat has been approved and recorded, development within the plat shall be governed by the terms of the approved plat, and the statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of its approval for a period of five years from the date of recording unless the city council finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health or safety.

B. Lots within a final plat that has been approved and recorded shall be considered legal lots.

C. Recorded plats may only be altered, modified, or vacated in accordance with chapter 16.50 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.30 BINDING SITE PLANS

Sections:

16.30.010    Title.

16.30.020    Application.

16.30.030    Purpose.

16.30.040    Authority.

16.30.050    Approval required.

16.30.060    Review process.

16.30.070    Preliminary application requirements.

16.30.080    Distribution of preliminary applications.

16.30.090    Approval criteria for preliminary applications.

16.30.100    Critical areas and natural hazards.

16.30.105    Effect of preliminary binding site plan approval.

16.30.110    Final application requirements.

16.30.120    Distribution of final applications.

16.30.130    Final binding site plan approval process.

16.30.140    Effect of final approval.


16.30.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Binding Site Plans.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.020 Application.

Land may be divided using the provisions of this chapter as an alternative to the platting review process for subdivisions and short subdivisions. Only the following land divisions shall be eligible for approval using the binding site plan approval process:

A. Commercial, Industrial, and Mixed-Use Developments. Land with a zoning classification allowing commercial, industrial or mixed-use development may be divided into two or more lots using the binding site plan process;

B. Manufactured Home Parks. Land may be divided using the binding site plan process for the purpose of lease when no residential structures other than manufactured homes or travel trailers are permitted to be placed upon the land, provided the site plan complies with all applicable manufactured home park regulations and the zoning code requirements;

C. Condominiums. Land may be divided using the binding site plan process for the purpose of creating condominiums, or sites for condominiums, in accordance with the provisions of chapters 65.32 and 65.34 RCW or other applicable state laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide an alternative method of land division to enable the establishment of condominiums or manufactured home parks, or to create lots for lease or sale in commercial or industrial zones. This method may be employed as an alternative to the platting review process required for subdivisions and short subdivisions, provided the proposed land division is consistent with one of the applicable development types listed in BMC 16.30.020. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.708, 58.17 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.050 Approval required.

A. All binding site plans shall require city approval and shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.

B. No binding site plan shall be recorded prior to obtaining both preliminary and final binding site plan approval.

C. Applications for final binding site plan approval shall not be accepted without an approved preliminary binding site plan.

D. No application for final binding site plan approval shall be accepted until the installation and construction of all required improvements is completed. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.060 Review process.

Binding site plans shall be subject to both a preliminary and final review process as follows:

A. Applications for preliminary binding site plan approval shall be processed as Type II decisions in accordance with BMC Title 14A.

B. Applications for final binding site plan approval shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with BMC Title 14A.

C. Unless the applicant requests otherwise, applications for preliminary binding site plan approval shall be combined and processed together with any other applications associated with the proposed land division, such as zoning amendments, variances, or critical area approvals. In accordance with chapter 14A.05 BMC, combined applications shall be processed using the procedures applicable to the permit with the highest classification. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.070 Preliminary application requirements.

Applications for preliminary binding site plan approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

A. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

B. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy;

C. Soils report;

D. Preliminary drainage report showing how storm water will be managed and identifying areas suitable for storm water infiltration, treatment, and low impact development features;

E. SEPA checklist or other SEPA documentation and reports if required;

F. Critical areas information or reports in accordance with the requirements of chapter 14.15 BMC;

G. Written verification from the Skagit Public Utility District indicating they are able and willing to provide water service to the proposed binding site plan;

H. A preliminary binding site plan prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. The preliminary binding site plan shall be consistent with the applicable standards and requirements identified in chapter 16.40 BMC.

I. If the applicant or property owner owns or controls adjoining contiguous parcels the application shall be accompanied by a sketch showing how the proposed street system would be extended to serve the adjoining parcels in the future so the street system can be considered as a whole;

J. Binding site plans shall be prepared consistent with the survey and design standards identified in chapter 16.40 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.080 Distribution of preliminary applications.

Applications which have been deemed complete in accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 14A and BMC 16.30.070 shall be distributed and reviewed as follows:

A. The building official shall review the application for compliance with chapter 15.04 BMC and the flood development regulations identified in chapter 14.15 BMC;

B. The fire marshal shall review the application for compliance with chapter 15.08 BMC;

C. The city engineer shall review the application for compliance with BMC Titles 12 and 13, and chapter 14.05 BMC.

D. Each official identified above shall review the preliminary binding site plan application and, within 30 days, provide the director with a report; each report shall:

1. Document whether or not the application complies with the municipal code requirements, laws, and other regulations the official is charged with administering; and

2. Recommended conditions of approval. If the official concludes that conditions are necessary in order to ensure the proposal complies with applicable regulatory requirements, recommended conditions of approval shall be included in the report; and

3. The extent and type of improvements, infrastructure, utilities, roads, and dedications necessary to serve the subdivision or short subdivision; and

4. Any permits or other regulatory approvals, such as grading permits, flood development permits, and right-of-way permits, that will be required prior to beginning the construction phase. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.090 Approval criteria for preliminary applications.

A. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.30.080, the director shall prepare a report documenting, through written findings of fact, whether or not the proposed binding site plan complies with applicable municipal code requirements. If the director finds that the application complies with all applicable municipal code requirements, it shall be approved. If director finds that the application does not comply, or cannot comply, through the application of reasonable conditions of approval, it shall either be denied or returned to the applicant for corrections.

B. Preliminary binding site plan applications may be approved with conditions if the conditions are necessary to ensure compliance with applicable municipal code requirements, or to identify specific improvements or actions which must be completed prior to final approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.100 Critical areas and natural hazards.

The following standards shall apply to all applications where critical areas, critical area buffers, or natural hazards are present within, or adjacent to, the proposed binding site plan:

A. No lot shall be created through a binding site plan which lacks an adequate building site outside of critical areas and critical area buffers unless restrictive notes are included on the face of the binding site plan permanently prohibiting development of the lot;

B. No lot shall be created through a binding site plan which lacks an adequate building site outside the floodway or special flood risk area, unless restrictive notes are included on the face of the binding site plan permanently prohibiting development of the lot or restricting the use of the lot to flood control structures and improvements;

C. No lot shall be created through a binding site plan which lacks an adequate building site unencumbered by natural hazards or natural hazard buffers unless the hazards can be mitigated to an acceptable level through the construction of protective improvements or other means consistent with provisions of chapter 14.15 BMC;

D. Under no circumstances shall a lot be created through a binding site plan which necessitates subsequent critical area variances or reasonable use determinations. Restrictive notes shall be included on the face of all binding site plans containing critical areas, critical area buffers, or natural hazards identifying the applicable development regulations and stating that no critical area variances or reasonable use determinations will be granted within the binding site plan boundaries. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.105 Effect of preliminary binding site plan approval.

A. Following preliminary approval, all improvements and infrastructure required as conditions of the preliminary approval shall be constructed or installed. No application for final binding site plan approval shall be accepted until all of the required improvements and infrastructure have been completed.

B. All work done during the construction phase shall be consistent with the approved preliminary binding site plan and any conditions of approval.

C. All required permits and approvals must be obtained prior to beginning the construction phase, and all subsequent work shall be in strict accordance with the approved permits.

D. Preliminary binding site plan approvals shall be valid for a period of two years. A final binding site plan shall be submitted to the city for approval and recorded prior to the expiration of the preliminary approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.110 Final application requirements.

Following the approval of a preliminary binding site plan, and the installation or construction of any required improvements, an application for final binding site plan approval may be submitted. Applications for final binding site plan approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications including all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

A. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

B. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy;

C. A copy of the approved preliminary binding site plan and decision granting preliminary approval;

D. A statement from the city engineer indicating that the construction phase is complete and all required utilities, infrastructure, streets, roads, sidewalks, and other improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved preliminary binding site plan and any other applicable city requirements;

E. A statement from the Skagit Public Utility District indicating that water service has been extended to serve each lot in the binding site plan, unless the lot is designated on the face of the binding site plan for nonbuilding purposes;

F. A title report provided by a title insurance company licensed in the state of Washington, dated not more than 30 days prior to the application date, confirming that the title of the lands as described and shown on the face of the binding site plan is in the name of the owners signing the certificate;

G. A full set of survey notes consistent with the requirements of chapter 16.40 BMC;

H. A final binding site plan prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. The final binding site plan shall be consistent with the applicable standards and requirements identified in chapter 16.40 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.120 Distribution of final applications.

Applications which have been deemed complete in accordance with the requirements of BMC Title 14A and BMC 16.30.110 shall be distributed and reviewed as follows:

A. The building official shall review the application to ensure that any conditions of preliminary approval relating to chapter 15.04 BMC and the flood development regulations identified in chapter 14.15 BMC have been met;

B. The fire marshal shall review the application to ensure that any conditions of preliminary approval related to chapter 15.08 BMC have been met;

C. The city engineer shall review the application with respect to accuracy, engineering standards, the survey and design requirements of chapter 16.40 BMC, and to ensure that any conditions of preliminary approval related to BMC Titles 12 and 13, and chapter 14.05 BMC have been met.

D. Each official identified above shall review the final binding site plan application and provide the director with a report addressing all of the following:

1. Whether or not the application complies with the municipal code requirements, laws, and regulations the official is charged with administering; and

2. Whether or not the conditions specified in the preliminary approval have been satisfied; and

3. Verifying that all improvements, infrastructure, utilities, roads, and dedications required by the preliminary approval have bean provided, constructed, or installed; and

4. Verifying that all required permits or other regulatory approvals such as grading permits, flood development permits, and right-of-way permits have been obtained. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.130 Final binding site plan approval process.

A. Following the review process specified in BMC 16.30.120, the director shall approve the final binding site plan application, return it to the applicant for corrections, or deny it within 30 days after filing an application meeting the criteria below.

B. Approval Criteria. Applications for final binding site plan approval shall be approved, denied, or returned to applicant for corrections based on the following criteria. Applications for final binding site plan approval which meet all of the following criteria shall be approved:

1. The final binding site plan is consistent with the approved preliminary approval; and

2. All of the conditions associated with the preliminary approval have been satisfied; and

3. All of the infrastructure and improvements required by the preliminary approval have been constructed, installed, or provided; and

4. The city engineer has certified that the final binding site plan is technically correct and accurate, complies with all applicable survey and mapping standards, and that all lot corner markers and permanent control monuments have been installed; and

5. The title insurance report submitted with the final application confirms that title of the land and the proposed binding site plan is vested in the name of the owners whose signatures appear on the face of the binding site plan certificate; and

6. All other applicable requirements of this chapter have been addressed. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.30.140 Effect of final approval.

A. Once a final binding site plan has been approved and recorded, development within the binding site plan shall be governed by the terms of the approved binding site plan, and the statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of its approval for a period of five years from the date of recording unless the city council finds that a change in conditions creates a serious threat to the public health or safety.

B. Lots within a binding site plan that has been approved and recorded shall be considered legal lots.

C. Recorded binding site plans may only be altered, modified, or vacated in accordance with chapter 16.50 BMC. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.40 SURVEY AND DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

16.40.010    Title.

16.40.020    Application.

16.40.030    Purpose.

16.40.040    Authority.

16.40.050    Access standards.

16.40.060    Design of lots and blocks.

16.40.070    Utilities.

16.40.080    Survey requirements.

16.40.090    Preliminary plat and binding site plan requirements.

16.40.100    Final plat and binding site plan requirements.

16.40.110    Dedications.


16.40.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Survey and Design Standards.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply as follows:

A. Plats and binding site plans shall be subject to this chapter;

B. The design specifications identified in this chapter shall apply to the design and construction of streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks and other improvements serving plats and binding site plans;

C. No plat or binding site plan shall be granted final approval unless the streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other improvements required by this chapter have been constructed, installed, or provided. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.030 Purpose.

A. Ensure that plats and binding site plans include appropriate provisions for the public health, safety, and general welfare, for open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys, other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds, sidewalks, and planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students traveling to and from school;

B. Establish uniform standards for the preparation of plats and binding site plans;

C. Ensure that plats and binding site plans are accurate and consistent with applicable laws and regulations;

D. Establish uniform design standards for the design and construction of streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other infrastructure or improvements within plats and binding site plans.

E. Ensure that streets, roads, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and other improvements serving plats and binding site plans are compatible with, and can be easily connected to, adjoining properties and developments, thereby creating a uniform and interconnected system of public improvements. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B, 58.17 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.050 Access standards.

The design standards in this section shall apply to the design and construction of all plats and binding site plans. Vehicle and pedestrian access shall be provided as follows:

A. General.

1. Plats and binding site plans shall be served by one or more streets providing adequate ingress and egress.

2. The alignment of streets within plats and binding site plans shall conform to the city’s street plan and allow streets adjoining the plat or binding site plan to be extended through the site.

3. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable and in no event shall the angle formed be less than 30 degrees.

4. Street networks shall conform to any applicable fire code requirements to ensure adequate access for emergency vehicles and equipment.

5. Unless warranted by special physical circumstances, the right-of-way for public streets shall be at least 60 feet wide.

6. Alleys shall be at least 16 feet wide plus such additional width as shall be necessary for an adequate turning radius.

7. Public streets, roads, alleys, and sidewalks shall conform to applicable standards identified in chapter 12.28 BMC.

8. Low impact development features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, and permeable paving shall be incorporated into the design and construction of all streets unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis. In determining the feasibility of such low impact development features, an engineering analysis shall be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site characteristics such as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic volumes. The analysis should be consistent with the Washington State Department of Ecology’s “Stormwater Manual for Western Washington” and the design and site evaluation guidance in the Puget Sound Partnership’s “Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.”

9. All streets, bridges, sidewalks, and pedestrian access facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications prepared or approved by the city engineer.

10. All dedicated streets shall be graded to their full width with adequate drainage provided prior to acceptance for public use. Grades shall be established by the city engineer and all streets shall be surfaced according to plans and specifications prepared or approved by the city engineer.

B. Private Streets. Vehicle and pedestrian access should be provided by public streets dedicated to the city. However, private streets and shared driveways may, at the city’s discretion, be authorized if all of the following criteria are met:

1. The goals of the zoning code to provide for adequate light, air and usable open space between structures would not be compromised; and

2. The dedication and improvement of a public street is not necessary to facilitate the provision of public utilities such as water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage; and

3. The dedication and improvement of a street is not necessary or desirable in order to provide on-street parking for overflow conditions; and

4. No potential safety hazards would result from multiple access points between existing and future developments onto a roadway without curbs and with limited sight lines; and

5. There is no potential for extending the street system to connect with existing streets, or to serve potential development sites adjacent to the plat or binding site plan; and

6. Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable standards identified in chapter 17.85 BMC.

C. Sidewalks and Pedestrian Access.

1. Sidewalks and pedestrian access shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable standards identified in chapter 17.85 BMC.

2. Sidewalks should be provided along both sides of streets unless the street adjoins the boundary of the plat or binding site plan and there is no potential for future development along the opposite side of the boundary. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.060 Design of lots and blocks.

A. Blocks.

1. Blocks shall be designed and arranged to provide for the safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians.

2. Blocks shall be identified on the face of the plat or binding site plan by letters or numbers.

B. Lots.

1. Lots shall either adjoin a street, or be served by a private access easement if permitted by this chapter and chapter 17.85 BMC.

2. Lots shall be numbered with reference to blocks. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.070 Utilities.

A. Easements shall be provided for all utilities including storm water facilities.

B. All utility easements shall be designed and configured to allow access for inspection, maintenance, and repair purposes.

C. The design and configuration of easements for storm water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.

D. Low impact development techniques shall be incorporated into the design and construction of all plats and binding site plans in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17.70 BMC.

E. All storm water facilities shall be approved by the city engineer and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable standards identified in BMC Title 14.

F. Above ground utility installations, such as power and telephone lines, shall not be permitted unless the city engineer determines that topographic or geologic conditions make below ground installation infeasible.

G. Each lot in a plat or binding site plan shall be provided with a connection to a public water supply system. Lots used for nonbuilding purposes shall be exempt from this requirement provided a note is included on the face of the plat restricting the use of the lot to nonbuilding purposes.

H. Public water supply systems and connections shall be designed and constructed in accordance with any standards adopted by the Skagit Public Utility District.

I. Each lot in a plat or binding site plan shall be provided with a connection to the city’s sanitary sewer system. Lots used for nonbuilding purposes shall be exempt from this requirement provided a note is included on the face of the plat restricting the use of the lot to nonbuilding purposes.

J. Sewer system components and connections shall be designed and constructed in accordance with any applicable standards adopted by the city of Burlington and shall be approved by the city engineer.

K. Service Mains and Fire Hydrants. Service mains and fire hydrants shall be installed and inspected by the city engineer and fire marshal prior to final approval of plats and binding site plans. The design and construction of service mains and fire hydrants shall be consistent with all applicable standards and regulations, and all plans shall be approved by the city engineer and fire marshal. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.080 Survey requirements.

Plats and binding site plans shall be based on a thorough survey and shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington. Plats and binding site plans shall be consistent with the following requirements:

A. The surveyor shall furnish the city engineer with a full set of survey notes which include:

1. The ties to each permanent monument;

2. At least three durable, distinctive reference points or monuments;

3. Sufficient data to determine readily the bearing and length of each line;

4. The base meridian referred to.

B. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan and all lots and blocks shall close within one foot in 5,000 feet, as required by chapter 332-130 WAC.

C. Primary survey control points shall be referenced to section corners and monuments, and the corners of adjoining plats or binding site plans, or portions of plats or binding site plans, shall be identified and ties shown.

D. Prior to final plat or binding site plan approval, permanent control monuments shall be established at:

1. All controlling comers on the boundaries of the plat or binding site plan;

2. The intersections of centerlines of roads within the plat or binding site plan;

3. The beginning and ends of curves on centerlines;

4. All block corners.

E. Permanent control monuments may be placed on the offset lines. The position and type of every permanent monument shall be noted on all plats and binding site plans. Permanent control monuments shall be of a type approved by the city engineer.

F. Permanent control monuments within the streets shall be set after the streets are graded.

G. Each lot corner shall be marked by a three-quarter-inch galvanized iron pipe, 24 inches in length, or approved equivalent, driven into the ground, set with C cap per the requirements of RCW 58.19.120.

H. Prior to final plat or binding site plan approval the city engineer shall verify the required permanent control monuments and lot corner markers have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

I. Property contiguous to water. If any land in a plat or binding site plan is contiguous to a body of water, a meander line shall be established along the shore at a safe distance back from the ordinary high water mark. Property lying below and beyond the meander line shall be defined by distance along the side property lines extended from the meander line. If the thread of a stream lies within a plat or binding site plan or forms the boundary of a plat or binding site plan, such thread shall be defined by bearings and distances as it exists at the time of the survey. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.090 Preliminary plat and binding site plan requirements.

Preliminary plats and binding site plans shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington and shall include all of the following:

A. A complete survey of the parcel being divided;

B. The name of the proposed plat or binding site plan;

C. North point and scale;

D. The location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, natural hazards, critical areas and critical area buffers, significant topographic features, and existing utilities;

E. A legal description of the land contained within the plat or binding site plan;

F. The names and addresses of all persons, firms and corporations holding interest in the lands, including easement rights and interest;

G. The proposed locations, dimensions, and names of streets, alleys, and roadways;

H. The location and dimensions of all proposed lots, lot lines, easements, common areas, storm water facilities, and dedications;

I. The locations, dimensions, and centerlines of all public and private streets, roadways, and access easements adjoining the proposed plat or binding site plan;

J. The approximate location of utilities adjoining the proposed plat or binding site plan;

K. The proposed location and routing of utilities necessary to serve lots within the proposed plat or binding site plan;

L. The names of adjoining plats or binding site plans;

M. The surveyor’s signature, license stamp, name, and contact information;

N. The date of the survey;

O. All existing monuments and markers located by the survey;

P. The zoning classification applicable to the land within the plat or binding site plan;

Q. The conditions of or the limitations on dedications, if any, including slope rights;

R. Contour intervals as required, based upon city datum;

S. Any other information required by Burlington Municipal Code or deemed necessary by the director for purposes of demonstrating compliance with regulatory requirements. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.100 Final plat and binding site plan requirements.

Final plats and binding site plans shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington and shall include all of the following:

A.  A complete survey of the section or sections in which the plat, or replat, is located, or as many sections as may be necessary to properly orient the plat within the section or sections;

B. Complete field and computation notes as provided in BMC 16.40.080;

C. The final plat or binding site plan shall be printed on paper or other material acceptable to the Skagit County auditor and shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size;

D. The accuracy and completeness of the final plat or binding site plan shall be the sole responsibility of the surveyor preparing the plat or binding site plan. The surveyor shall make field surveys and investigations as necessary to ensure the map is complete and accurate in every detail;

E. The final plat or binding site plan shall be presented at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch;

F. The final plat or binding site plan shall include the following:

1. The name of the plat or binding site plan;

2. The lines, widths and names of all streets, avenues, places, parks or other public property, and the location of monuments marking the same;

3. The length and direction of all lot lines, also the angles made by the lot lines with the street lines;

4. The location of control points and monuments together with all ties;

5. The names of all adjoining plats and binding site plans;

6. The scale and north point;

7. The boundary of the tract as covered by the plat or binding site plan showing courses and distance on the plat;

8. The initial point;

9. All protective improvements and restrictions on uses;

10. All dedications and all conveyances to a homeowner’s nonprofit maintenance corporation in lieu of dedication;

11. Any notes, restrictions, or information required by Burlington Municipal Code or as a condition of preliminary plat or binding site plan approval;

12. Inscriptions or notes on the face of the plat or binding site plan setting forth all limitations and conditions for the use of land;

13. Inscription or notes on the face of the plat or binding site plan requiring that any development of the subject property be in conformance with the plat or binding site plan;

G. Any additional information necessary to meet the standards for mapping set forth in chapter 332-130 WAC;

H. In the case of a plat alteration or binding site plan alteration, the lots, blocks, streets, alleys, easements and parks appearing on the original plat or binding site plan shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper position in relation to the new arrangement of the plat or binding site plan, and the new plat or binding site plan shall be shown clearly in solid lines to avoid ambiguity;

I. The following certificates and signature blocks shall be included on the face of the plat or binding site plan. The director may specify the specific content, or format, of the required signature blocks and certificates unless a specific format is prescribed by state law.

1. A dated surveyor’s certificate including the surveyor’s signature and license stamp;

2. A certificate giving a full and correct description of the lands divided as they appear on the plat or binding site plan, including a statement that the subdivision, short subdivision, or binding site plan has bean made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners. If the plat is subject to a dedication, the certificate or a separate written instrument shall also contain the dedication of all streets and other areas to the public, an individual or individuals, religious society or societies or to any corporation, public or private as shown on the plat and a waiver of all claims for damages against any governmental authority which may be occasioned to the adjacent land by the established construction, drainage and maintenance of the road. The certificate or instrument of dedication shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all parties having any ownership interest in the land subdivided and recorded as part of the final plat;

3. A statement of approval from the city engineer as to the survey data, the layout of streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way, design of bridges, sewage and water systems, and other structures, and indicating the plat complies with BMC Titles 12, 13, and 14;

4. A statement of approval from the director indicating the plat or binding site plan complies with BMC Titles 15, 16, 17, and 18;

5. For subdivisions, a signature block indicating the city council’s approval;

6. Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before the auditor of the county in which the land is located, or any other officer who is authorized by law to take acknowledgment of deeds, and a certificate of said acknowledgment shall be enclosed or annexed to such plat or binding site plan and recorded therewith;

7. A certification from the Skagit County treasurer that all taxes and delinquent assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged;

8. A certification from the city treasurer that all taxes and delinquent assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged;

9. Be acknowledged by the person filing the plat before the Skagit County auditor or any other officer who is authorized by law to take acknowledgment of deeds, and a certificate of the acknowledgment shall be enclosed or annexed to the plat or binding site plan and recorded with it;

10. For binding site plans where a condominium or condominium conversion is proposed, the final plan drawing shall include a statement indicating that the plan is either for a “condominium development” or a “condominium conversion.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.40.110 Dedications.

A. All subdivisions and short subdivisions shall include adequate provisions for the dedication of drainage ways, streets, alleys, easements, critical areas, parks, and other public open space areas as may be required by Burlington Municipal Code, Washington State law, or other applicable regulatory requirements.

B. All dedications shall be clearly and precisely indicated on the face of plat or binding site plan along with the intended purpose of the dedication and any associated restrictions on its use.

C. Protective improvements and easements allowing access, inspection, and maintenance of such improvements shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with applicable municipal code requirements.

D. City-owned and operated storm water facilities, infiltration areas, and conveyance or collection systems, as well as easements allowing access, inspection, and maintenance of such features shall be dedicated to the city in accordance with applicable municipal code requirements.

E. Easements being dedicated, and their intended purpose, shall be shown on the face of the plat or binding site plan and included in the certificate of dedication.

F. Convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to every lot shall be provided by a dedicated street unless a private street is authorized pursuant to BMC 16.40.050(B).

G. If the city concludes that the public interest will be served the city may, in lieu of requiring the dedication to the public of land in a subdivision for protective improvements, drainage ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other open space, allow the land to be conveyed to a homeowner’s nonprofit maintenance corporation. In such cases, prior to the time of filing a final plat or binding site plan for approval, articles of incorporation and bylaws of the grantee organization and evidence of the conveyance or of a binding commitment to convey shall be provided to the city. The articles of incorporation shall provide that membership in the corporation shall be conditioned upon ownership of land in the plat or binding site plan, that the corporation is empowered to assess the land for costs of construction and maintenance of the improvements and property owned by the corporation, and that the assessment shall be a lien upon the land. The city attorney shall review and approve the articles of incorporation and bylaws as to compliance with this provision. The city council may impose other conditions as it deems appropriate to assure that property and improvements owned by the corporation will be adequately constructed and maintained.

H. Any dedication, donation or grant as shown on the face of the plat or binding site plan shall be considered, to all intents and purposes, as a quitclaim deed to the grantee or grantees, for his, her or their use for the purpose intended by the donors or grantors. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.50 ALTERATIONS AND VACATIONS

Sections:

16.50.010    Title.

16.50.020    Application.

16.50.030    Purpose.

16.50.040    Authority.

16.50.050    Approval required.

16.50.060    Review process.

16.50.070    Application requirements.

16.50.080    Approval criteria.

16.50.090    Effect of approval.


16.50.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Alterations and Vacations.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to alterations, modifications, and vacations of recorded plats and binding site plans as follows:

A. Public Streets and Roads. The provisions of this section shall not apply to vacation requests that are strictly limited to vacating a public street or road. In such cases the procedures for street vacation are set forth in chapter 35.79 RCW.

B. All Other Vacations. The provisions of this section shall apply to all other alteration and vacation applications, and to proposals involving the vacation or alteration of a plat or binding site plan, or a portion of a plat or binding site plan, together with streets or roads within the plat or binding site plan. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and approval criteria for the alteration and vacation of recorded plats and binding site plans consistent with Washington State law (RCW 58.17.215 and 58.17.217). (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70.A, 36.70B, and 58.17 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.050 Approval required.

No recorded plat or binding site plan shall be modified, vacated, or altered without city approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.060 Review process.

A. Short Subdivisions. Applications to alter a recorded short plat shall be processed in the same manner as new applications for short plat approval and shall require both preliminary and final approval.

B. Subdivisions. Applications to alter a recorded subdivision shall be processed in the same manner as new applications for subdivision approval and shall require both preliminary and final approval.

C. Binding Site Plans. Applications to alter a recorded binding site plan shall be processed in the same manner as new applications for binding site plan approval and shall require both preliminary and final approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.070 Application requirements.

In addition to any information normally required for preliminary or final approval, alteration applications shall be subject to the following additional requirements:

A. The application shall include the signatures of a majority of those persons having an ownership interest in the lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions that would be modified or affected by the proposed alteration. If the subdivision, short subdivision or binding site plan is subject to restrictive covenants that were filed at the time the original plat or binding site plan was recorded, and if the proposed alteration would result in the violation of the covenants, the application shall contain an agreement signed by all parties subject to the covenants providing that the parties agree to terminate or alter the relevant covenants to accomplish the purpose of the proposed alteration;

B. Plats and binding site plans submitted for preliminary and final approval shall be titled “Alteration of (insert subdivision/short subdivision/binding site plan name)” and shall show the entire plat or binding site plan and the portion being altered. The final plat or binding site plan shall be prepared in such a way that the altered portions or features can be easily distinguished from the portions or features which will remain unaltered. The altered plat or binding site plan shall also include a note indicating the nature of the alteration;

C. If an easement created by the original plat or binding site plan will be altered or vacated the application shall include written approval from any person, utility, company, or other entity that has a vested interest in the easement. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.080 Approval criteria.

A. General. The alteration shall not be used to create additional lots.

B. Short Subdivisions. Alterations of short subdivisions shall be subject to the same approval criteria applicable to new short subdivisions.

C. Subdivisions. Alterations of subdivisions shall be subject to the same approval criteria applicable to new subdivisions.

D. Binding Site Plans. Alterations of binding site plans shall be subject to the same approval criteria applicable to new binding site plans. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.50.090 Effect of approval.

A. Lots modified by a recorded plat alteration shall be considered legal lots.

B. If an alteration vacates land dedicated to the public the land shall be deeded to the city unless the city determines that retaining title to the land would not serve the public interest.

C. Title to vacated property, other than land dedicated to the public, shall vest with the rightful owner as shown in the county records. If the vacated land is land that was dedicated to the public, and the city has found that retaining title to the land is not in the public interest, title to the vacated land shall vest with the property owners on each side of the dedication, as determined by the city.

D. When a public street is vacated title to the vacated street shall vest with the property owners on each side of the street. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.60 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

16.60.010    Title.

16.60.020    Application.

16.60.030    Purpose.

16.60.040    Authority.

16.60.050    Review process.

16.60.060    Application requirements.

16.60.070    Approval criteria.

16.60.080    Final approval.

16.60.090    Effect of boundary line adjustment approval.


16.60.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Boundary Line Adjustments.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.020 Application.

A. This chapter shall apply to the adjustment of boundary lines between platted or unplatted lots or both.

B. The elimination of lot lines or the combination of lots shall be subject to this chapter.

C. This chapter shall not apply to any action which creates an additional lot, parcel, site, or division. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.030 Purpose.

This chapter is intended to create a process for reviewing boundary line adjustments and lot combinations for compliance with the requirements of this chapter, BMC Title 17, Washington State law, and other applicable regulatory requirements. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B and 58.17 RCW as well as other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.050 Review process.

A. Approval Required. City approval is required for all boundary line adjustments and lot combinations. Any lots created, combined, or reconfigured without city approval shall be considered illegal lots.

B. Applications for boundary line adjustments and lot combinations shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.060 Application requirements.

Applications for boundary line adjustment and lot combination approval shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications which include all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

A. A site plan showing the existing lot configuration and a site plan showing the proposed lot configuration. The required site plans shall be prepared as follows:

1. All drawings shall be submitted on eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch or legal sized paper and shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington.

2. Margins shall be provided consistent with any requirements established by the Skagit County auditor for recorded documents.

3. Existing Site Plan. The site plan showing existing conditions and lot configuration shall include:

a. Layout and dimensions of all lots included in the adjustment or combination;

b. Assessor’s parcel numbers for each lot;

c. North arrow;

d. Date of preparation;

e. Scale;

f. The area of each lot included in the adjustment or combination in square feet;

g. Each existing lot shall be assigned an identifying number or letter;

h. The location of all existing buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, sidewalks, and easements;

i. The location of all public and private roads abutting the lots included in the adjustment or combination;

j. Surveyor’s license stamp, signature, and contact information.

4. Proposed Site Plan. The site plan showing proposed conditions and lot configurations shall include:

a. Layout and dimensions for the proposed lot configurations;

b. North arrow;

c. Date of preparation;

d. Scale;

e. The proposed area of each lot in square feet;

f. Each proposed lot shall be assigned an identifying number or letter;

g. The location of all existing buildings, structures, utilities, driveways, sidewalks, and easements in relation to the proposed lot lines;

h. The location of all public and private roads abutting the lots included in the adjustment or combination;

i. Surveyor’s license stamp, signature, and contact information.

B. Names and contact information for each property owner involved in the adjustment or combination.

C. Name and contact information for the applicant.

D. Legal descriptions prepared by a title company or licensed land surveyor for the existing and proposed lot configurations.

E. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council.

F. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.070 Approval criteria.

Boundary line adjustments shall not be approved unless consistent with all of the following:

A. No additional lots shall be created.

B. All of the lots included in the boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall be legal lots unless the purpose of the adjustment or combination is to remedy a zoning or platting violation.

C. The boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall not create a lot which lacks sufficient area to meet the minimum lot size requirements for the zone in which it is located. For boundary line adjustments involving nonconforming lots, the adjustment shall not cause a lot to become smaller, or less conforming, with respect to the applicable standards for area or dimension.

D. The boundary line adjustment shall not cause a building or structure to violate a required property line setback. For boundary line adjustments involving structures which are nonconforming with respect to setback requirements, the adjustment or combination shall not increase the degree of nonconformity.

E. The boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall not create a lot which lacks legal access.

F. All of the resulting lots shall comply with the Burlington Municipal Code standards for access.

G. The following statement shall appear on deeds or conveyance documents affecting the adjustment: “This boundary line adjustment is not for the purpose of creating an additional lot.”

H. The boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall not create a lot which is bisected by a zoning district or comprehensive plan designation boundary.

I. The boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall not create a lot which is bisected by an urban growth area boundary.

J. The boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall not create a lot which is bisected by the jurisdictional boundary between the city of Burlington, another city, or unincorporated Skagit County.

K. The boundary line adjustment shall not cause a lot, structure, or development to violate the Burlington Municipal Code. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.080 Final approval.

A. Following the review process specified above, the director shall approve the final plat application, return it to the applicant for corrections, or deny it within the 30 days after filing an application meeting the criteria above.

B. Boundary line adjustments and lot combinations approved by the city shall be signed by the director and returned to the applicant for recording. One copy of the approved boundary line adjustment shall be retained by the city.

C. Approved boundary line adjustments shall be recorded within two years of the date of approval and a copy of the recorded boundary line adjustment shall be provided to the city. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.60.090 Effect of boundary line adjustment approval.

Lots reconfigured by an approved boundary line adjustment or lot combination shall be considered legal lots. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 16.70 INNOCENT PURCHASER AND TESTAMENTARY DIVISIONS

Sections:

16.70.010    Title.

16.70.020    Application.

16.70.030    Purpose.

16.70.040    Authority.

16.70.050    Approval required.

16.70.060    Review process.

16.70.070    Application requirements.

16.70.080    Approval criteria.

16.70.090    Effect of approval.


16.70.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Innocent Purchaser and Testamentary Divisions.” (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.020 Application.

A. This chapter shall apply to all lots created through testamentary provisions and laws of descent.

B. Applications for innocent purchaser status shall be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.030 Purpose.

A. To provide a means of ensuring that lots created through testamentary divisions comply with applicable zoning and development standards.

B. To provide a process for granting relief to innocent purchasers of lots created in violation of platting and zoning regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to chapters 36.70, 36.70A, 36.70B and 58.17 RCW as well as other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.050 Approval required.

A. No lot created by a testamentary division shall be recognized as a legal lot without city approval.

B. No owner of an illegal lot shall be recognized as an innocent purchaser without city approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.060 Review process.

A. Testamentary Divisions. Applications for recognition of lots created through testamentary provisions shall be processed as Type I decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A.

B. Innocent Purchaser. Applications for innocent purchaser status shall be processed as Type II decisions in accordance with the provisions of BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.070 Application requirements.

A. Testamentary Divisions. Applications for recognition of lots created through testamentary provisions shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications which include all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

1. A completed application form;

2. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

3. Documentation establishing the lots were created by testamentary provisions or the laws of descent;

4. A survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington showing the area and dimensions of the lots;

5. Legal descriptions for each lot prepared by a title company or surveyor;

6. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy.

B. Innocent Purchaser. Applications for innocent purchaser status shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall include all of the information required by the form in addition to all of the items listed below. Only applications which include all of the information required by this section shall be deemed complete for purposes of complying with BMC Title 14A. A complete application shall include:

1. A completed application form;

2. Any applicable fees in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city council;

3. Documentation establishing the owner of the lot purchased the property for value and in good faith, and did not have knowledge of the fact that the property acquired was created in violation of this title;

4. A survey prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the state of Washington showing the area and dimensions of the lot;

5. Legal descriptions for each of the lots prepared by a title company or surveyor;

6. Additional copies of all required information. The director shall specify the required number of copies in order to ensure that each department, or official, charged with reviewing the application can be provided with a copy. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.080 Approval criteria.

A. Testamentary Divisions.

1. Each lot shall meet the minimum standards for area and dimension prescribed by the zoning code;

2. Each lot shall adjoin or have legal access to a public road right-of-way or private road easement.

B. Innocent Purchaser.

1. Substantial evidence is provided that clearly indicates the property owner purchased the illegally created lot without notification or knowledge of the fact it was illegally divided from a larger parcel or adjusted without city approval;

2. The property in question shall comply with minimum standards for area and dimension prescribed by the zoning code. Lots that do not comply with the applicable standards for area and dimension may be eligible for recognition provided they are large enough to accommodate a building site outside of the setbacks required by the zoning code, critical areas, and critical area buffers. In such cases a survey shall be submitted showing the location and dimensions of the proposed building envelope. As a condition of approval the survey shall be recorded and shall include a notation indicating that subsequent variances or reasonable use determinations will not be granted for the purpose of authorizing development outside of the envelope shown on the survey;

3. If the property owner owns adjoining lots, and if combining the illegal lot with the adjoining lots would remedy the platting or zoning violation which caused the lot to be considered illegal, the lots shall be combined as a condition of approval. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


16.70.090 Effect of approval.

A. Testamentary Divisions. Once recognized by the city lots created by a testamentary division shall be considered legal lots.

B. Innocent Purchaser. If the city recognizes the owner of an illegally created lot as an innocent purchaser the lot shall be considered a legal lot. (Ord. 1856 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Title 17 COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE1

Chapters:

17.01    General Provisions

17.05    District Establishment, Maps and Boundaries

17.15    R-1 Land Use Districts

17.20    R-2 Two-Family Residence Districts

17.25    R-3 Multifamily Residence Districts

17.30    R-S Semi-Public District

17.35    OSP Open Space and Parks District

17.40    MR-NB Medium Density Residential and Neighborhood Business District

17.45    B-1 Business District

17.50    C-1 General Commercial District

17.55    C-2 Heavy Commercial District

17.60    M-1 Industrial District

17.65    BP Business Park District

17.70    Supplemental Development Standards

17.80    Landscaping

17.85    Access, Parking and Loading

17.90    Public Utilities

17.95    Signs

17.100    Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses

17.105    Essential Public Facilities

17.110    Agricultural Heritage Credit Program

17.115    Planning Commission

17.120    Hearing Examiner

17.125    Amendments to Comprehensive Plan and Development Regulations1

Prior legislation: Ords. 890, 979, 1108, 1136, 1158, 1162, 1187, 1199, 1200, 1206, 1221, 1227, 1230, 1233, 1237, 1252, 1260, 1271, 1284, 1291, 1304, 1318, 1320, 1322, 1327, 1333, 1340, 1344, 1345, 1356, 1361, 1363, 1365, 1382, 1388, 1396, 1431, 1451, 1454, 1470, 1473, 1502, 1532, 1535, 1547, 1584, 1630, 1666, 1668, 1670, 1694, 1706, 1717, 1720, 1725, 1737, 1763, 1782, 1784, 1788, 1798, 1799, 1819, 1839 and 1843. 


Chapter 17.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.01.010    Title.

17.01.020    Application.

17.01.030    Purpose.

17.01.040    Authority.

17.01.050    Definitions.

17.01.060    Land use permit required.

17.01.070    Condition of ministerial errors.

17.01.080    Administrative interpretations.

17.01.090    Zoning for annexed land.

17.01.100    Relationship to other titles, chapters and codes.

17.01.110    Violation and penalties.

17.01.115    Duty to enforce.

17.01.120    Appeal.

17.01.125    Severability.


17.01.010 Title.

This title shall be called the “Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.” This chapter shall be called “General Provisions.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.020 Application.

A. This chapter shall apply to all chapters in this title. The provisions of this title shall apply to both public and private use of all land within the corporate limits of the city of Burlington.

B. No use shall be conducted, and no development, building, structure, or appurtenance shall be initiated, erected, relocated, remodeled, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged unless in compliance with the provisions of this title and with the comprehensive plan, and then only after securing all permits and approvals required hereby. It shall be unlawful to build or use any building or structure, or to use premises in the city, for any purpose or use other than the uses listed as being permitted in the district in which such building, land, or premises is located.

C. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between private parties. However, where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land and/or building or in general requires higher standards than other ordinances, rules, or private agreements, the provisions of this title shall govern.

D. No division of land pursuant to BMC Title 16 shall occur unless in compliance with the provisions of this title.

E. This title is not intended to regulate the erection, construction, or reconstruction of public streets, power poles, streetlights, utility lift stations, transmission lines, or other public uses within an existing improved, and maintained, city right-of-way necessary to support the general public welfare and conducted, or carried out, by the city of Burlington, or agents of the city working under a contract or franchise. Private utilities and infrastructure improvements, and public utilities located outside an improved public right-of-way, shall be subject to this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.030 Purpose.

The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish the following purposes:

A. This title is intended to address the requirements of chapter 36.70A RCW, the Growth Management Act, and shall be used to implement and enforce the provisions of city’s comprehensive plan. This title is also intended to protect the health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the city’s population.

B. The specific zones and regulations herein are designed to facilitate adequate provisions of utilities, schools, parks and housing with essential light, air, privacy, and open space; to lessen congestion on streets and facilitate the safe movement of traffic thereon; to stabilize and enhance property values; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to facilitate adequate provisions for doing public and private business and thereby safeguard the community’s economic structure upon which the prosperity and welfare of all depends and through such achievements help ensure the safety and security of home life, foster good citizenship, create and preserve a more healthful, serviceable and attractive municipality and environment in which to live.

C. To most effectively accomplish these purposes, this title divides the city into zones wherein the location, height and use of buildings, the use of land, the size of yards and other open space, and the provision of off-street parking and loading are regulated and restricted in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the city of Burlington. These zones and regulations are hereby deemed necessary and are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of each zone and its particular suitability for specific uses, the need for such uses, the common rights and interests of all within the zone as well as those of the general public, and with the view of conserving and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.040 Authority.

This title is created pursuant to the authority set forth in chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.050 Definitions.

For the purpose of this title, the words listed in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word “shall” is always mandatory, the word “may” denotes a use of discretion in making a decision; the words “used” or “occupied” shall be considered as though followed by the words “or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”

“A”

“Abandoned sign” means a sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner or lessor of the sign structure intends no longer to use the sign structure for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise defined by state law. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found, is an abandoned sign.

“Accessory building” or “accessory structure” means a subordinate building or structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of the main, or primary, building on the same lot.

“Accessory use” means a use incidental and subordinate to a principal use and located on the same lot or in the same building as the principal use.

“Adult motion picture theater” means a place of public assembly in which, in an enclosed building, motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, or any other such visual media, are presented which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” as defined herein.

“Alley” means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.

“Alteration” means a change, rearrangement, expansion, or modification of an existing building, structure, use, development, or facility. Alterations also include moving buildings, structures, and uses from one location to another. In buildings used for business, commercial, industrial or other similar purposes the installation or rearrangement of interior partitions affecting more than one-third of a single floor area shall be considered an alteration.

“Animated sign” means a sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. Note that animation is prohibited by BMC 17.95.135(B)(2), except for temporary signs in BMC 17.95.125. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this code, include the following types:

1. “Electrically activated” means animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electro-mechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:

a. Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of nonillumination. For the purposes of this chapter, “flashing” will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.

b. Patterned Illusionary Movement. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.

2. “Environmentally active” means animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input, including spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond directly to naturally occurring external motivation. Time or temperature displays shall not be construed as a direct response to the natural environment.

3. “Mechanically activated” means animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.

“Antenna” means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals.

1. “Omnidirectional antenna” (also known as a “whip antenna”) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a 360-degree radial pattern. For the purpose of this title, an omnidirectional antenna is up to 15 feet in height and up to four inches in diameter.

2. “Directional antenna” (also known as a “panel antenna”) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.

3. “Parabolic antenna” (also known as a “dish antenna”) is a bowl-shaped device for the reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communications signals in a specific directional pattern.

“Area of sign,” “surface area of sign,” or “sign area” means the area of a sign excluding sign support structures, which do not form part of the sign proper or the display. Surface area shall be measured as follows:

1. The surface area of the sign is determined by the height times the width of a typical rectangular sign or other appropriate mathematical computation of surface area for nonrectangular signs.

2. Surface area includes only one face of a double-faced sign where the faces of the sign are parallel. If any face is offset from parallel by more than five degrees, such face shall be counted as a separate surface area.

3. Surface area of a sign with more than two faces, such as a cube or pyramid, shall be calculated as the sum of the surface area of all faces, divided by two.

4. In the event of an irregular, three-dimensional object that serves as signage, where the surface area is not readily measurable, the surface area shall be calculated by the largest area of the three-dimensional object visible from any one viewing angle.

Figure 1. Sign Surface Area Calculation
[IMAGE]


“Attached wireless communication facility” means a wireless communication facility that is affixed to an existing structure and is not considered a component of the attached wireless communication facility.

“Automobile wrecking yard” means a salvage and recycling business establishment in which vehicles are dismantled or junked, or where one or more vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored in an area outside an enclosed structure.

“Automotive parts and accessories sales” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which goods are rented or sold primarily for use in motorized vehicles, but excluding gas stations.

“Automotive retail sales and service” means a retail sales and service use in which goods are rented or sold primarily for use in motorized vehicles, but excluding gas stations.

“Awning” means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a door or window from the elements.

Figure 2. Awning
[IMAGE]


“Awning sign” means any sign erected upon, or against, an awning.

“B”

“Banner” means a flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed, including blade banners.

“Banner sign” means a sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.

“Bed and breakfast” means a single-family dwelling where up to two rooms or lodging units are let as temporary accommodations for travelers or guests by the owner or occupant of the single-family dwelling. Bed and breakfast establishments may provide limited food service to guests.

“Billboard” means an outdoor advertising sign containing a message, commercial or otherwise, unrelated to the use or activity on the property on which the sign is located, and which is customarily leased for commercial purposes, but not including attached directional signs (not within the billboard face) as defined herein. Billboards are regulated in BMC 17.95.130(A).

“Boarding house” or “rooming house” means a dwelling unit, other than a hotel, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation. This term does not include buildings meeting the definition of a hotel, bed and breakfast, or multifamily dwelling. Boarding houses are differentiated from hotels and bed breakfasts by providing accommodations for periods of 30 days or more.

“Building” means a structure as defined in this chapter. When separated by division walls without openings each portion so separated shall be considered a separate building.

“Building area” means the total ground coverage of a building or structure which provides shelter measured from the outside of its external walls or supporting members or from a point 18 inches in from the outside edge of a cantilevered roof.

“Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. If a structure has none of the above features then the height shall be measured from the finished grade to the highest portion of the structure.

“Building-mounted sign” means a single- or multiple-faced sign of a permanent nature, made of rigid material, attached to the facade of a building or the face of a marquee.

Figure 3. Building-Mounted (Wall) Sign
[IMAGE]


“C”

“Canopy” means a multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection that provides protection from the elements to persons or property. The surface(s) or soffit may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. This includes marquees.

“Canopy-mounted sign” means any sign or awning erected upon or against a canopy, including marquee-mounted signs.

“Caretaker apartment” or “caretaker dwelling” mean an apartment or dwelling unit associated with, and subordinate to, a primary permitted use or development and used to provide housing for a person(s) employed to care for, or operate, the primary permitted use or development.

“Certificate of occupancy” means a written document issued by the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of the building permit. The certificate of occupancy indicates that, in the opinion of the building official, the project has been completed in accordance with the building and zoning codes. This document gives the owner permission from the authorities to occupy and use the premises for the intended purpose.

“Changeable sign” means a sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input without reworking, repainting, or otherwise altering the physical composition of the sign, including signs which are:

1. Electrically Activated. A changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. See also “electronic message sign or center.”

2. Manually Activated. A changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually.

“Co-location exists” means that more than one wireless communications provider mounts equipment on a single support structure (i.e., building, monopole, lattice tower).

“Commercial child day care center” means a building, or a portion of a building, used to provide early childhood education and learning services as defined in RCW 43.215.010.

“Commission” shall mean the planning commission of the city.

“Community development director” means the city administrator or designee.

“Conditional use” means a use or development which may, through a discretionary approval process, be conditionally permitted in one or more zones. Conditional uses are those uses and developments which are either identified as conditional in a particular zone, or which are not listed as permitted or conditional in any zone. Conditional uses generally have the following characteristics:

1. The impacts associated with the use or development are difficult to predict or ascertain due to variabilities in the size, scale, and design of the use or development, or because the activities associated with, or the technological processes employed by, the use or development are untested, experimental, unproven, or poorly documented;

2. The exact location of the use or development may determine its impact on, and compatibility with, surroundings uses, public streets, improvements and facilities;

3. The use or development requires a high level of analysis to determine if it will be, or can be made to be, consistent with applicable comprehensive plan goals and policies, abutting and adjacent uses, and the character of the surrounding neighborhood;

4. The use or development requires detailed and specific conditions of approval in order to be compatible with surrounding uses, public streets, improvements, and facilities;

5. The use or development is not substantially similar in form, function, size, scale, or impact to another use listed as permitted in one or more zones.

“Corner lot” means a lot at the junction of, and fronting on, two or more intersecting streets. A corner lot has a front lot line and a street side lot line.

“Council” or “city council” shall mean the city council of the city of Burlington.

“Coverage,” “lot coverage,” or “building coverage” means the area of a lot which is covered by a roofed structure.

“D”

“Density” means the ratio of dwelling units to lot area.

“Detached building” means a building surrounded on all sides by open space.

“Developed land area” means those parts of a lot, site, or area of land that have been extensively improved for an existing land use including building coverage, parking and loading areas, service yards, impervious surfaces, and landscaped areas.

“Development” means any activity that results in a use or modification of land or its resources. Development activities include, but are not limited to: dredging, drilling, dumping, filling, earth movement, grading, clearing or removal of vegetation; storage of materials or equipment; building or construction; land division, boundary line adjustments, lot segregations, subdivision and short subdivisions; binding site plans; land use permit approvals; variances; shoreline development or substantial development; and activities or uses allowed through conditional use permits.

“Development complex sign” means a free-standing sign identifying a multiple-tenant development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park, which is controlled by a single owner or landlord.

“Development right” means one residential unit of credit. This is calculated for unincorporated Skagit County in the agriculture natural resource land zoning district (AgNRL) at the rate of one residential unit per 40 acres of farmland, or at the rate of one residential unit per county certified lot of record for development. The farmland legacy program will accumulate Burlington heritage credits until a willing seller is identified and there is enough funding to acquire one or more development rights from agricultural resource land in the area specified on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Directional sign” means any sign that is limited to the purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Directional signs typically indicate entrances, exits, one-way circulation, drive-up windows, or provide similar types of information.

“Director” means the community development director or designee.

“District” or “zone” means a zoning district as described in chapter 17.05 BMC or as shown on the city’s adopted zoning map.

“Double-faced sign” means a sign with two faces, back to back.

“Driveway” means an area improved with an all-weather driving surface providing vehicle access to a single dwelling unit from a public or private street in accordance with applicable city standards and requirements. This term does not include public or private streets.

“Duplex” means a building containing two dwelling units. See “two-family dwelling.”

“Dwelling unit” means a building, or a portion of a building, providing complete housekeeping facilities for one family or housekeeping unit.

“E”

“Eating and drinking establishment” means a retail sales and service use in which food and/or beverages are prepared and sold at retail for immediate consumption.

“Electric sign” means any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.

“Electronic message sign or center” means an electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed. The electronic sign includes text and/or graphic messages that may change every few seconds. Advertising messages may contain words, phrases, sentences, symbols, trademarks and logos. See BMC 17.95.120 for requirements regarding electronic signs.

“Essential public facility (EPF)” means any public facility or facilities owned or operated by a unit of local or state government, public or private utility, transportation company, or any other entity that provides a public service as its primary mission, and is difficult to site. EPFs include those facilities listed in RCW 36.70A.200.

“Exterior lot” means a lot which directly abuts or adjoins at least one public or private street.

“Exterior sign” means any sign placed outside a building.

“F”

“Facade” means the exterior wall face of a building, extending from the ground to the top of the parapet or eaves, but not including any portion of the roof. Each side of a building (i.e., each architectural elevation) is considered one facade (see Figure 4). For buildings with more than one occupant, the facade for each occupant shall be that portion of the exterior wall face between the points where the interior walls between tenants intersect with the exterior wall.

Figure 4. Facade
[IMAGE]


“Family” means a person, or two or more persons, related by blood or marriage or law living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling. In addition, the following shall be included in the definition of family pursuant to the requirements of state and/or federal law:

1. Adult family homes licensed pursuant to RCW 70.128.150;

2. Foster homes for the placement of the disabled, or expectant mothers in a residential setting including, but not limited to, foster family homes licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW, community group care facilities licensed pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and crisis residential centers pursuant to chapter 13.32A RCW;

3. Consensual living arrangements of the disabled protected pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act amendments; and

4. A housekeeping unit as defined in this chapter.

Secure community transition facilities, as defined in chapter 71.09 RCW, are not included in the definition of “family.”

“Family day care home” means a residential dwelling used by a family day care provider to provide day care services in accordance with the provisions of RCW 36.70A.450 and 43.215.010.

“Family day care provider” means a child care provider who regularly provides early childhood education and early learning services for not more than 12 children in the provider’s home in the family living quarters.

Flashing Sign. See “animated sign, electrically activated.”

“Floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls and from the centerline of division walls. Floor area shall include: basement space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical equipment rooms or attic spaces with headroom of seven feet, six inches or more, penthouse floors, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches. Floor area shall not include: accessory water tanks and cooling towers, mechanical equipment or attic spaces with headroom of less than seven feet, six inches, exterior steps or stairs, terraces, breezeways and open spaces.

“Foster family home” means a dwelling unit used as a foster family home as defined in WAC 388-25-010 and chapter 74.13 RCW.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign principally supported by a structure affixed to the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground. Freestanding signs include those signs otherwise known as pedestal signs, pole signs, pylon signs, and monument signs.

Figure 5. Freestanding Sign
[IMAGE]


“Frontage (building)” means the length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single premises oriented to the public way or other properties that it faces as determined by the community development director or designee.

“G”

“Gas station” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which fuel for motorized vehicles is sold, and in which accessory uses including, but not limited to, towing by no more than two tow trucks, minor automobile repair, or rental of vehicles under 10,000 pound gross vehicle weight may also be provided. Facilities for washing no more than one car at a time or for the collection of used motor oil shall also be considered accessory to a gas station.

“Guest cottage” or “guest house” means a detached accessory building secondary and subordinate to a dwelling unit used by the family occupying the dwelling unit for the purpose of housing members of the family or guests. A guest cottage does not contain a kitchen or cooking facilities and is not used as a separate dwelling unit. This term does not include accessory dwelling units as defined in this chapter which may contain kitchens or cooking facilities and which may be used as separate dwelling units.

“Guyed tower” means a wireless communication support structure which is usually over 100 feet tall, which consists of metal crossed strips or bars and is steadied by wire guys in a radial pattern around the tower. Guyed towers are often constructed in rural areas and are used to support antennas and related equipment.

“H”

“Health care facility,” “medical service” or “outpatient clinic” means a building, or a portion of a building, containing offices for providing medical, dental, immediate care clinics, or psychiatric services not involving overnight housing of patients. This term does not include hospitals or nursing homes as defined in this chapter.

“Height of sign” or “sign height” means the vertical distance from the adjacent ground level to the highest point of a sign or, in the case of freestanding signs, to any vertical projection thereof including its supporting columns.

“Holographic display” means any display that creates a three-dimensional image through projection.

“Home occupation” means an occupation or profession which is customarily incidental to or carried on in a dwelling unit and not one in which the use of the premises as a dwelling place is largely incidental to the occupation carried on, and which occupation is carried on by a member of the family residing within the dwelling place.

“Hospital” means a building designed and used for the medical and surgical diagnosis, treatment and housing of persons under the care of doctors and nurses. Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes and clinics are not included.

“Hotel” means a building, or a portion of a building, designed or used to provide transient accommodations and consisting of three or more lodging units. An eating and drinking establishment and accessory shops and services catering to the general public may be provided as accessory uses. This definition does not include institutions housing persons under legal restraint or requiring medical attention or care.

“Housekeeping unit” means one household where all the members have common access to and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit, and household activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores, expenses, and maintenance of the premises are shared or carried out according to a household plan or other customary method. If the dwelling unit is rented, the household members must jointly occupy the unit under a single lease in order to be considered a housekeeping unit. This term does not include boarding or rooming houses as defined in this chapter where rooms within a dwelling unit are rented or leased to individuals under separate leases.

“I”

“Illegal sign” means a sign that does not meet the requirements of this chapter and has not received legal nonconforming status.

“Illuminated sign” means a sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).

“Impervious surface” means a hard surface which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development, and/or a hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops and eaves, walkways, patios, decks (both covered and open slat construction shall both be considered impervious), driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, rockeries and oiled macadam or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface and storm water runoff. Open, uncovered storm water retention and detention facilities shall not be considered impervious surfaces for purposes of this definition. For purposes of calculating impervious surface coverage and demonstrating compliance with this title, the following impervious surfaces shall be included at a ratio of 50 percent:

1. “Permeable paving” means pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers, grass grid, or other forms of pervious or porous paving material intended to allow the passage of water through the pavement section. Permeable paving often includes an aggregate base that provides structural support and acts as a storm water reservoir.

2. “Open slatted decking” means a deck surface constructed of boards with intermittent gaps that allow water to pass through to the surface below. Only open, uncovered decks installed over a permeable surface shall be included in impervious surface calculations at a 50 percent ratio. Covered decks, or decks installed over an impermeable surface, shall be considered an impervious surface and included in all coverage calculations accordingly.

3. “Green roof” or “vegetated roof” means a roof, or a portion of a roof, consisting of waterproofing material, growing medium or soil, and vegetation used in place of or over the top of a conventional roof. Green roofs provide storm water management by capturing, filtering, and evaporating rainfall.

“Informational sign” means a single- or double-faced sign intended primarily for the safety and convenience of the public or to ensure the orderly operation of the site, including but not limited to signs designating restrooms, address numbers, hours of operation, business directories, help wanted, public telephones, and instructions regarding parking.

“Inoperable vehicle” means a car, truck or van that cannot be started and moved under its own power. A vehicle that is not currently licensed, including a recreational vehicle or trailer, that is designed for travel on the public roads, is also considered an inoperable vehicle.

“Interior lot” means a lot which has no street frontage and which can only be accessed through a driveway or shared driveway.

“Interior sign” means any sign placed within a building, but not including window signs as defined by this chapter. Interior signs, with the exception of window signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.

“J”

“Junk storage” means the temporary or permanent storage outdoors of junk, waste, discarded, salvaged or used materials or inoperable vehicles or vehicle parts. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, the storage of used lumber, scrap, metal, tires, household garbage, furniture, and inoperable machinery, and as further defined in the current edition of the International Fire Code. See also chapter 8.12 BMC, Nuisances.

“Junk yard” means a lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used for the collection, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of parts of machinery or vehicles not in running condition.

“K”

“Kennel” means a facility, structure, property, or development where more than four dogs and/or one litter of unweaned pups are kept.

“L”

“Land use” means the type of use activity occurring on a land parcel or within a building situated upon a land parcel.

“Land use permit” means a document issued by the city which documents or authorizes a particular use or development. A land use permit formally documents the city’s land use decision and may establish, or document, the conditions and restrictions applicable to the use or development.

“Lattice tower” means a wireless communication support structure which consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related equipment.

“Lodging unit” means a room or a group of interconnected rooms, intended for sleeping, that is rented on a short-term basis to guest(s) to provide transient accommodation and is individually designated by number, letter, or other means of identification. Lodging units may contain cooking facilities; however, this definition does not include long-term, nontransient accommodations such as multifamily dwellings and boarding houses.

“Lot” means a single tract of land, no matter how legally described, whether by metes and bounds and/or by lot or lots and block designation as in a recorded plat, that at the time of applying for a building permit is designated by its owner or developer as the tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit of land under single ownership or control and assigned to the particular use for which the building permit is being secured. This definition includes only those lots, tracts, parcels, and sites which were created in compliance with the zoning and platting regulations in effect at the time of their establishment, or which are subsequently recognized by the city as separate lots consistent with applicable municipal code requirements and Washington State law.

“Lot area” means the area of a lot contained within the lot lines. Lot area includes areas within easements, submerged lands, and wetland areas. For purposes of determining compliance with this title the city may require that lot area(s) be calculated by a licensed land surveyor.

“Lot depth” means the mean dimension of the lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line.

“Lot line” means a line or boundary which separates a lot, tract, parcel, or site from another lot, tract, parcel or site, or from an adjoining public street or right-of-way. For purposes of compliance with this title the city may require that the location of lot lines be determined by a licensed land surveyor.

1. “Front lot line” means the lot line parallel to and abutting a public or private street. For interior lots, or lots with more than one street frontage, the front lot line shall be side which provides the primary means of access to the lot. If a lot has frontage on a street and an alley, the property line adjoining the alley shall not be considered a front lot line regardless of the point of access.

2. “Rear lot line” means the lot line which is opposite from and generally parallel to the front property line.

3. “Side lot line” means any lot line other than the front line or rear lot line. Generally a side property line is perpendicular to and connects the front and rear property lines.

4. “Street side lot line” means a lot line, other than a front lot line, which adjoins a public or private street.

“Lot width” means the dimension across the lot between the side lot lines at the front setback line.

“Low impact development” or “LID” means a storm water and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation, and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed storm water management practices that are integrated into a project design. Low impact development features, practices, and techniques include bioretention, rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, vegetated or green roofs, minimum excavation foundations, and water reuse.

“M”

“Macro facility” means an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas equal to or less than 15 feet in height or a parabolic antenna up to one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter and with an area not more than 100 square feet in the aggregate as viewed from any one point.

“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling unit built in accordance with regulations adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and (RCW 43.22.335). This term includes modular homes as defined in this chapter but does not include mobile homes. This term also does not include recreational vehicles, park models, trailers, and other similar vehicles which are licensed for use on public roads, capable of being licensed for use on public roads, or designed and constructed to be licensed for use on public roads. Only structures which are certified by the state of Washington or federal government for use as a permanent habitable dwelling are included in this definition.

“Manufactured home park” means an area of land occupied or designed for the occupancy of two or more manufactured homes.

“Marijuana processor” means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to process marijuana into usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products, package and label usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products for sale in retail outlets, and sell usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products at wholesale to marijuana retailers.

“Marijuana producer” means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to produce and sell marijuana at wholesale to marijuana processors and other marijuana producers.

“Marijuana retailer” means a person licensed by the State Liquor and Cannabis Board to sell usable marijuana and marijuana-infused products in a retail outlet.

“Mean depth” of a lot is the depth of such lot measured on a line approximately perpendicular to the fronting street and midway between the side lines of such lot.

“Medical service” means a retail sales and service use in which health care for humans is provided on an outpatient basis including, but not limited to, offices for doctors, dentists, chiropractors, and other health care practitioners.

“Mini commercial child day care center” or “mini commercial day care” means a commercial child day care center that provides services to not more than 12 children at any one time.

“Mobile home” means a factory built dwelling unit that does not meet current state or federal standards for factory built dwellings, modular homes, or manufactured homes. This definition does not include manufactured or modular homes as defined in this chapter or site built homes constructed in accordance with city building code requirements. Mobile homes may not be placed within the city of Burlington; however, existing legally established mobile homes shall be considered a nonconforming use and shall be subject to the nonconforming standards set forth in chapter 17.100 BMC.

“Modular home” means factory built housing as defined by RCW 43.22.450(3) which has been approved by the Department of Labor and Industries in accordance with RCW 43.22.455.

“Monopole I” is a wireless communication facility which consists of a support structure, the height of which shall not exceed 60 feet.

“Monopole II” is a wireless communication facility which consists of a wireless communications support structure greater than 60 feet in height erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances.

“Monument sign” means a ground-mounted, fixed sign. The base (not included in the sign surface area calculation) is attached to the ground as a wide base of solid construction.

Figure 6. Monument Sign
[IMAGE]


“Multifamily dwelling” means a building containing three or more dwelling units.

“Multiple-tenant development” means a group of structures housing at least one retail business, office, commercial venture, or independent or separate part of a business or a single structure containing more than one business with separating walls and at least one outside access for each business which shares a common lot, access, and/or parking facility.

“N”

“Noncommercial public service sign” means a noncommercial sign devoted to religious, charitable, cultural, governmental, or educational messages including, but not limited to, the advertising of events sponsored by a governmental agency, a school, church, civic or fraternal organization or other organizations.

“Nonconforming lot” means a lot which was legally established but which does not conform to current zoning or development regulations including any applicable standards for width, depth, or area. For purposes of interpreting this definition, “legally established” means the lot was created in compliance with the zoning and platting regulations, if any, in effect at the time the lot was created. A lot may also be considered a legal nonconforming lot if it is subsequently recognized by the city as a separate lot consistent with applicable municipal code requirements and Washington State law.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure which was lawfully established but which does not conform to current zoning or development regulations. A structure shall be considered lawfully established if it conformed to the applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time it was built or established. This includes the requirement to obtain city approvals or permits. A structure shall also be considered lawfully established if a permit for the structure has been granted and has not expired. Subsequent expansions or modifications of a legally established structure shall conform to all applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time of the modification or expansion. Specific regulations governing nonconforming structures can be found in chapter 17.100 BMC.

“Nonconforming use” means the use of land or a structure for a purpose which was lawful at the time the use was established or initiated but which does not now conform to currently applicable zoning or development regulations. A use shall be considered lawfully established if it was consistent with all of the applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time it was established or initiated. This includes the requirement to obtain city approvals or permits. A use shall also be considered lawfully established if a permit authorizing the use has been granted and has not expired. Subsequent expansions or modifications of a legally established use shall conform to all applicable zoning and development regulations in effect at the time of the modification or expansion. Specific regulations governing nonconforming uses can be found in chapter 17.100 BMC.

“Nursing home” or “convalescent home” means a facility licensed by the state of Washington providing 24-hour supervised nursing care, personal care, therapy, nutrition management, organized activities, social services, room, board, and laundry for persons requiring regular medical attention by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, but excluding surgical or emergency medical services. This definition excludes hospitals, multifamily dwellings, boarding houses, and hotels as defined in this chapter.

“O”

“Off-premises sign” means a sign which displays a message relating to a use of property or sale of goods or services at a location other than that on which the sign is located.

“Office” means a commercial use which provides administrative, contractors, professional or customer services to individuals, businesses, institutions and/or government agencies in an office setting.

1. “Administrative office” means an office use in which services are provided to customers primarily by phone or mail, by going to the customer’s home or place of business, or on the premises by appointment; or in which customers are limited to holders of business licenses. Examples of services provided include, but are not limited to, general contracting, janitorial and housecleaning, legal, architectural, data processing, broadcasting companies, administrative offices or businesses, unions or charitable organizations, and wholesalers and manufacturer’s representatives’ office. Administrative offices may include accessory storage, but not the storage of building materials, contractor’s equipment or items, other than samples, for wholesale sale.

2. “Customer service office” means an office use in which on-site customer services are provided in a manner which encourages walk-in clientele and in which generally an appointment is not needed to conduct business. Examples include branch banks, travel agencies, airline ticket offices, brokerage firms, real estate offices, and government agencies which provide direct services to clients.

“On-premises sign” means a sign which displays a message which is directly related to the use of the property on which it is located.

“Outdoor vending machine” shall mean a mechanical device located on the outside of a building that provides a product or service to the public for compensation, including but not limited to drink dispensers, food dispensers, movie rental or other product vending machines. The definition shall also include freestanding automated teller machines that are not on the same property as the financial institution. For purposes of this chapter, news boxes, pay phones, youth amusement rides, and bottled soda, juice or water machines shall not be deemed to be outdoor vending machines.

“P”

“Parking space” means a space used to temporarily park a motor vehicle and having access to a public street or alley.

“Permitted use” means any use authorized or permitted alone or in conjunction with another use in a specific district and subject to the limitations of the regulations of such use district.

“Personal and household retail sales and service” means a retail sales and service use in which goods are rented or sold or services are provided primarily for household and personal use, rather than for business establishments, institutions, or governmental agencies, but excluding uses in which primarily building materials and/or heating fuel are sold. Examples of personal and household retail sales are bookstores, furniture stores, and grocery stores. Examples of personal and household services are shoe repair, hair-cutting salons, and dry cleaning.

1. “General personal and household retail sales and service” means a personal and household retail sales and service use which is not a multipurpose convenience store, major durables sales and service or a specialty food store.

2. “Major durables sales, service, and rental” means a personal and household retail sales and service use in which large household items such as, but not limited to, furniture or appliances, are rented or sold.

3. “Multipurpose convenience store” means a personal and household retail sales and service use in which a wide range of items frequently purchased for household use are rented or sold. Examples of multipurpose convenience stores include, but are not limited to, grocery, hardware, drug, and variety stores.

4. “Specialty food store” means a personal and household retail sales and service use in which food such as salads, deli meats, desserts, baked goods, whole pizzas, and other ready-to-eat foods are prepared and sold, generally for consumption on other premises. Specialty packaged foods, and/or bulk items such as cheese, and aged foods may also be sold, and the square footage of any area used for seating for the immediate consumption of food shall be no more than 300 square feet. If more than 300 square feet are devoted to seating space, the entire use shall be considered an eating and drinking establishment rather than a specialty food store.

“Portable sign” means a movable sign that is not permanently attached to a structure or the ground. Portable signs include A-frame signs and signs mounted on a portable base, but not portable readerboards.

“Primary use (or principal use)” means the use for which a lot, structure or building, or the major portion thereof is designed or actually employed.

“Professional office” means a small scale office used as a place of business by licensed professionals, or persons in other generally recognized professions, which use training or knowledge of a technical, scientific or other academic discipline as opposed to manual skills, and which does not involve outside storage or fabrication, or on-site sale or transfer of commodity. This term includes office space for lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, consultants, and other similar professions.

“Projecting sign” means a building mounted sign which projects past the face of a building for the purpose of displaying the sign content in a direction other than parallel to the building facade.

“Public hearing” means a duly advertised public meeting called by the hearing examiner, council, or commission of the city for the purpose of taking formal public comment, both in favor and opposition to a proposed action.

“R”

“Readerboard” means a sign or part of a sign on which the letters are replaceable by manual means, such as changing magnetic letters on a sign board.

“Receiving site” means the site in the recipient zoning district that will receive the increased density by purchasing Burlington heritage credits at a set fee or transferring development rights from the sending site. Receiving sites in the city of Burlington are further described in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts.

“Recreational vehicle” or “RV” means a structure or vehicle containing living space intended to provide short-term accommodations for recreational purposes and licensed for use on public roads, designed to be licensed for use on public roads, or capable of being licensed for use on public roads. This term includes trailers, campers, motor homes, park models, and other similar vehicles but does not include manufactured homes as defined in this chapter. A recreational vehicle shall not be considered a dwelling unit and shall not be used as a permanent place of habitation.

“Related equipment” is all equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and data via radio frequencies. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to, cable, conduit and connectors.

“Retail sales and service” means a commercial use in which goods are rented or sold at retail to the general public for direct consumption and not for resale, or in which services are provided to individuals and/or households. Merchandise may be bought as well as sold and may be processed as long as the items processed are sold on the premises, and production is incidental or subordinate to the selling, rental or repair of goods. See the following definitions: “personal and household retail sales and service,” “medical services,” “automotive retail sales and service,” and “eating and drinking establishments.”

“Rezone” means an amendment to the official land use map to change the zone classification of an area.

“Roof sign” means a sign or sign structure erected above a roof, parapet, canopy, or porte cochere of a building or structure.

“S”

“Sales and rental of motorized vehicles” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which motorized vehicles, such as cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles or motorcycles, or related nonmotorized vehicles, such as trailers, are rented or sold.

“School” means an institution of learning, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the Washington Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards required by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of education, and also includes higher education institutions and vocational schools, but does include health and fitness clubs or facilities that solely provide artistic or musical instruction.

“Secure community transition facilities (SCTF)” means, under RCW 71.09.020, a residential facility for persons civilly committed and conditionally released to a less restrictive alternative under chapter 71.09 RCW. A secure community transition facility has supervision and security, and either provides or ensures the provision of sex offender treatment services. Secure community transition facilities include but are not limited to the facility established pursuant to RCW 71.09.250 and any community-based facilities established under this chapter and operated by the Washington State Secretary of Social and Health Services or under contract with the Secretary.

“Sending site” means the site that is to be preserved as agricultural resource land by selling or transferring its residential development rights to the Skagit farmland legacy program or other entity approved by the Skagit farmland legacy program. Sending sites shall be maintained permanently as agricultural lands and no structures may be built on the land. Sending sites may not be in public ownership. If the sending site consists of more than one tax lot, the lots must be contiguous. For purposes of this section, lots divided by a street are considered contiguous if the lots would share a common lot line if the street was removed. See Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, for land generally eligible as sending sites for the purpose of this chapter.

“Service yard” or “storage yard” means an accessory yard or outdoor area used to store equipment, vehicles, materials, or used for outdoor fabrication or processing of materials.

“Setback” means the space or distance required between a lot line and a building, structure, or development. Required setback areas are intended to remain free of buildings and structures and open to the sky as specified in this title. Setbacks may also be required between different and incompatible uses.

1. “Front setback” means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to the front property line and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required front setback unless explicitly authorized by this title.

2. “Rear setback” means an open, unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to the rear property line and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required rear setback except as explicitly authorized by this title.

3. “Side setback” means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to a side property line and extending from the front property line to the rear property line. Buildings and structures shall not be placed within or extend into a required side setback except as explicitly authorized by this title.

4. “Street setback” means an open unoccupied space parallel and adjacent to a public or private street and extending from one side property line to the opposite side property line. No building or structure shall be placed within or extend into a required street setback unless explicitly authorized by this title. This definition does not include the front setback area as defined in this title and is intended to be applied to property lines which adjoin or abut streets when a lot has more than one street frontage.

“Shared driveway” means an area improved with an all-weather driving surface providing vehicle access to two to four dwelling units from a public or private street in accordance with applicable city standards and requirements. This term does not include public or private streets.

“Sign” means all surfaces/structures (permitted, exempt, or prohibited) regulated by this chapter that have letters, figures, designs, symbols, trademarks or devices intended to attract attention to any activity, service, place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever.

“Sign, off-premises” means a sign which displays a message relating to a use of property or sale of goods or services at a location other than that on which the sign is located.

“Sign, on-premises” means a sign which displays a message which is directly related to the use of the property on which it is located.

“Single-faced sign” means a sign with only one face, displaying content on only one side and in only one direction.

“Single-family dwelling” means a detached building used as a single dwelling unit. This definition does not include “accessory dwelling unit” as defined in this chapter.

“Site area” means the total horizontal area within the property lines excluding external streets.

“Small lot development” or “residential small lot” means a subdivision or short subdivision process that allows lots to be created that are smaller than would be allowed under the normally applicable zoning requirements. Small lot development, construction on lots created through the small lot development process, and boundary line adjustments of lots created through the small lot development process are subject to the standards set forth in BMC 17.15.110.

“Specified anatomical areas” means:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” means:

1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;

3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.

“Story” means the part of a building lying between two floors or between the floor and ceiling of the highest usable level in the building.

“Street” means a public or private thoroughfare which is consistent with the classification scheme identified in chapter 12.28 BMC and which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties, dwelling units, or commercial premises. This term does not include “driveway” or “shared driveway” as defined in this chapter.

“Structure” means a combination of materials constructed and erected permanently on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. Not included are residential fences, retaining walls less than three feet in height, rockeries and similar improvements of a minor character.

“T”

“Telecommunication micro facility” means an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas equal to or less than four feet in height (except omnidirectional antennas which may be up to six feet in height) and with an area of not more than 580 square inches in the aggregate (e.g., one-foot diameter parabola or two-foot by one-and-one-half-foot panel) as viewed from any one point. The permitted antenna height includes the wireless communication facility support structure.

“Telecommunication mini facility” means an attached wireless communication facility which consists of antennas equal to or less than 10 feet in height or a parabolic antenna up to one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter and with an area of not more than 50 square feet in the aggregate as viewed from any one point.

“Topless club” means a public or private club employing persons exposing “specified anatomical areas” as defined herein.

“Towing service” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which more than two tow trucks are employed in the hauling of motorized vehicles, and where vehicles may be impounded, stored or sold, but not disassembled or junked.

“Tract” means a lot, usually several acres in area.

“Traffic control devices” means signs, signals, directional symbols, and similar devices specifically intended to direct traffic to, from, and within a site.

“Trailer park” means a facility designed to accommodate recreational vehicles or trailers no longer than 40 feet and capable of being pulled with a one-ton truck. Units shall at all times be prepared for evacuation in event of a flood warning. This term does not include manufactured home parks.

“Transient accommodations” means the provision of lodging units, room, board, or sleeping space to guests on a short-term basis for periods of less than 30 days. This tam does not include multifamily dwellings or boarding houses as defined in this chapter.

“Transmission tower” is a freestanding structure, other than a building, on which communication devices are mounted. Transmission towers may serve either as a major or minor communication facility. Examples include, but are not limited to:

1. Monopoles;

2. Lattice towers;

3. Guyed towers.

“Two-family dwelling” or “duplex” means a building containing two dwelling units.

“V”

“Variance” means relief from certain provisions of this title as authorized by the hearing examiner after determining that the criteria established for the granting of variances have been satisfied.

“Vehicle repair, major” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which one or more of the following activities are carried out:

1. Reconditioning of any type of motorized vehicle including any repairs made to vehicles over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight;

2. Collision services, including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair;

3. Overall painting of vehicles in a paint shop;

4. Dismantling of motorized vehicles in an enclosed structure.

“Vehicle repair, minor” means an automotive retail sales and service use in which general motor repair work is done as well as the replacement of new or reconditioned parts in motorized vehicles of 10,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight, but not including any operation included in the definition of “major vehicle repair.”

“W”

“Walking advertisers” means persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing location, supervision and public safety.

“Wireless communication facility” is an unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception of low-power radio signals consisting of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support structure, antennas (e.g., omnidirectional, panel/directional or parabolic) and related equipment.

“Wireless communication support structure” is the structure erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include, but are not limited to, stanchions, monopoles, lattice towers, wood poles or guyed towers.

“Y”

Yard. See “setback.”

“Z”

“Zone” or “zoning district” means a zoning district as described in chapter 17.05 BMC or as shown on the city’s adopted zoning map. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.060 Land use permit required.

A land use permit issued pursuant to BMC Title 14A shall be required to establish or change use as provided by this title. Compliance with the procedural requirements set forth in BMC Title 14A shall be required. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.070 Condition of ministerial errors.

The director may at any time amend an administrative decision to correct ministerial errors clearly identifiable from the public record. Such a correction does not affect any time limit provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.080 Administrative interpretations.

A. The director shall be authorized to interpret the meaning of words, phrases and sentences which relate to the determining of uses permitted in the various districts, approval or disapproval of development plans, or other related zoning actions.

B. The director may permit a use in a zone that is not listed as permitted or conditional in the zone, if the director determines the use is consistent with the intent of the zone, the applicable goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, and has similar characteristics and impacts to the other uses listed as permitted or conditional in the zone; provided, that the use is not prohibited or listed as permitted or conditional in another zone.

C. An administrative interpretation may be appealed using the process set forth in BMC Title 14A.

D. Should a conflict occur between the provisions of this title or between this title and the laws, regulations, codes or rules promulgated by another authority having jurisdiction within the city, the most restrictive requirement shall be applied, except when constrained by federal or state law, or where specifically provided otherwise in this code.

E. In all cases this title shall be interpreted and applied in a manner which is consistent with, and best implements the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.090 Zoning for annexed land.

At the time of any parcel of land being annexed to the city, the property shall be zoned consistent with the Burlington zoning districts and the comprehensive plan amended if necessary. Application for the rezone and necessary amendment may be done simultaneously with the request for annexation. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.100 Relationship to other titles, chapters and codes.

The administrative provisions of BMC Title 14A shall apply to requests for project permits under this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.110 Violation and penalties.

A. All acts or omissions in violation of any provision contained within this title, or acts or omissions that cause or contribute to a violation of any provision contained within this title, are hereby determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance. Further, as specified in chapter 1.24 BMC, such acts or omissions shall be subject to enforcement fines and abatement under chapter 8.12 BMC, criminal penalties as set forth in chapter 1.24 BMC, penalties for civil infractions as set forth in chapter 1.34 BMC, or civil violations as set forth in chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. It is a violation of this title for any person to initiate or maintain or cause to be initiated or maintained the use of any structure, land or property within the city without first obtaining the permits or authorization required for the use by this title.

C. It is a violation of this title for any person to use, construct, locate, demolish or cause to be used, constructed, located, or demolished any structure, land or property within the city in any manner that is not permitted by the terms of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this title; provided, that the terms or conditions are explicitly stated on the permit or the approved plans.

D. It is a violation of this title to remove or deface any sign, notice, complaint or order required by or posted in accordance with BMC Title 15 or this title.

E. It is a violation of this title to misrepresent any material fact in any application, plans or other information submitted to obtain any land use authorization.

F. It is a violation of this title for anyone to fail to comply with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.115 Duty to enforce.

A. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce this title. The director may call upon the police, fire, health or other appropriate city departments to assist in enforcement.

B. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the director may, with the consent of the owner or occupier of a building or premises, or pursuant to a lawfully issued warrant, enter any building or premises subject to the consent or warrant to perform the duties imposed by the zoning code.

C. This title shall be enforced for the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

D. It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner, occupier or other person responsible for the condition of the land and buildings within the scope of this code.

E. No provision of or term used in this code is intended to impose any duty upon the city or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.120 Appeal.

Appeals of decisions made pursuant to this title shall be subject to the procedures and regulations set forth in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.01.125 Severability.

If my portion of this title is found to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such finding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other section of this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.05 DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT, MAPS AND BOUNDARIES

Sections:

17.05.010    Title.

17.05.020    Application.

17.05.030    Purpose.

17.05.040    Authority.

17.05.050    Districts established.

17.05.060    District boundaries – Established.

17.05.070    District boundaries – Shown on zoning map.

17.05.080    District boundaries – Rules for interpretation.

17.05.090    Conformity with district regulations required.

17.05.100    Adoption of special planning areas map.


17.05.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “District Establishment, Maps and Boundaries.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all zoning in the city and all zoning actions as specified in this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.030 Purpose.

This chapter sets forth the zoning classifications for the city and general provisions applicable to such classifications. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.040 Authority.

This chapter is created pursuant to the authority set forth in BMC 17.01.040, chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.050 Districts established.

The city is divided into a number of zoning districts in order to implement the city’s comprehensive plan and to classify, segregate, and regulate the uses of land, buildings, and structures. Each zoning district, and its corresponding comprehensive plan designation, is shown below.

	Comprehensive Plan Designation	Zoning Designation

	SF-D (Single-Family and Duplex)	R-1-6.0

R-1-7.6

R-1-8.4

R-1-9.6

R-2

	M-F (Multifamily Residential)	R-3

	OSPA (Open Space, Parks, and Agriculture)	OSP

	C-B (Commercial Business)	B-1

C-1

MR-NB

R-S

	HC-I (Heavy Commercial and Industrial)	C-2

M-1

BP

(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.060 District boundaries – Established.

The boundaries of such use districts as are shown upon any zoning map adopted by this title, or amendments thereto, are adopted and approved and the regulations of this title governing the uses of land, buildings and structures, the height of buildings and structures, setbacks, and other matters as set forth in this title are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every use district shown upon each zoning map. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.070 District boundaries – Shown on zoning map.

The boundaries of use districts shall be determined and defined or redefined from time to time, by the adoption of zoning maps covering the city and showing the geographical area and location of said use districts. Each zoning map shall be, upon its final adoption, a part of the zoning ordinance codified in this title, and said map, and all notations, references and other information shown thereon, thereafter shall be as much a part of this title as though all matters and information set forth on said map were fully described in this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.080 District boundaries – Rules for interpretation.

When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any use district shown on zoning maps, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of a street, alley, highway, public right-of-way, or railroad the actual centerline shall be construed to be the boundary.

B. Where district boundaries are indicated as running approximately parallel to the centerline of a street, alley, highway, public right-of-way, or railroad the boundary line shall be construed to be parallel to the centerline.

C. Where districts, or district boundaries, appear to follow both sides of, and thereby exclude from designation, a street, alley, highway, public right-of-way, or railroad the boundaries of the adjoining districts shall be construed to extend to the centerline. Where the same zoning designation is present on both sides of such a feature, that zoning designation shall be construed to extend across the feature.

D. Where district boundaries are indicated on such map as approximately following the lot or tract lines, the actual lot or tract lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such use district.

E. Where a district boundary on such zoning map divides a tract in unsubdivided property, the location of such use district boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions thereon, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on such zoning map.

F. Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the abutting property to which the vacated portion shall revert shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

G. In case uncertainty exists which cannot be determined by application of the foregoing rules, the hearing examiner upon application by the city or affected property owner shall recommend, and the city council shall determine, the location of such use district boundaries. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.090 Conformity with district regulations required.

Except as otherwise provided in this title:

A. All development within the city of Burlington shall be consistent with the requirements of this title. An exemption from a requirement to obtain a permit shall not be construed as an exemption from compliance with other applicable requirements.

B. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used, or modified to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use listed in this title or amendments thereto or permitted in the use district in which such land, building, structure or premises is located.

C. No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any building or structure be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area, setback and height regulations established by this title or amendments thereto for the use district in which such building or structure is located.

D. No setback or other open spaces provided about any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this title or amendments thereto shall be considered as providing a setback or open space for any other building or structure.

E. If a use is not listed as permitted or conditional in a district, but is listed as permitted or conditional in one or more other districts, it shall be considered a prohibited use in the district in which it is unlisted. If a use is not listed as permitted or conditional in any district it shall be considered a conditional use unless the director determines the use is substantially similar to and has the same characteristics, functions, and impacts as a use listed as permitted in the district in which it is being considered. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.05.100 Adoption of special planning areas map.

The special planning areas map, adopted as part of the Burlington comprehensive plan, is hereby adopted as part of the zoning code for the purpose of identifying the location of areas where there may be specific additional regulations under the applicable chapter of this code. See Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this section. The following descriptions apply to the special planning areas:

A. Downtown. This area encompasses the original downtown of Burlington and adjacent areas that are directly linked to the main street, Fairhaven Avenue. The intent is to implement the downtown plan, encourage new activity, and gradually retrofit the area to enhance the focus on customer service retail, office and restaurant, keeping medical uses east of Anacortes Street and north of Fairhaven Avenue.

B. North and South Entrance Areas. These areas are uniquely constrained by freeway interchanges and major interchanges including the Skagit River Bridge and, as a result, have traffic problems that may require study and mitigation. High traffic generating uses are discouraged.

C. Retail Core. This area is the shopping and entertainment district that attracts regional traffic. Drive-ins are limited to tenant pads and signalized intersection, banks are limited to multiple-tenant buildings, gas stations, car washes and automobile sales are prohibited and vehicle repair is limited to side streets.

D. West Side Commercial Area. This area provides a wide array of uses, but the emphasis in terms of overall land use is on vehicle sales and related activities. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.15 R-1 LAND USE DISTRICTS

Sections:

17.15.010    Title.

17.15.020    Application.

17.15.030    Purpose.

17.15.040    Authority.

17.15.050    District subdivisions designated.

17.15.060    Permitted primary uses.

17.15.070    Permitted accessory uses.

17.15.080    Conditional uses.

17.15.090    Additional regulations.

17.15.100    Development standards.

17.15.105    Cluster developments.

17.15.110    Residential small lot.


17.15.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “R-1 Land Use Districts.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated R-1. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.030 Purpose.

The primary purpose of the R-1 district is to accommodate lower density residential development and compatible accessory uses. Development in the R-1 district should generally be limited to single-family dwellings and detached structures. Other uses and structures may be appropriate in limited circumstances when not inconsistent with the primary purpose of the zone. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A and 36.70B RCW, and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.050 District subdivisions designated.

District R-1 is further subdivided into subdistricts differing only in the requirements for minimum lot area:

	Subdistrict	Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit

	R-l-6.0	6,000 sq. ft.

	R-1-7.6	7,600 sq. ft.

	R-1-8.4	8,400 sq. ft.

	R-1-9.6	9,600 sq. ft.

In addition residential small lots with a minimum lot area of 3,000 square feet may be developed in any subdistrict in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in BMC 17.15.110. The minimum lot area requirements and density limits identified in this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.060 Permitted primary uses.

Buildings, structures, and lots in the R-l district shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Single-family dwelling units; provided, that no more than one single-family dwelling unit shall be permitted on a single lot;

B. Municipal parks and playgrounds;

C. Boarding houses accommodating 10 persons or less. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.070 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Normal residential appurtenances. The following uses and structures may be authorized as an accessory use in conjunction with a residential dwelling: garage, guest cottage, recreation room, storage shed, noncommercial greenhouse, decks, driveway, on-site utilities and utility connections, fences, and swimming pool;

B. Keeping of not more than six household pets, four of which may be dogs, kept in the home. This limit shall not include birds, fish or suckling young of pets;

C. Family day care homes;

D. Foster family care homes accessory to a dwelling unit;

E. Accessory dwelling units associated with a single-family dwelling unit subject to the following approval criteria:

1. The general appearance and character of the single-family residence shall be maintained.

2. New entrances shall face the side or rear property lines.

3. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable standards set forth in BMC 17.85.070.

4. Accessory dwelling units shall be contained within, or attached to, the existing single-family home. A detached accessory building may only be used as an accessory dwelling unit if the subject lot is 12,000 square feet or larger.

5. The primary dwelling or the accessory dwelling shall be occupied by the owner. The residence must have been owner occupied for at least three years since the construction date. A covenant or declaration regarding ownership requirements shall be recorded with the Skagit County auditor.

6. In all cases the accessory dwelling unit must be located on the same lot as the single-family dwelling it is associated with;

F. Telecommunication micro facility, subject to the following requirements, except as limited by the Telecommunication Act of 1996 as amended:

1. Micro facility shall be located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures. A micro facility may locate on buildings and structures; provided, that the interior wall or ceiling immediately adjacent to the facility is not designated residential space.

2. Antennas equal to or less than four feet in height (except omnidirectional antennas which can be up to six feet in height) and with an area of not more than 580 square inches in the aggregate (e.g., one-foot diameter parabola or two-foot by one-and-one-half-foot panel as viewed from any one point) are exempt from the height limitation of the zone in which they are located. Structures which are nonconforming with respect to height may be used for the placement of omnidirectional antennas providing they do not extend more than six feet above the existing structure. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure.

3. The micro facility shall be exempt from design review if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

4. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

5. Micro facilities for a specific wireless provided shall be separated by a distance equal to or greater than 1,320 linear feet from other micro facilities of the same wireless provider. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.080 Conditional uses.

The following uses shall require a conditional use permit:

A. Mini commercial child day care center;

B. Commercial child day care center, if located on an arterial;

C. Duplex on a corner lot in any residential zone; provided, that a duplex shall be located no closer than 300 feet from another duplex, measured along the right-of-way; except that when the blocks are more than 300 feet long, duplexes shall not be limited to the corner as long as they are located no closer than 300 feet to another duplex;

D. Government facilities, other than those listed as a permitted use;

E. Kennels;

F. Manufactured home park;

G. Neighborhood recreational buildings and facilities;

H. Private country clubs and golf courses, excluding driving ranges;

I. Religious facilities and fraternal organizations;

J. Schools;

K. Utility substations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.090 Additional regulations.

A. Manufactured homes may be placed on any lot in an R-1 zone and regulated in accordance with the same standards and requirements applicable to site built single-family homes, except that the following additional regulations shall apply. These standards and requirements do not apply to legally established, nonconforming manufactured homes or manufactured homes placed within a manufactured home park.

1. The manufactured home shall be set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and the space between the bottom of the home and the ground shall be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which may be either load bearing or decorative;

2. The manufactured home shall have been originally constructed with and shall now have a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal 3:12 pitch;

3. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding similar in appearance to siding materials commonly used on conventional site-built uniform building code single-family residences;

4. The placement of the manufactured home shall be consistent with all other regulatory requirements generally applicable to new homes.

B. Accessory Buildings.

1. All accessory buildings shall be located behind the primary structure, and individually, or cumulatively, shall not cover more than 50 percent of the required rear setback area for the primary structure; and

2. All accessory buildings shall comply with the setback, height, and size limits specified in BMC 17.15.100(E).

C. Horses, beef cattle or other domestic farm animals are permitted on the condition that the number of animals not exceed a ratio of one per one-half acre of fenced pasture area. The keeping of mink, goats, foxes or hogs is prohibited.

D. No trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, camping trailer, fifth wheel, camper, van, car, or other similar type of mobile unit that is not a permanent structure attached to the ground, shall be used as a place of habitation. Only site built structures which comply with all applicable building code requirements and manufactured or modular homes which meet applicable state or federal standards for use as a dwelling unit may be used as a place of habitation.

E. All uses and developments shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in chapter 17.85 BMC.

F. Junk and inoperable vehicles shall not be stored outdoors unless completely surrounded by a solid, site obscuring fence and not visible from an adjoining street or public right-of-way. Outdoor storage shall also be subject to the following additional restrictions and requirements:

1. Litter, trash, used appliances, used interior furnishings and discarded exterior furnishings and similar items are prohibited outdoors regardless of location.

2. Junk storage is further limited to piled used lumber, yard cleanup equipment and similar types of items; it is not intended to include the storage of any items that would be classified as a nuisance under chapter 8.12 BMC. Whenever it is stated in writing by two or more persons having separate residences in a neighborhood that any person is violating the provisions of this subsection, the police chief or designee shall investigate, and, if appropriate, advise the person of the complaint and that such violations must cease. Failure to comply shall constitute a violation of this code.

G. Where alley access is available, parking shall be located off the alley and no curb cuts shall be permitted. This requirement shall apply to all land divisions, the construction of new homes and accessory buildings, and requests for curb cuts to serve existing homes and accessory buildings.

H. Home occupations are allowed subject to compliance with BMC 17.70.090.

I. Heat pumps or other noise-producing mechanical equipment shall not be located within 10 feet of a property line abutting another lot and all equipment shall be equipped with a noise-baffling screen so that there shall be no audible sound at the property line.

J. New subdivisions with 40 or more lots shall provide common open space, a playground or a park. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.100 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and boundary line adjustments in the R-1 zone except that small lot development shall be subject to the standards and requirements set forth in BMC 17.15.110 and cluster developments shall be subject to the standards in BMC 17.15.105.

1. Minimum Lot Area.

a. R-l-6.0: 6,000 square feet.

b. R-l-7.6: 7,600 square feet.

c. R-l-8.4: 8,400 square feet.

d. R-l-9.6: 9,600 square feet.

2. Minimum lot width: 30 feet.

3. Minimum lot depth: 80 feet.

B. Minimum Setback Requirements.

1. Front: 17 feet.

2. Street side: 20 feet.

3. Side: five feet. Provided, that the total of the two side yards shall not be less than 15 feet.

4. Rear: 20 feet.

5. Setback Exceptions.

a. Accessory buildings: see subsection (E) of this section.

b. All other buildings and structures: see BMC 17.70.080.

6. Minimum Building Separation. All detached structures shall be subject to a minimum building separation of 10 feet.

C. Maximum Building and Impervious Surface Coverage.

1. Building coverage: 35 percent.

2. Impervious surface coverage: 40 percent.

D. Maximum Building Height. Buildings and structures in the R-1 zones shall be subject to the following maximum height limits, except that spire, fleche, campanile or high nave, a dome and lantern, or a clock tower may exceed these limits if authorized by a conditional use permit.

1. Primary structures: 35 feet.

2. Accessory structures: 20 feet, see table in subsection (E) of this section.

E. Accessory buildings and structures shall not cover more than 50 percent of the required rear yard setback and shall comply with the following requirements:

 

	Lot Size	Maximum Building Size	Setback	Maximum Eave Height at Minimum Setback Line

	Up to 9,600 square feet	640 square feet	5 feet	12 feet

	9,601 – 10,890 square feet (1/4 acre)	960 square feet	7 feet	12 feet

	10,891 – 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre)	1,200 square feet	10 feet	12 feet

	21,781 – 43,560 (1 acre)	1,600 square feet	12 feet	12 feet

	> 43,560 (1 acre)	2,000 square feet	15 feet	15 feet

(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.105 Cluster developments.

Cluster developments may be permitted through a subdivision or short subdivision process. For such developments, the normally applicable requirements for lot width and lot width at the building line, lot depth, lot area, building and impervious surface coverage, and property line setbacks may be reduced or altered; provided, that:

A. Housing types may include single-family detached, townhouses, zero lot line, multifamily, or a combination of housing types; provided, that no structure or building shall contain more than eight dwelling units.

B. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within the boundaries of the subdivision or short subdivision shall not exceed the number permitted by the zoning district in which the subdivision or short subdivision is located.

C. When the building or impervious surface coverage of individual lots exceeds the permissible limits for the zone in which the development is located, additional open space areas shall be set aside so that the total coverage of development is consistent with the coverage limits prescribed by the underlying zone.

D. The resulting subdivision or short subdivision design shall clearly retain a substantial area of continuous, publicly accessible open space, wetlands, areas adjacent to wetlands, steep slopes, geologically hazardous areas, wildlife habitat areas, or other critical areas. Cluster developments may also be authorized if the resulting open space area(s) is used for nonstructural low impact development features, such as bioretention areas, which mimic natural environmental and hydrologic processes. All such low impact development features shall be extensively landscaped using native vegetation.

E. Lot size reductions shall be limited to 20 percent of the minimum lot size required by the zoning district in which the subdivision or short subdivision is located. For example, if the underlying zoning has a minimum lot size of 9,600 square feet, the maximum reduction in lot size is 1,920 square feet, or a minimum lot size of 7,680 square feet.

F. When deviations from lot size and dimension requirements are granted, restrictive plat notes shall be included prohibiting future divisions or adjustments if such divisions or adjustments would have the effect of increasing the overall density of the subdivision or short subdivision.

G. Open space areas created through a cluster development shall be placed within separate tracts.

H. Restrictive notes shall be included on the face of the plat, or short plat, limiting future use and development of open space tracts to uses and developments that are consistent with the intended purpose of the open space tracts. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.15.110 Residential small lot.

Residential small lots may be created in any R-1 zone through a subdivision or short subdivision process if the following requirements are met:

A. Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet.

B. Maximum height limit: 20 feet.

C. All structures placed on a residential small lot shall have a pitched roof as follows:

1. Structures with finished living space on only one floor shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4:12.

2. Structures with finished living space on more than one floor shall have a minimum roof pitch of 12:12.

D. Maximum structure depth: 60 feet. Garages, decks, balconies, and bay windows shall be excluded from measurement for the purposes of this provision.

E. Setback Requirements.

1. Front: 17 feet. The front setback for residential small lots may be reduced to 10 feet through the subdivision or short subdivision process if alley access is provided and setback requirements are noted on the face of the plat.

2. Street side: 20 feet.

3. Rear: 10 feet.

4. Side: five feet.

F. Maximum building coverage: 45 percent.

G. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60 percent.

H. Small lot subdivisions and short subdivisions shall include restrictive plat notes identifying the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.20 R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS

Sections:

17.20.010    Title.

17.20.020    Application.

17.20.030    Purpose.

17.20.040    Authority.

17.20.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.20.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.20.070    Conditional uses.

17.20.080    Additional regulations.

17.20.090    Development regulations.

17.20.100    Cluster developments.

17.20.105    Residential small lot.


17.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “R-2 Two-Family Residence Districts.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated R-2. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.030 Purpose.

The R-2, two-family residence, zone is intended to permit up to two dwelling units on a single lot at moderate densities above those permitted in the R-1 zones, but below those permitted in the R-3 zone. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63A, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.050 Permitted primary uses.

Any use listed as a permitted use in the R-1 zone shall be considered a permitted use in the R-2 zone. The following additional uses shall also be considered permitted uses in the R-2 zone:

A. Two-family (duplex) dwellings; provided, that no more than one duplex building shall be permitted on a single lot. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.060 Permitted accessory uses.

Any use identified as a permitted accessory use in the R-1 zone shall be considered a permitted accessory use in the R-2 zone, subject to any standards identified in BMC 17.15.070. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.070 Conditional uses.

Any use listed as a conditional use in the R-1 zone may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-2 zone subject to the procedural requirements applicable to conditional use permits. The following additional uses may also be permitted as conditional uses in the R-2 zone:

A. Boarding houses accommodating more than 10 persons;

B. Duplexes, more than one per lot;

C. Museums;

D. Nursing homes;

E. Utility substations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.080 Additional regulations.

All structures, uses, and developments located in the R-2 zone shall be subject to the “additional regulations” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.090). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.090 Development regulations.

All structures, uses, and developments shall comply with the “development standards” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.100) except as follows:

A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and boundary line adjustments in the R-2 zone except that small lot development shall be subject to the standards and requirements in BMC 17.15.110 and cluster developments shall be subject to the standards and requirements in BMC 17.15.105.

1. Minimum lot area: 7,600 square feet.

2. Minimum lot width: 70 feet.

B. Maximum Building and Impervious Surface Coverage.

1. Building coverage: 40 percent.

2. Impervious surface coverage: 60 percent. See table in BMC 17.15.100(C).

All other area and dimensional regulations shall be the same as those identified in the R-1 zone. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.100 Cluster developments.

Cluster developments may be permitted in the R-2 zone as part of the subdivision or short subdivision process subject to the applicable provisions set forth in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.105). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.20.105 Residential small lot.

Residential small lots may be created in an R-2 zone through a subdivision or short subdivision process subject to the applicable provisions set forth in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.110). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.25 R-3 MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS

Sections:

17.25.010    Title.

17.25.020    Application.

17.25.030    Purpose.

17.25.040    Authority.

17.25.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.25.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.25.070    Conditional uses.

17.25.080    Additional regulations.

17.25.090    Development standards.

17.25.100    Cluster developments.

17.25.105    Residential small lot.


17.25.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “R-3 Multifamily Residence Districts.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated R-3. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.030 Purpose.

The R-3 district is intended to accommodate a variety of higher density housing types, including, but not limited to, attached townhomes, multifamily apartment buildings, and duplexes. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63A, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.050 Permitted primary uses.

Any use listed as a permitted use in the R-1 or R-2 zone shall be considered a permitted use in the R-3 zone. The following additional uses shall also be considered permitted uses in the R-3 zone:

A. Multifamily dwellings. The construction and development of multifamily dwellings shall be subject to the following requirements:

1. Parking areas shall be screened from the street.

2. Pedestrian access shall be provided throughout the site and shall provide a complete and logical circulation system that connects each dwelling unit with streets, adjoining developments, parking areas, common areas, and recreation areas. Any additional pedestrian access circulation and access requirements identified in chapter 17.85 BMC (Access, Parking and Loading) shall also be addressed.

3. Trash and recycling areas and containers shall be fully enclosed and screened from view with a solid site obscuring fence or wall and gate. Trash and recycling containers shall not be visible from adjoining public streets or adjacent properties.

4. Developments with 40 or more units shall provide a children’s play area(s) at a rate of 225 square feet plus 20 additional square feet for each unit.

5. Developments with 40 or more units shall provide common open space for passive or active recreation at the rate of 50 square feet per unit.

6. Laundry and storage facilities shall be provided, either in each unit or in a central facility.

7. Exterior lighting shall be provided for parking areas, access streets and pedestrian walkways. Lighting shall be designed to direct light away from residential units to prevent glare. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.060 Permitted accessory uses.

Any use identified as a permitted accessory use in the R-1 or R-2 zone shall be considered a permitted accessory use in the R-3 zone, subject to any standards identified in BMC 17.15.070. The following additional uses shall also be considered permitted accessory uses in the R-3 zone:

A. Telecommunication mini facility, subject to the following requirements:

1. The mini facility may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The mini facility shall be exempt from design review if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Mini facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 10 feet, or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 10 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing nonconforming building and blends in architecturally with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.070 Conditional uses.

Any use listed as a conditional use in the R-1 or R-2 zone may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-3 zone subject to the procedural requirements applicable to conditional use permits. The following additional uses may also be permitted as conditional uses in the R-3 zone:

A. Commercial child day care center;

B. Health care facilities;

C. Professional offices;

D. Government facilities, other than those listed as a permitted use. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.080 Additional regulations.

All structures, uses, and developments located in the R-3 zone shall be subject to the “additional regulations” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.090). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.090 Development standards.

All structures, uses, and developments shall comply with the “development regulations” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.100) except as follows:

A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and boundary line adjustments and not to the use of existing lots:

1. Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.

2. Minimum lot width: 60 feet.

3. Minimum lot depth: 80 feet.

B. Maximum Density. The maximum permissible density for multifamily development shall be calculated as follows: one unit per lot plus one additional unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area; provided, that additional density may be permitted through the agricultural heritage credit program.

C. Maximum building and impervious surface coverage: 70 percent.

D. Maximum building height: 35 feet.

E. Minimum Building Separation.

1. Between primary structures located on the same lot: 30 feet.

2. Between primary structures and accessory structures: 10 feet.

F. Maximum Building Dimension. In no instance shall the greatest dimension of a multifamily building exceed 150 feet, measured parallel to exterior building walls.

G. Maximum Building Gross Floor Area. In no instance shall the gross floor area exceed 8,000 square feet for any multifamily building. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.100 Cluster developments.

Cluster developments may be permitted in the R-3 zone as part of the subdivision or short subdivision process subject to the applicable provisions set forth in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.105). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.25.105 Residential small lot.

Residential small lots may be created in an R-3 zone through a subdivision or short subdivision process subject to the applicable provisions set forth in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.110). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.30 R-S SEMI-PUBLIC DISTRICT

Sections:

17.30.010    Title.

17.30.020    Application.

17.30.030    Purpose.

17.30.040    Authority.

17.30.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.30.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.30.070    Conditional uses.

17.30.080    Additional regulations.

17.30.090    Development standards.


17.30.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “R-S Semi-Public District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated R-S. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.030 Purpose.

The R-S residential office zone encompasses Burlington’s original town site and is intended to permit a mixture of residential and office uses that are compatible in design and character with adjacent residential uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.050 Permitted primary uses.

Any use listed as a permitted use in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 zone shall be considered a permitted use in the R-S zone. The following additional uses shall also be considered permitted uses in the R-S zone:

A. Professional offices. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.060 Permitted accessory uses.

Any use identified as a permitted accessory use in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zone shall be considered a permitted accessory use in the R-S zone, subject to any standards identified in BMC 17.15.070. The following additional uses shall also be considered permitted accessory uses in the R-S zone:

A. Accessory buildings or uses incidental and subordinate to primary permitted commercial use, including but not limited to: garages solely for the storage and servicing of vehicles of occupants of the building; restaurants or cafeterias primarily for the convenience of the occupants of the building; printing of materials necessary in the operation of the primary business and not used for the conduct of a general printing business; sample display sales rooms; or similar accessory uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.070 Conditional uses.

Any use listed as a conditional use in the R-1 or R-2 zone may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-S zone subject to the procedural requirements applicable to conditional use permits. The following additional uses may also be permitted as conditional uses in the R-S zone:

A. Multifamily housing at densities higher than those allowed in the R-3 zone. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.080 Additional regulations.

All structures, uses and developments located in the R-S zone shall be subject to the “additional regulations” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.090) except as noted below.

A. No operation shall be permitted in the R-S district which creates smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, noise, glare, heat, odor, gases, vibrations, electrical radiation or interference or any other evidence of nuisance which is detectable at objectionable levels at the property lines. The performance standards of chapter 17.70 BMC shall provide the criteria for measurement of such nuisances.

B. Parking shall be provided as required by chapter 17.85 BMC (Access, Parking and Loading).

C. Signs and signage shall comply with the regulations identified in chapter 17.95 BMC (Signs).

D. All parking areas and storage yards shall be fully screened from view. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.30.090 Development standards.

All structures, uses, and developments shall comply with the “development regulations” identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.100) except as follows:

A. Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. This requirement shall apply to land divisions and boundary line adjustments and not to the use of existing lots.

B. Minimum setback requirements: All buildings, structures, and development shall be subject to the minimum setback requirements identified in the R-1 zone (BMC 17.15.100).

C. Maximum Floor Area Ratio. Nonresidential buildings shall be limited to a maximum floor area ratio of one square foot of building floor area for every three square feet of lot area. Nonresidential buildings with greater floor area ratios may be approved through a conditional use permit process.

D. Maximum building height: 45 feet, except that spire, fleche, campanile or high nave, a dome and lantern, or a clock tower may exceed these limits if authorized by a conditional use permit.

E. Minimum Building Separation.

1. Between primary structures located on the same lot: 30 feet.

2. Between primary structures and accessory structures: 10 feet. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.35 OSP OPEN SPACE AND PARKS DISTRICT

Sections:

17.35.010    Title.

17.35.020    Application.

17.35.030    Purpose.

17.35.040    Authority.

17.35.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.35.060    Conditional uses.

17.35.070    Permitted accessory uses.

17.35.080    Development standards.


17.35.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “OSP Open Space and Parks District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated OSP. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.030 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage desirable and appropriate land uses in areas of the city which by reason of location, soil, topographic or flooding characteristics, public ownership, wetlands, wildlife habitat, or values to the community for scenic, recreation, agricultural, forest, or open space, are not suited to intensive land development patterns as determined by the comprehensive plan and may require specific management or development techniques. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.050 Permitted primary uses.

Buildings, structures, and parcels of land shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Agriculture, including crop land but specifically excluding livestock and poultry, machinery and equipment sheds or barns;

B. Conservation areas including forest, wetlands and wildlife preserves;

C. Parks, natural scenic areas, trails, walking and bicycle paths, excluding commercial amusement devices or operations;

D. Playgrounds or playfields;

E. Reclamation areas limited to soil, forest, wildlife, special flood risk or wetland;

F. Community centers, recreational buildings, band shells and similar facilities;

G. Existing agricultural uses;

H. Existing single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.060 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when a conditional use permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this code:

A. Uses similar to and compatible with permitted uses. Conditional uses may not decrease the openness or interfere with the scenic or habitat value of the land.

B. Installation of various public utilities into or across open space zones, and clearing of a vegetated natural area for one of the permitted uses listed above, subject to the following:

1. In addition to the conditional use criteria of BMC 14A.05.140, it shall be shown that the intrusion is necessary to provide services to the open space for public benefit or safety; or for physical or technical reasons, and that no reasonable alternative is practicable.

2. The design and plan shall create the minimum of surface and vegetation disturbance necessary to accomplish its purpose.

3. Undergrounding of utilities shall be encouraged and required where site characteristics are suitable.

C. Publicly owned golf courses and associated clubhouses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.070 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Restrooms, storage buildings and refreshment stands associated with parks, playgrounds, and playfields;

B. Parking facilities to support a permitted use identified in this chapter. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.35.080 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension. The following requirements shall apply to land divisions and boundary line adjustments and not to the use of existing lots:

1. Minimum lot area: 40 acres.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Minimum Setback Requirements.

1. Buildings and other structures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any lot in a residential zone.

2. Sports play areas and parking lots shall be located to minimize disruption of nearby residential uses.

C. Maximum building height: 20 feet. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.40 MR-NB MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AND NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

17.40.010    Title.

17.40.020    Application.

17.40.030    Purpose.

17.40.040    Authority.

17.40.050    Primary permitted uses.

17.40.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.40.070    Conditional uses.

17.40.080    Additional regulations.

17.40.090    Development standards.


17.40.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “MR-NB Medium Density Residential and Neighborhood Business District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated MR-NB. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.030 Purpose.

This area is intended to provide a mixed use zone for residences, business and other commercial uses that are not high traffic generators and that provide limited customer services on the premises, in areas that may already be mixed use in character because of a fragmented zoning pattern, or residential areas that are in transition as a result of changes in the arterial street network. Reuse of existing buildings is encouraged. This is a mixed use, medium density residential and neighborhood business district that allows more than one use on a lot, but requires that commercial uses be compatible with residential uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.050 Primary permitted uses.

A. Multifamily dwellings;

B. Art, music and dance studios;

C. Artisanal uses, such as photographer, artist studio dwelling;

D. Contractor’s office and storage;

E. Laboratories, such as dental or soil testing;

F. Light industry;

G. Municipal parks and playgrounds;

H. Personal service uses such as barber and beauty shops;

I. Professional offices;

J. Fraternal organizations and religious facilities, existing;

K. Single-family dwellings;

L. Two-family dwellings;

M. Trades and subcontractors such as plumbing, electrical, HVAC;

N. Utilities;

O. Woodworking uses complying with the International Building Code exception from hazardous occupancies. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Outdoor storage that is screened with a solid fence and perimeter landscaping, accessory to the primary use;

B. Home occupations;

C. Family day care homes;

D. Automobile parking;

E. Foster family care homes associated with a single-family dwelling;

F. Telecommunication mini facility, subject to the following requirements, except as limited by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended:

1. The mini facility may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The mini facility shall be exempt from review by the community development director or designee if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Mini facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 10 feet, or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 10 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing nonconforming building and blends in architecturally with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.070 Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be considered conditional uses and shall require a conditional use permit:

A. Eating and drinking establishments with less than 1,000 square feet of floor area;

B. Commercial child day care center;

C. Fraternal organizations and religious facilities. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.080 Additional regulations.

A. Uses generating noise levels incompatible with residential occupancy shall not be permitted and the following regulations shall apply to all uses:

1. Truck loading activities and similar noisy activities shall be prohibited except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

2. Uses such as music and dance studios shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building and an approved acoustical wall installed to prevent excessive noise at the property line, or if in a mixed use building, to provide a noise barrier between the commercial and residential occupancy. Sound transmission control ratings compatible with mixed uses shall be required in construction.

B. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, including medical waste, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use, subject to the requirements of the International Fire Code.

C. Parking areas shall be fully screened from view and shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements identified in chapter 17.80 BMC.

D. Drive-in uses are prohibited.

E. Parking area illumination shall be directed away from residential uses.

F. Assembly uses shall require approval from the planning, police and fire departments for all special events. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.40.090 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot area: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum Density. New residential development, and the addition of dwelling units to existing residential structures, shall be subject to the following standards:

1. Dwelling Units per Building. A multifamily building shall not contain more than eight dwelling units;

2. Maximum Density. The maximum permissible density for multifamily development shall be calculated as follows: one unit per lot plus one additional unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area; provided, that additional density may be permitted through the agricultural heritage credit program.

C. Minimum Setback Requirements.

1. Front: 17 feet.

2. Side: 5 feet.

3. Street: 20 feet.

4. Rear: 10 feet.

5. Setback Exceptions. Buildings or structures which do not conform to the setback standards identified above may be expanded or modified; provided, that any wall or facade which extends into a required setback may be further extended along the established building line but may not extend further into the required setback;

D. Maximum building and impervious surface coverage: none.

E. Maximum building height: 35 feet. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.45 B-1 BUSINESS DISTRICT

Sections:

17.45.010    Title.

17.45.020    Application.

17.45.030    Purpose.

17.45.040    Authority.

17.45.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.45.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.45.070    Conditional uses.

17.45.080    Additional regulations.

17.45.090    Development standards.


17.45.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “B-l Business District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all areas zoned B-1. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.030 Purpose.

The B-l zone should be applied to the historic city center. This area has traditionally served as the city’s center for financial, commercial, government, and professional services. This area also provides the greatest concentration of cultural amenities and pedestrian oriented commercial enterprises.

The purpose of the B-1 zone, and the following regulations, is to preserve and enhance the unique characteristics of the historic city center by encouraging the preservation, expansion, and establishment of smaller scale, pedestrian oriented businesses and uses, and by discouraging or prohibiting incompatible uses such as gas stations, outdoor storage yards, and drive-through uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.050 Permitted primary uses.

Hereafter all buildings, structures, or parcels of land shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Administrative offices, provided they are located in a multistory building the ground floor of which must contain another permitted use listed in this section;

B. Multifamily dwellings, provided they are located in a multistory building, the ground floor of which must contain another permitted use as listed in this section;

C. Art, music and photography studios;

D. Automotive parts and accessories;

E. Customer service office, excluding drive-in facilities;

F. General personal and household retail sales and service;

G. Hotels;

H. Major durables, sales, service and rentals;

I. Health care facilities, provided such uses shall be prohibited along Fairhaven Avenue;

J. Multipurpose convenience store;

K. Eating and drinking establishments;

L. Schools, including art, business, barber, beauty, dancing, martial arts and music;

M. Specialty food store;

N. Theaters, except drive-in. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Accessory buildings or multi-building developments with uses complementary and related to a dominant or primary use; provided control of building design, location and site development is retained by the dominant use. In such coordinated developments the site area requirement shall apply to the group of buildings and the yard requirements to the site perimeter; provided, that construction of warehouse space accessory to another use shall be required to provide landscaping, comply with design review standards and shall not be permitted to be an all-metal building;

B. Automobile parking;

C. Outdoor seating associated with an eating and drinking establishment;

D. Caretaker apartment;

E. Macro telecommunication facilities, subject to the following standards:

1. Macro facilities may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The macro facility shall be exempt from review by the director if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Macro facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 15 feet, or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 15 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing building and architecturally blends in with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.070 Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be considered conditional uses and shall require a conditional use permit:

A. Administrative offices located on the ground floor;

B. Multifamily dwellings without a permitted ground floor use;

C. Arcades;

D. Utility substations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.080 Additional regulations.

A. Off-Street Parking and Loading Area Requirements. See chapter 17.85 BMC.

B. All uses shall be conducted entirely within a building or structure except:

1. Automobile parking lots;

2. Display or sales of goods that do not extend eight feet past the front of the building, do not block entrances or interfere with pedestrian travel, do not interfere with the parking areas and do not encroach upon public property;

3. Outdoor seating associated with an eating and drinking establishment, theater, or other entertainment;

4. Temporary uses as permitted by the fire marshal, building official, community development director or designee or city engineer pursuant to the applicable ordinances;

5. Unloading and loading areas;

6. Utility substations;

7. Refuse and recycling containers, provided they are fully screened from view in accordance with any applicable standards set forth in this title;

8. Play areas for child day care centers and schools.

C. Any on-premises repair work shall be incidental only, and limited to repairing the types of merchandise sold on the premises. The floor area devoted to such repair work shall not exceed 30 percent of the total floor area occupied by the primary use, except that the limitations of this subsection shall not apply to electronic devices, shoe, radio, television, or other small appliance repair services.

D. Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the limited fabrication of commodities sold at retail on the premises. No outside storage is permitted.

E. Operations conducted on the premises shall not be objectionable beyond the property boundary lines by reason of noise, odor, fumes, gases, smoke, vibration, hazard, or other causes.

F. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use as regulated by International Fire Code. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.45.090 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot size: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum Density. The maximum permissible density for multifamily development shall be calculated as follows: one unit per lot plus one additional unit for every 3,000 square feet of lot area; provided, that additional density may be permitted through the agricultural heritage credit program.

C. Maximum building and impervious surface coverage: none.

D. Minimum Setback Requirements.

1. Front: none;

2. Side: none;

3. Street: none;

4. Rear: none.

E. Maximum front setback along Fairhaven Avenue: zero feet; provided, that exceptions to this requirement may be authorized when:

1. A wider sidewalk or additional landscaping is approved at the building entrance; or

2. A greater setback is necessary to maintain the continuity of the street front because of the setback line of the buildings on either side.

F. Maximum setback requirement in all other locations: 10 feet from the property line on the front and street side. The maximum setback shall apply to each lot line adjacent to a street.

G. Maximum building height: 45 feet.

H. Fences. See BMC 17.70.070.

I. Parking. Parking shall not be located between a building and a street.

J. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC.

K. Signs. See chapter 17.95 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.50 C-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

17.50.010    Title.

17.50.020    Application.

17.50.030    Purpose.

17.50.040    Authority.

17.50.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.50.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.50.070    Conditional uses.

17.50.080    Additional regulations.

17.50.090    Development standards.


17.50.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “C-1 General Commercial District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated C-1. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.030 Purpose.

The intent and objective of this classification and its application is to provide for the location of a grouping of uses which are considered compatible uses having common or similar performance standards in that they represent types of enterprises involving the rendering of services, both professional or to the person, or on-premises retail activities. This zone represents the prime commercial designation for small to moderate scale commercial activities and should be developed in a manner which is consistent with and attracts pedestrian oriented activities. This zone encourages leisure shopping and provides amenities conducive to attracting shoppers.

There are several blocks zoned C-1 general commercial in old downtown Burlington located along Fairhaven, Victoria and Washington between Burlington Boulevard and Anacortes Avenue. The goal of the commercial zoning in this area is to attract new businesses and uses, and to upgrade existing businesses and uses that enhance the district as a whole, without having an adverse impact on parking or changing the character of the area. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.050 Permitted primary uses.

Property located in downtown Burlington as mapped in the comprehensive plan that is zoned C-1 general commercial shall comply with the B-1 business district zoning regulations, unless a conditional use permit is authorized by the city council. See also BMC 17.05.100.

Hereafter all buildings, structures, or parcels of land zoned general commercial but located outside downtown Burlington shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Multifamily dwellings, provided they are located in a mixed use development with commercial on the street frontage and apartments in a separate structure or on the upper floor(s);

B. Art, music and photography studios;

C. Automotive parts and accessories sales;

D. Banking and related financial institutions, excluding drive-in facilities, and located in a building containing another permitted use;

E. Bowling alleys, bingo halls, skating rinks and other commercial recreation;

F. Bus passenger terminals;

G. Civic, social, and fraternal clubs;

H. Commercial child day care centers;

I. Existing automobile service stations;

J. Funeral homes;

K. Health care facilities;

L. Hospitals and health care, to include small animal, but does not allow outside runs or kennels;

M. Hotels;

N. Meeting rooms and/or reception facilities;

O. Nursing homes;

P. Offices;

Q. Personal and household retail sales and service;

R. Printing and publishing;

S. Religious institutions;

T. Existing single-family and duplex dwellings;

U. Eating and drinking establishments, provided drive-through uses may only be permitted through a conditional use permit process as specified in BMC 17.50.070(D);

V. Schools, including art, business, barber, beauty, dancing, martial arts and music;

W. Theaters, except drive-in;

X. Trailer parks within 1,000 feet of the Skagit River Levee, subject to the following requirements:

1. A flood evacuation plan shall be prepared by the applicant, approved by the city and posted on the site. The plan shall include the following elements at a minimum:

a. A requirement that wheels shall not be removed from units;

b. A requirement that the hitch shall not be removed from units;

c. A requirement that only quickly removable, knockdown skirting shall be used;

d. A requirement that a plan is in place to move the units out;

2. The site shall have a row of screening trees or hedge around the perimeter;

3. The site shall be designed and maintained as a permanent long-term viable use, rather than an interim use and shall meet city standards for utilities and infrastructure;

4. The site shall be located in an area where it is unlikely to create land use conflicts with either industrial or residential properties;

5. The site shall be developed to minimize drainage impacts, with gravel and lawn and minimal asphalt;

6. The site shall take advantage of FEMA recommendations for location and shall be planned for ease of evacuation in the event of flood danger;

7. Park rules shall be approved by the city and posted on the site;

8. Health department and other required permits shall be obtained for the use;

9. A children’s play area approved by the city shall be provided on the site;

Y. Other uses may be permitted by the community development director or designee if the use is determined to be consistent with the intent of the zone and substantially the same with respect to function and impacts as another use permitted in the zone; provided, that if the use is listed as permitted or conditional in another zone it shall not be permitted. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Automobile parking facilities;

B. Caretaker apartment;

C. Family day care home;

D. Foster family home;

E. Telecommunication macro facilities, subject to the following requirements:

1. Macro facilities may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The macro facility shall be exempt from review by the community development director or designee if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Macro facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectioual antennas may exceed the height limitation by 15 feet, or in the ease of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 15 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing building and architecturally blends in with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.070 Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be considered conditional uses and shall require a conditional use permit:

A. Multifamily dwellings, either single purpose or as part of a mixed use development where the street frontage is primarily residential; provided, that an additional criterion for approval is that the site is better suited for housing than commercial development. Multifamily dwellings authorized under this provision shall comply with the plan review criteria in BMC 17.25.050(A) and 17.25.090;

B. Arcades;

C. Dance halls;

D. Drive-in facilities, including banks and restaurants, when located on a tenant pad on an existing development site or at a signalized intersection;

E. Government facilities, other than those listed as a permitted use;

F. Household goods storage, provided the following requirements are met:

1. No more than two main entrances and/or exits to the building and access to the individual storage area shall be from the inside of the building;

2. Landscaping and architectural improvements required to ensure compatibility with present and potential C-1 uses in the vicinity;

3. The site does not front on Burlington Boulevard;

G. Utility substations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.080 Additional regulations.

A. All uses shall be conducted entirely within a building or structure except:

1. Automobile parking lots accessory to a permitted use;

2. Existing automobile sales and leasing areas;

3. When accessory to a permitted use, display or sales of goods that do not extend eight feet past the front of the building, do not block entrances or interfere with pedestrian travel, do not interfere with the parking areas and do not encroach upon public property;

4. Outdoor seating accessory to a permitted use;

5. Play areas accessory to a child day care center or school;

6. Refuse and recycling containers associated with a permitted use, provided they are screened from view in accordance with the requirements of chapter 17.80 BMC;

7. Temporary uses as permitted by the fire marshal, building official, community development director or designee or city engineer pursuant to the applicable ordinances;

8. Unloading and loading areas accessory to a permitted use;

9. Utility substations.

B. Any repairing done on the premises shall be incidental only, and limited to custom repairing of the types of merchandise sold on the premises at retail. The floor area devoted to such repairing shall not exceed 30 percent of the total floor area occupied by the particular enterprise, except that the limitations of this subsection shall not apply to electronic equipment, shoe, radio, television, or other small appliance repair services.

C. Storage shall be limited to accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises or materials used in the limited fabrication of commodities sold at retail on the premises.

D. Operations conducted on the premises shall not be objectionable beyond the property boundary lines by reason of noise, odor, fumes, gases, smoke, vibration, hazard, or other causes.

E. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use, subject to the requirements of the International Fire Code.

F. Parking areas shall not be located between buildings and adjoining streets.

G. Commercial land abutting directly a residential zone shall provide for a transition to the residential use as required in chapter 17.70 BMC, Supplemental Development Standards, and the following:

1. A six-foot screening fence and a 20-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling or a six-foot solid block wall and a 10-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling; and

2. Uses generating noise after 9:00 p.m. shall not be permitted, including assembly occupancies, restaurants with cocktail lounges or dance floors, all night businesses and other similar types of uses;

3. Measures shall be taken to prevent light and glare from being directed to residential uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.50.090 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot area: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum lot coverage: none required.

C. Minimum Setbacks.

1. Front: none.

2. Side: none.

3. Street: none.

4. Rear: none.

D. Maximum Setbacks.

1. Front: 10 feet.

2. Street: 10 feet.

3. Exceptions. Exceptions to the maximum setbacks identified above may be authorized in the following instances:

a. A greater setback for drive-through uses may be authorized through the conditional use permit for the drive-in use; provided, that the building shall be located as close as possible to adjoining streets and shall be set back only the distance necessary to accommodate the drive-through and any associated queuing lanes.

b. The presence of a utility easement makes compliance with the maximum setback impossible; provided, that the building shall still be located as close as possible to adjoining streets.

c. The building entrance may be set back a greater amount to accommodate a wider sidewalk or additional landscaping.

d. A greater setback is necessary to accommodate m architectural design feature, such as: a unique building entrance, outside seating area, pocket park, or similar element.

e. Deviations from the maximum setback requirements may be granted for development on irregular shaped lots where the street frontages are angular or curvilinear. In such instances buildings shall be located as close as possible to the street frontages.

f. The expansion or modification of existing buildings, when a greater setback is needed to preserve existing visual and physical access.

g. Other similar exceptions may be granted when consistent with the intent of providing a well-defined street edge and pedestrian oriented streetscape.

E. Maximum building height: 45 feet, except:

1. Buildings may exceed 45 feet if one foot of setback is provided from each property line, for each foot the building exceeds 45 feet; and

2. An additional 15 feet of height may be permitted when parking is located under the building.

F. Fences. See BMC 17.70.070.

G. Parking. See chapter 17.85 BMC.

H. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC.

I. Signs. See chapter 17.95 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.55 C-2 HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

17.55.010    Title.

17.55.020    Application.

17.55.030    Purpose.

17.55.040    Authority.

17.55.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.55.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.55.070    Conditional uses.

17.55.080    Additional regulations.

17.55.090    Development standards.


17.55.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “C-2 Heavy Commercial District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated C-2. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.030 Purpose.

The intent and objective of this classification and its application is to provide for the location of and grouping of enterprises which may involve some on-premises retail service but with outside activities and display or fabrication, assembling, and service features. This zone is intended to accommodate uses which are oriented to automobiles either as the mode or target of producing the commercial service. The uses enumerated in this classification are considered as having common or similar performance standards in that they are heavier in type than those uses permitted in the more restrictive commercial classifications. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.050 Permitted primary uses.

Land that is zoned C-2, but located in the retail core as mapped in the comprehensive plan, shall comply with the C-1 zoning regulations for the retail core; provided, that expansion of an existing use on C-2 zoned property shall be permitted consistent with this chapter. See also BMC 17.05.100.

Hereafter all buildings, structures, or parcels of land shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Arcades;

B. Art, music and photography studios;

C. Auction houses, excluding animals;

D. Automotive parts and accessories sales;

E. Banking and related financial institutions;

F. Bowling alleys, bingo halls, skating rinks and other commercial recreation;

G. Building contractor services;

H. Bus passenger terminals;

I. Car wash;

J. Civic, social and fraternal associations;

K. Dance halls;

L. Commercial child day care centers;

M. Eating and drinking establishments;

N. Equipment rental and leasing, does not include heavy construction equipment;

O. Food locker services;

P. Funeral homes;

Q. Gas stations;

R. Health and physical fitness clubs;

S. Hospitals, to include small animal, but does not allow outside runs or kennels;

T. Hotels;

U. Lumber yards;

V. Manufactured/mobile home sales lots;

X. Massage parlors;

Y. Health care facilities;

Z. Meeting rooms and/or reception facilities;

AA. Mini-storage warehouses;

BB. Offices;

CC. Personal and household retail sales and service;

DD. Printing and publishing;

EE. Sales and rental of motorized vehicles;

FF. Schools, including art, business, barber, beauty, dancing, driving, martial arts and music;

GG. Theaters, including drive-ins;

HH. Vehicle repair, major;

II. Vehicle repair, minor. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Automobile parking facilities;

B. Outdoor storage yards;

C. Caretaker apartments;

D. Storage warehousing;

E. Accessory buildings and structures associated with a permitted primary use;

F. Telecommunication macro facilities, subject to the following requirements:

1. Macro facilities may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or celling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The macro facility shall be exempt from review by the community development director or designee if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Macro facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 15 feet, or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 15 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing building and architecturally blends in with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.070 Conditional uses.

The following uses may be permitted when a conditional use permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of BMC 14A.05.140:

A. Multifamily dwellings, either single purpose or as part of a mixed use development where the street frontage is primarily residential; provided, that an additional criterion for approval is that the site is better suited for housing than commercial development and the project complies with the plan review criteria in BMC 17.25.050(A) and 17.25.090;

B. Governmental facilities, other than those listed as a permitted use;

C. Heliports;

D. Miscellaneous light manufacturing including toys, jewelry, ceramic, musical instruments and similar products, apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials, manufacturing of professional, scientific, and controlling instruments such as photo and optical goods, watch and clock manufacturing, and similar products, with retail sales of products manufactured on the premises;

E. Nursing homes;

F. Semi-tractor and trailer sales;

G. Utility substations;

H. Towing service. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.080 Additional regulations.

A. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use, subject to the requirements of the International Fire Code.

B. Service Yards. All service yards shall be enclosed by a six-foot fence and screened with solid planting where visible from the public right-of-way or an adjacent residential zone with the exception of access gates.

C. Commercial land abutting directly a residential zone shall provide for a transition to the residential use as required in chapter 17.70 BMC, Supplemental Development Standards, and the following:

1. A six-foot screening fence and a 20-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling or a six-foot solid block wall and a 10-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling;

2. Uses generating noise after 9:00 p.m. shall not be permitted, including taverns, assembly occupancies, restaurants with cocktail lounges or dance floors, all night businesses and other similar types of uses; and

3. Measures shall be taken to prevent light and glare from being directed to residential uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.55.090 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot area: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum Building and Impervious Surface Coverage.

1. Building coverage: none.

2. Impervious surface coverage: 80 percent.

C. Minimum Setbacks.

1. Front none.

2. Side: none.

3. Street: none.

4. Rear: none.

D. Maximum Setback.

1. Front: 10 feet.

2. Street: 10 feet.

3. Exceptions. Exceptions to the maximum setbacks identified above may be authorized in the following instances:

a. A greater setback for drive-through uses may be authorized through the conditional use permit for the drive-in use; provided, that the building shall be located as close as possible to adjoining streets and shall be set back only the distance necessary to accommodate the drive-through and any associated queuing lanes.

b. The presence of a utility easement makes compliance with the maximum setback impossible; provided, that the building shall still be located as close as possible to adjoining streets.

c. The building entrance may be set back a greater amount to accommodate a wider sidewalk or additional landscaping.

d. A greater setback is necessary to accommodate an architectural design feature, such as: a unique building entrance, outside seating area, pocket park, or similar element.

e. Deviations from the maximum setback requirements may be granted for development on irregular shaped lots where the street frontages are angular or curvilinear. In such instances buildings shall be located as close as possible to the street frontages.

f. The expansion or modification of existing buildings, when a greater setback is needed to preserve existing visual and physical access.

g. Other similar exceptions may be granted when consistent with the intent of providing a well-defined street edge and pedestrian oriented streetscape.

E. Maximum building height: 45 feet, except:

1. Buildings may exceed 45 feet if one foot of setback is provided from each property line for each foot the building exceeds 45 feet; and

2. An additional 15 feet of height may be permitted when parking is located under the building.

F. Fences. See BMC 17.70.070.

G. Parking. See chapter 17.85 BMC.

H. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC.

I. Signs. See chapter 17.95 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.60 M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

Sections:

17.60.010    Title.

17.60.020    Application.

17.60.030    Purpose.

17.60.040    Authority.

17.60.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.60.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.60.070    Conditional uses.

17.60.080    Additional regulations.

17.60.090    Development standards.


17.60.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “M-1 Industrial District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all uses and developments in areas designated M-1. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.030 Purpose.

An M-1 district shall provide a use district for manufacturing, warehousing and distribution operation which require little or no retail contact with the general public. The industrial zone is intended to provide for general manufacturing and processing and grouping of industrial enterprises which possess common or similar characteristics and performance standards involving manufacturing, assembling, fabrication and processing, bulk handling of products, large amounts of storage and warehousing, outdoor storage, processing and other related uses.

While other uses may be sited within this zone, permits for such uses should not be issued if such uses will discourage use of adjacent sites for industry, interrupt the continuity of industrial sites, or produce traffic in conflict with the industrial uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.050 Permitted primary uses.

Hereafter all buildings, structures, or parcels of land shall only be used for the following, unless otherwise provided for in this title:

A. Adult motion picture theater; provided, that it shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residential zone, 1,000 feet from any school, public or private, 1,000 feet from any church, and 1,000 feet from any park, measured along the right-of-way;

B. Automobile parking and storage;

C. Basic wood processing including sawmills, planing mills, veneering and laminating of wood;

D. Building movers;

E. Cold storage plants;

F. Commercial laundries;

G. Contractor trade services including storage yards;

H. Enameling, galvanizing and electroplating;

I. Equipment repair and storage;

J. Heavy equipment and truck repair;

K. Household movers and storage;

L. Janitorial services;

M. Job training and vocational education, where the course of instruction is related to another permitted use;

N. Lumber yards;

O. Manufacturing, assembling and packaging of articles, products, or merchandise from previously prepared natural or synthetic materials, including but not limited to bristles, canvas, cellophane, and similar synthetics, chalk, clays (pulverized only, with gas or electric kilns), cloth, cork, feather, felt, fiber, fur, glass (including glass finishing), graphite, hair, horn, leather, paper, paraffin, plastic and resins, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, putty, pumice, rubber, shell, textiles, tobacco, wire, wood, wool, and yarn;

P. Manufacturing establishments engaged in electronic, automotive, aerospace, airframe, or related manufacturing and assembly activities, including precision machine shops producing parts, accessories, assemblies, systems, engine, major components, and whole electronic or electrical devices, automobiles, aircraft, aerospace, or underwater vehicles, but specifically excluding explosive fuels and propellants;

Q. Manufacturing, processing, assembling and packaging of precision components and products, including precision machine shops for products such as radio and television equipment, business machine equipment, home appliances, scientific, optical, medical, dental, and drafting instruments, photographic and optical goods, phonograph records and prerecorded audio-visual tape, measurement and control devices, sound equipment and supplies, personal accessories, and products of similar character;

R. Manufacturing, processing, treating, assembling and packaging of articles, products or merchandise from previously prepared ferrous, nonferrous or alloyed metals;

S. Manufacturing, processing, blending and packaging of products such as the following:

1. Soaps, detergents and other basic cleaning and cleansing materials;

2. Mineral products such as abrasives, asbestos, chalk, pumice, etc.;

3. Clay and cement products such as brick, tile, pipe, etc.;

T. Manufacturing, processing, blending and packaging of the following:

1. Drugs, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, and cosmetics;

2. Food and kindred products, such as confectionery products, chocolate, cereal breakfast food, bakery products, paste products, fruits and vegetables, beverages, prepared food specialties (such as coffee, dehydrated and instant food, extracts, spices and dressings) and similar products;

3. Dairy products and byproducts such as milk, cream, cheese and butter, including the processing and bottling of fluid milk, and cream and wholesale distribution;

U. Manufacturing, assembling, packaging and development of computer equipment and software, and related products;

V. Recreational marijuana processors, producers and retail stores. All such uses shall meet the following development standards:

1. The definitions set forth in BMC 17.01.050 shall apply.

2. Recreational marijuana processors, producers and retail stores shall only be permitted when licensed by the state of Washington.

3. Location.

a. No more than one medical or recreational marijuana use or garden shall be located on a single parcel or in a single structure.

b. Shall be located fully within a permanent structure designed to comply with the city building code and constructed under a building permit from the city regardless of the size or configuration of the structure.

c. Shall not be located in a mobile structure.

d. Shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any elementary or secondary school, playground, recreation center or facility, child care center, public park, public transit center, library, or arcade, single-family residential zone or another medical or recreational marijuana use. The measurement shall be taken in a straight line from property boundary to property boundary.

e. No production, processing or delivery of marijuana may be visible to the public nor may it be visible through windows.

f. All requirements of state laws must be met.

g. All fertilizers, chemicals, gases and hazardous materials shall be handled in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. No fertilizers, chemicals, gases or hazardous materials shall be allowed to enter a sanitary sewer or storm sewer system nor be released into the atmosphere outside of the structure where the garden is located.

h. No odors shall be allowed to migrate beyond the interior portion of the structure where the garden or processing facility is located;

W. Motor freight terminals and transportation;

X. Office with more than 50,000 square feet of floor space;

Y. Outside storage yards;

Z. Printing, publishing, and allied industries including such processes as lithography, etching, and engraving, binding, blueprinting, photocopying, and film processing;

AA. Dwelling units, existing;

BB. Topless club; provided, that it shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any residential zone, 1,000 feet from any school, public or private, 1,000 feet from any church, and 1,000 feet from any park, measured along the right-of-way;

CC. Warehousing and distribution facilities, to include wholesale trade not open to general public. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Caretaker apartments;

B. Offices related to an on-site permitted use or larger than 50,000 square feet of floor area;

C. On-site day commercial child day center serving the employees of a permitted use;

D. On-site recreational facilities serving the employees of a permitted use;

E. Research, development and testing;

F. Eating and drinking establishment;

G. Retail and wholesale trade of products produced, manufactured, or assembled on site;

H. Telecommunication macro facilities may be permitted, subject to the following requirements, except as limited by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended:

1. Macro facilities may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

3. Macro facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 15 feet, or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 15 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing building and architecturally blends in with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure.

I. Existing monopole I and lattice towers may be extended in height to maximum of 160 feet in height without complying with setback requirements. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.070 Conditional uses.

The following uses shall be considered conditional uses and shall require a conditional use permit:

A. Auction houses, excluding animals;

B. Automobile wrecking yard;

C. Banks and financial institutions;

D. Car wash;

E. Family day care home;

F. Commercial child day care centers;

G. Eating and drinking establishments other than those serving a permitted use on the same site;

H. Equipment rental and leasing and sales;

I. Health and physical fitness clubs;

J. Mini-storage warehouses;

K. Offices with less than 50,000 feet of floor space and not accessory to a permitted use, including corporate headquarters;

L. Personal and household retail sales and service;

M. Reupholstery and furniture repair;

N. Secretarial services;

O. Small appliance repair;

P. Towing service;

Q. Vehicle repair, major and minor;

R. Animal auction houses;

S. Animal and food processing including the following:

1. Tanning and dressing of hides,

2. Curing, canning, freezing, canning and processing of meat and seafood,

3. Pickling and brine curing;

T. Bulk storage or processing of oil, gas, petroleum, butane, liquid petroleum, gas and similar products, unless clearly incidental and secondary to support a principally permitted use;

U. Concrete mixing and batching plants, including ready-mix concrete facilities;

V. Drive-in theaters;

W. Government facilities, other than those listed as a permitted use;

X. Hotels;

Y. Radio and television transmitting towers;

Z. Rock crushing plants;

AA. Sales and rental of motorized vehicles;

BB. Transmission towers on Burlington Hill where co-location exists subject to the following additional criteria, except as limited by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended:

1. Antennas may not extend more than 15 feet above their supporting structure, monopole, lattice tower, building or other structure;

2. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district to the extent consistent with the function of the communications equipment. Wireless communication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practicable. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area;

3. Accessory equipment facilities used to house wireless communications equipment should be located within buildings or placed underground when possible. When they cannot be located in buildings, equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened and landscaped in conformance with chapter 17.80 BMC;

4. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce noise in levels above 45 dB as measured from the nearest property line on which the attached wireless communication facility is located;

5. New transmission towers and additional height on existing towers shall comply with performance standards for industrial uses adjacent to residential zones (BMC 17.70.115, 17.70.120 and 17.70.125);

CC. Utility substations, unless clearly incidental and part of a permitted use;

DD. Warehouse sales, open to the public, must have a minimum of 50,000 square feet of floor space. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.080 Additional regulations.

A. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use, subject to the requirements of the International Fire Code.

B. Industrial land abutting directly a residential zone shall provide for a transition to the residential use required in chapter 17.70 BMC, Supplemental Development Standards, and the following:

1. A six-foot screening fence and a 20-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling or a six-foot solid block wall and a 10-foot landscaped buffer designed for sight and noise baffling;

2. Uses generating noise after 9:00 p.m. shall not be permitted, including assembly occupancies, restaurants with cocktail lounges or dance floors, all night businesses and other similar types of uses. This shall not include shift work for the industrial use;

3. Measures shall be taken to prevent light and glare from being directed to residential uses; and

4. A 20-foot setback shall be required for sites that abut or adjoin a residential zone. This setback requirement shall also apply to sites which are separated from a residential zone by a street 50 feet or less in width and when the abutting property is located outside the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.60.090 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot area: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum Building and Impervious Surface Coverage.

1. Building coverage: none.

2. Impervious surface coverage: 80 percent.

C. Minimum Setbacks.

1. Front: none.

2. Side: none.

3. Street: none.

4. Rear: none.

D. Maximum building height: 45 feet except:

1. Buildings may exceed 45 feet if one foot of setback is provided from each property line for each foot the building exceeds 45 feet; and

2. An additional 15 feet of height may be permitted when parking is located under the building.

E. Fences. See BMC 17.70.070.

F. Parking. See chapter 17.85 BMC.

G. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC.

H. Signs. See chapter 17.95 BMC.

I. Performance Standards. See chapter 17.70 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.65 BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT

Sections:

17.65.010    Title.

17.65.020    Application.

17.65.030    Purpose.

17.65.040    Authority.

17.65.050    Permitted primary uses.

17.65.060    Permitted accessory uses.

17.65.070    Conditional uses.

17.65.080    Additional regulations.

17.65.105    Development standards.


17.65.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “BP Business Park District.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to all areas zoned BP. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to respond to modern trends in business park (BP) development by providing a suitable area for industrial, professional office, service and commercial uses within a planned, well-managed site with high-quality development standards. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.050 Permitted primary uses.

Any use listed as a permitted or conditional use in the B-1, R-3, C-1, C-2, and M-1 zones shall be considered a permitted use in the BP zone except as limited or restricted by provisions in this chapter that outdoor activities such as storage, fabrication, or sales shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.060 Permitted accessory uses.

A. Caretaker apartments;

B. Offices related to an on-site permitted use or larger than 50,000 square feet of floor area;

C. On-site commercial child day care center serving the employees of a permitted use;

D. On-site recreational facilities serving the employees of a permitted use;

E. Research, development and testing;

F. Eating and drinking establishment;

G. Retail and wholesale trade of products produced, manufactured, or assembled on site;

H. Telecommunication macro facilities may be permitted, subject to the following requirements, except as limited by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended:

1. Macro facilities may be located on buildings and structures; provided, that the immediate interior wall or ceiling adjacent to the facility is not a designated residential space.

2. The macro facility shall be exempt from review by the community development director or designee if the antenna and related components are the same color as the existing building, pole or support structure on which it is proposed to be located.

3. The shelter or cabinet used to house radio electronic equipment shall be contained wholly within a building or structure, or otherwise appropriately concealed, camouflaged or located underground.

4. Macro facilities shall comply with the height limitation specified for all zones except as follows: Omnidirectional antennas may exceed the height limitation by 15 feet or in the case of nonconforming structures the antennas may extend 15 feet above the existing structure. Panel antennas may exceed the height limitation if affixed to the side of an existing building and architecturally blends in with the building. Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure;

I. Existing monopole I and lattice towers may be extended in height to maximum of 160 feet in height without complying with setback requirements. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.070 Conditional uses.

Reserved. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.080 Additional regulations.

A. All activities shall be conducted entirely within a building except as follows:

1. Gas pumps;

2. Refuse containers, provided they are screened from adjoining properties and streets in accordance with any applicable municipal code requirements;

3. Horticulture activities;

4. Play areas for commercial child day care centers and schools.

B. All odors, noise, vibrations, heat, glare, or other emissions are controlled within the confines of a building unless specifically permitted elsewhere by this title.

C. No outdoor testing of products.

D. No highly combustible, explosive or hazardous materials are permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to the permitted use.

E. Rooftop equipment shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of the roof and be painted the same color as the building on which the equipment is located; or, screen the equipment from adjoining uses or from street right-of-way if setback is less than 20 feet.

F. Loading and unloading docks that have frontage on a street shall be required to provide an additional 10-foot width of landscaping or in lieu of additional 10-foot width, landscaping may be provided as approved by the landscaping committee.

G. Outdoor storage may be restricted to the rear of the property and shall as a minimum be guided by the screening and landscaping requirements of the M-1 zone.

H. No on-site hazardous substance processing and handling, or hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be permitted, unless clearly incidental and secondary to a permitted use. On-site hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities shall be subject to the approval of the fire department. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.65.105 Development standards.

A. Lot Area and Dimension.

1. Minimum lot area: none.

2. Minimum lot width: none.

3. Minimum lot depth: none.

B. Maximum Building and Impervious Coverage.

1. Building coverage: none.

2. Impervious surface coverage: 80 percent.

C. Minimum Setbacks.

1. Front: none.

2. Side: none.

3. Street: none.

4. Rear: none.

D. Maximum building height: 45 feet except:

1. Buildings may exceed 45 feet if one foot of setback is provided from each property line for each foot the building exceeds 45 feet; and

2. An additional 15 feet of height may be permitted when parking is located under the building.

E. Fences. See BMC 17.70.070.

F. Parking. See chapter 17.85 BMC.

G. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC.

H. Signs. See chapter 17.95 BMC.

I. Performance Standards. See chapter 17.70 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.70 SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

17.70.010    Title.

17.70.020    Application.

17.70.030    Purpose.

17.70.040    Authority.

17.70.050    Special height restrictions.

17.70.060    Obstructions, generally prohibited.

17.70.070    Fences.

17.70.080    Standard setback exceptions.

17.70.090    Home occupations.

17.70.100    Responsibility for animals.

17.70.105    Outdoor vending machines.

17.70.110    Performance standards.

17.70.115    Height requirements for transitional zones.

17.70.120    Setback requirements for transition zones.

17.70.125    Telecommunication facilities.

17.70.130    Mechanical equipment.

17.70.135    Low impact development.


17.70.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Supplemental Development Standards.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.020 Application.

The standards of this section shall apply to all new uses, structures, and development, and to the expansion or modification of existing uses, structures and developments. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.030 Purpose.

The purpose of supplemental development standards is to achieve compatible land uses within zoning districts and surrounding areas by providing uniform regulations throughout each district, encouraging neighborhood stability and consistency, and promoting commercial viability and compatibility. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.050 Special height restrictions.

A. There shall not be anything constructed or reconstructed, and no obstruction permitted to grow, other than a post, column or tree not exceeding one foot square or one foot in diameter, between a height three feet and 10 feet above the established grade within the triangular areas described below, without the express approval of the city engineer:

1. The triangular area formed by a line 20 feet along the right-of-way lines of two intersecting streets, measured from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines, and the line connecting the two ends of the two 20-foot lines;

2. The triangular area formed by a line 15 feet along the street right-of-way line measured from the point of intersection of the alley right-of-way line and a line 15 feet along the alley right-of-way line measured from the point of intersection of the street and alley right-of-way lines and the line connecting the unconnected ends of the two lines.

B. In general, no fence, hedge, structure or other obstruction shall act as a sight hazard to traffic, and the city engineer may order the removal of such hazard whether or not such object otherwise complies with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.060 Obstructions, generally prohibited.

A. In no case shall any fence and/or hedge be constructed or grown, within a distance of three feet, around any fire hydrant; as well as no fence or hedge shall deter or hinder the fire department from gaining access to any fire department connection, fire protection control valve, fire hydrant, or fire department appliance or device;

B. In no case shall any fence and/or hedge obstruct the visibility of any fire hydrant from a distance of 150 feet, in any direction, of vehicular approach to the hydrant;

C. In no case shall any fence and/or hedge be constructed or grown in a manner which interferes with access to storm or sanitary sewer manholes and other appurtenances which require access for maintenance purposes. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.070 Fences.

A. Fences in residential areas providing a maximum six-foot sight obstruction from adjacent properties can be built on the side and rear property lines and across the front of the property in line with the front of a building but not closer than 20 feet to the street right-of-way. Corner lots must observe the 20-foot setback on both streets. From the 20-foot line to the street right-of-way, solid fences a maximum of three feet high, measured from the ground on which the fence stands, are permitted and open rail fences a maximum of four feet, six inches high, measured from the ground on which the fence stands, are permitted in which the rails and posts constitute not more than one-third of the fence area. Taller fences may be permitted in the 20-foot setback area by way of an administrative permit issued by the community development director or designee based on a field inspection and staff report with site plan and photographs provided by the applicant demonstrating consideration of adjacent structures, driveways, location of transit stops, need for privacy, visual impacts of fence structure on block front, or other circumstances not anticipated by this code. Fences up to six feet tall are permitted in commercial and industrial areas subject to corner vision requirements and permit conditions established through the plan review process.

B. Electric fences shall only be permitted in the OSP district and only when associated with an agricultural use. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.080 Standard setback exceptions.

The following may project into a required setback:

A. Fireplace structures, bay windows, garden windows, enclosed stair landings, closets, framed fireplace shafts or similar projections not wider then eight feet measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part: 18 inches into a required setback area;

B. Uncovered porches and platforms less than 30 inches in height: 18 inches into side yards and six feet into the front yard and rear yard;

C. Planting boxes or masonry planters not exceeding 42 inches in height may be placed in a required setback area;

D. Eaves may protrude into a required setback provided they do not exceed 24 inches into a required setback area.

E. Ramps and other structures necessary to provide handicap access. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.090 Home occupations.

A. General Requirements. All home occupations, including permitted and conditional home occupations, shall be consistent with the following:

1. Only members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be employed;

2. No inventory is kept (other than incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of such home occupation) or commodities sold other than those produced on the premises. Samples may be kept but not sold on the premises. Items commonly collected or traded, and occasionally sold by hobbyists such as coins, stamps, antiques, etc., may be considered to be exempt from this provision, as long as all other requirements of home occupations are met;

3. No mechanical equipment is used except such as is customarily used for domestic, household or personal purposes (or as deemed similar in terms of power and type);

4. Not more than one-fourth of the floor area of any building is devoted to such occupation, except accessory buildings which are used for no other purpose;

5. Such occupation shall not require internal or external alteration or involve construction features not customarily found in a dwelling;

6. Shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the distribution of materials from the premises;

7. The conduct of any home occupation, including but not limited to the storage of goods and equipment, shall not reduce or render unusable areas provided for the required off-street parking. Additional parking is not allowed in order to conduct a home occupation;

8. Only one sign is permitted, two square feet in area, indirect illumination only, and attached to a building or inside the home;

9. No display pertaining to the occupation, other than the one permitted sign, is visible from the street or adjacent residences;

10. No more animals are maintained on the premises than what may otherwise be permitted in the zone;

11. The home occupation is to be conducted in such a manner that the residence shall not differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emissions of sound, noises, vibrations or odors.

B. Exemptions. Garage sales, yard sales, bake sales, temporary home boutiques or bazaars for handcrafted items, parties for the display of domestic products, and other like uses do not need to comply with the requirements of this section as long as the use is not conducted on more than four days in any given two-year period or in violation of any other provisions of the Burlington Municipal Code. To qualify for this exemption, garage and yard sales must involve only the sale of household goods, none of which were purchased for the purpose of resale.

C. A conditional use permit is required and must be granted by the city council for the following home occupation uses, even if the use meets all 11 of the requirements of subsection (A) of this section but in no case shall any home occupation meet less than nine of the 11 requirements:

1. Automobile repair and rebuild;

2. Craft classes;

3. Home occupations that can only meet nine or 10 of the 11 requirements as outlined in subsection (A) of this section;

4. Music and dancing studios.

D. Additional Requirements. In addition to the requirements identified above, any home occupation identified as a conditional use shall be subject to the following:

1. In considering applications for home occupation conditional use permits, the hearing examiner shall consider the nature and conditions of all adjacent uses and structures, and no such special home occupation permit shall be authorized unless the city council finds that the authorizing of such special home occupation permit will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property in the zone or vicinity in which the property is located, and that the authorization of such permit will be consistent with the spirit and purpose of this title.

2. The hearing examiner may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, installation, construction, maintenance and operation and extent of open spaces in addition to those expressly set forth in this title, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of other properties in the zone or vicinity and the public interest. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.100 Responsibility for animals.

Owners, including both property owners and residents, of animals, including household pets and farm animals, shall be responsible for damage to other properties, including damage to trees and other landscaping, fences and structures. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.105 Outdoor vending machines.

A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, outdoor vending machines may be operated only in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, provided the use, maintenance, and placement of vending machines shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Outdoor vending machines located in public parks or any other public property shall not be subject to this section.

B. No outdoor vending machine may be installed, maintained, repaired or operated in the city without first being issued a valid land use permit. A land use permit shall be issued by the community development director or designee only if the following standards and conditions are met:

1. The outdoor vending machine may not be located such that the outdoor vending machine, or a user of the outdoor vending machine, is within:

a. A public right-of-way;

b. A required landscape area;

c. A driveway;

d. An area used by vehicles for circulation; or

e. Five feet of any business entrance or exit.

2. All outdoor vending machines must be ancillary to an approved primary use and may not be located on an unimproved lot. Automated banking teller machines not on the same property as the financial institution may be located in a parking lot of a multiple-tenant development if a conditional use permit is issued pursuant to BMC Title 14A.

3. When an outdoor vending machine is situated within the primary ingress to and egress from the lot, a minimum walkway width of six feet shall be required in front of the outdoor vending machine. The building official shall determine whether the ingress to and egress from the lot is primary to the lot. In all other situations, a minimum walkway width of four feet is required in front of the outdoor vending machine.

4. All outdoor vending machines shall only be located on a building elevation that contains a primary entrance.

5. All outdoor vending machines must be positioned against a building wall and not located in front of windows.

6. An outdoor vending machine shall not block the exit door.

7. Outdoor vending machine sign panels shall be limited to the products sold within the outdoor vending machine. No additional signs or advertising can be attached to or placed on the top or side of any outdoor vending machine.

8. Exterior conduit, piping or wiring must not be visible when standing directly in front of the outdoor vending machine.

9. No visible security cages are permitted on the outside of an outdoor vending machine.

10. Outdoor vending machines shall not exceed 80 inches in height and 36 inches in depth and 42 inches in width.

11. All outdoor vending machines shall be maintained in a clean and attractive condition.

12. Any graffiti on an outdoor vending machine shall be removed within 24 hours.

13. The vending machine shall not appear to flash, undulate, or pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights. Displays shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it moves onto, is displayed on, or leaves the machine as visible from any residence or vehicle traveling the right-of-way.

14. Number of Outdoor Vending Machines.

a. No more than five outdoor vending machines shall be permitted per development site or integrated development site.

b. The number of outdoor vending machines permissible on a development site shall be as follows:

	Square Footage of Development Site	Number of Outdoor Vending Machines

	15,000 or less	1

	15,001 – 30,000	2

	30,001 – 45,000	3

	45,001 – 60,000	4

	60,001 or greater	5

c. For integrated development sites, regardless of the number of lots or individual tenants, that are developed with common parking, on-site circulation, architecture or design features, with multiple underlying lots, at least one outdoor vending machine, but not to exceed three outdoor vending machines, may be allowed per lot. Multiple outdoor vending machines shall be subject to the following ratio:

	Square Footage of a Lot within an Integrated Development	Number of Outdoor Vending Machines

	15,000 or less	1

	15,001 – 30,000	2

	30,001 or greater	3

15. Upon removal of an outdoor vending machine, the building and site area where the outdoor vending machine was located shall be repaired to its original condition. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.110 Performance standards.

The purpose of this section is to establish the following performance standards which are intended to reduce the visual, physical, and environmental impacts of new development on existing uses and developments.

A. Light and Glare. Building materials with high light-reflective qualities shall not be used in the construction of buildings in such manner that reflected sunlight will throw intense glare to surrounding areas. Artificial lighting shall be hooded or shaded so that direct light of high-intensity lamps will not result in glare when viewed from residential areas surrounding a commercial or industrial district.

B. Electrical Interference. Provisions must be made for necessary shielding or other preventive measures against interference occasioned by mechanical, electrical and nuclear equipment uses or processes with electrical apparatus in nearby buildings or land uses.

C. Odorous Gases and Matter. The emission of odorous gases or matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable, without special instruments, at any point beyond the property line of the use creating the odor, is prohibited.

D. Smoke and Particulate Matter Emissions. No emissions shall exceed the allowances set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Washington State Department of Ecology and/or the Northwest Sound Air Pollution Control Agency, unless local regulations are more restrictive, in which case the local regulation shall apply.

E. Dust, Dirt, Fly Ash, or Air-Borne Solids. No observable dust, dirt, fly ash or other air-borne solids shall be emitted except as related to construction activity.

F. Waste Storage. Storage of animal or vegetable wastes which attract insects or rodents or otherwise create a health hazard shall be prohibited. No waste products shall be exposed to view, from eye level, beyond the property line of the use storing the waste.

G. Toxic Gases and Matter. No emissions of toxic gases or matter shall be permitted.

H. Vibration. Vibration which is easily discernible, without special instruments at any point beyond the property line, is prohibited. This shall not apply to vibration caused by highway vehicles, trains, aircraft or construction activities.

I. Hazardous Substance and Waste. No hazardous substances or wastes shall be released into the environment so as to cause dangerous or offensive emission or contamination of any public or private water supply, sewage treatment processes, watercourse or water body, the air, or the ground, except in accordance with standards approved by provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations, and the International Fire Code. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.115 Height requirements for transitional zones.

All commercial, industrial, and multifamily development within 45 feet of a single-family zone shall be limited to a maximum height of 35 feet. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.120 Setback requirements for transition zones.

The following setback requirements shall apply to all commercial, industrial, and multifamily development on properties adjacent to single-family zones.

A. Multifamily. The minimum side and rear setbacks for multifamily development adjacent to single-family zones shall be derived using a ratio of two feet of building setback for every one foot of building height.

B. Commercial. The minimum side and rear setbacks for commercial development adjacent to single-family zones shall be derived using a ratio of two feet of building setback for every one foot of building height.

C. Industrial. The minimum side and rear setbacks for structures adjacent to single-family lots shall be derived using a ratio of two feet of building setback for every one foot of building height. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.125 Telecommunication facilities.

A. Application and Conditional Use Criteria – FCC Preemption. In any proceeding regarding the issuance of a conditional use permit under the terms of this chapter, federal law prohibits consideration of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that the proposed facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission regulations concerning such emission.

B. The following are exempt from the requirements of a conditional use permit, and shall be considered a permitted use in all zones where wireless and attached wireless communications facilities are permitted: minor modifications of existing wireless communications facilities and attached wireless communications facilities, whether emergency or routine, so long as there is little or no change in the visual appearance. Minor modifications are those modifications, including the addition of antennas, to conforming wireless and attached wireless communications facilities that meet the performance standards set forth in this title.

C. A wireless communications facility or attached wireless communications facility shall be removed by the facility owner within six months of the date it ceases to be operational or if the facility falls into disrepair. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.130 Mechanical equipment.

A. Mechanical equipment shall be equipped with a noise-baffling screen as necessary, so that there shall be no audible sound at the property line.

B. Roof-mounted or ground-mounted equipment shall be located and designed to blend in with the architecture of the building. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.70.135 Low impact development.

The following standards and requirements shall apply to any building, development, or construction activities that result in an increase in impervious surface coverage, building coverage, or modifications to existing storm water management features or facilities. These standards and requirements shall also apply to all activities involving the modification of existing impervious surfaces or the removal of significant quantities of vegetation.

A. All development, building, construction, and grading permit applications shall be provided to the city engineer for review. No permit shall be issued or approved unless the city engineer finds the proposal complies with the surface water management regulations in BMC Title 14.

B. All development activities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Washington State Department of Ecology’s Stormwater Manual for Western Washington.

C. Low impact development shall be the preferred and commonly used approach for all development and construction activities. Low impact development (LID) techniques shall be incorporated into all development proposals unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis.

D. The Department of Ecology’s Stormwater Manual for Western Washington and the Puget Sound Partnership’s Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound shall be consulted to assess the feasibility of LID techniques, to select appropriate LID measures, and to aid in the design and construction of LID features. All storm water systems and improvements shall be consistent with BMC Title 14. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.80 LANDSCAPING

Sections:

17.80.010    Title.

17.80.020    Application.

17.80.030    Purpose.

17.80.040    Authority.

17.80.050    Application/review procedures.

17.80.060    General standards.

17.80.070    Minimum area requirements.

17.80.080    Street frontage requirements.

17.80.090    Perimeter landscaping.

17.80.100    Parking lot landscaping.

17.80.105    Screening requirements.


17.80.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Landscaping.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.020 Application.

The standards of this section shall apply to all new uses, structures, and development, and to the expansion or modification of existing uses, structures and developments, except:

A. The construction of single-family homes on existing lots; and

B. Where 100 percent lot coverage is permitted by buildings and the proposed project covers 100 percent of the lot. Landscaping shall be provided as feasible on such sites, focused on improving the appearance of the site from the public right-of-way.

C. Where a maximum setback is prescribed these standards shall not be construed as requiring a greater setback or buffer area. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.030 Purpose.

Landscaping is necessary to provide a well-balanced, aesthetically pleasing environment for the residents and visitors of Burlington. Specifically, these requirements are intended to accomplish the following:

A. Maintain and enhance property values;

B. Enhance the appearance of the development;

C. Provide adequate buffers between different uses;

D. Improve the character and appearance of the city;

E. Reduce erosion and storm water runoff, and provide areas for biofiltration of sediments and oils;

F. Retain and incorporate existing significant trees and natural drainage areas into site plans to the maximum extent practical. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63 and 36.70A RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.050 Application/review procedures.

A. Submittal Requirements. Landscape plans shall be submitted to the planning department and shall include locations, spacing, quantities and sizes of proposed plants, dimensions of planting areas, calculation of percentage of site to be landscaped, staking and planting plans, irrigation plans (may be on separate sheet), and other nonplant features to be included in the landscaping, such as river rock, pedestrian paths, benches, large stones, garden ornaments, or special lighting features. Three sets of drawings shall be submitted.

B. Planning Department Review. The community development director or designee shall review all landscape plans under the provisions of this chapter and may approve, deny, or approve with conditions, landscape plans for any development. In addition, the community development director or designee shall review and recommend action to the hearing examiner on the landscape plans for any development subject to hearing examiner review. The hearing examiner may authorize the community development director or designee to review any landscape plan, or final landscape plan, for any development which has come under their review.

C. Minor Modifications. Any applicant, or the community development director or designee, may request modification of any standard specified under this chapter, subject to the provisions of BMC 17.80.070(B). (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.060 General standards.

The following general standards shall apply to all landscaping required under this section:

A. Landscape Materials.

1. Acceptable landscape materials include evergreen or deciduous trees, shrubs, and ground cover plants, perennial or annual flowers, and lawn. River rock, driftwood, bark, rockeries, ornamental or decorative walkways (provided both sides abut landscaping) may be included. No artificial lawn or plants will be permitted in landscaped areas. Low impact development techniques and planting plans shall be employed to the maximum extent feasible in all landscaping plans.

2. At least 50 percent of all vegetation shall be native to the northwest and at least 25 percent of required trees shall be coniferous evergreens.

B. Existing Site Vegetation. Significant existing trees and shrubs shall be incorporated into the landscaping as much as possible. “Significant trees” shall be those evergreen and deciduous trees at least six inches in diameter at a point five feet above ground level. The site plan for the project shall include the location of significant trees, and shall identify which trees will be retained on the site. Care shall be taken in the grading and construction process so as not to disturb the roots within the drip line of existing trees to be retained, and to ensure proper irrigation.

C. Erosion Control Plan. The city may require temporary erosion sedimentation control measures as part of the landscape plan for the development. Sloped areas of the site shall be protected during construction, and planted with vines or other ground cover materials that will provide 90 percent coverage within 18 months of planting.

D. Pollution Control. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that storm runoff from landscaped areas does not contain excessive amounts of fertilizer, insecticides and herbicides that may be harmful to aquatic life, and to take measures to prevent runoff water impacts as required by the Departments of Ecology and Wildlife.

E. Corner Vision. Along street frontages, within 30 feet of a driveway, alley, or street intersection, no shrubs shall be higher than 30 inches and no trees shall have branches or foliage below eight feet above street level.

F. Safety Features/Utilities. Installation of landscape materials shall not obstruct access to fire hydrants, standpipes, sprinkler connections, utility vaults, pedestals, and other public and private utility facilities.

G. Right-of-Way Landscaping. In addition to all other landscaping requirements, the developer shall landscape the unused right-of-way between the front property line(s) and the improved roadway. Where a street is at its ultimate width, “unused right-of-way” is defined as the area between the property line and the curb or edge of pavement. Landscaping within the right-of-way shall satisfy the corner vision and safety feature provisions of this section. In most cases, low shrubs and ground cover plantings similar to those used on the site will be preferred. Trees should be placed on private property whenever possible. Maintenance of landscaping in the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property adjacent to the right-of-way. Nothing in this section shall create or imply any interest of the property owner in the right-of-way. At such time as the city, county or state shall need to use the right-of-way, removal of the landscaping shall be the responsibility of the property owner. If such landscaping is not removed, it may be destroyed by the city, county or state.

H. Irrigation/Watering System. An irrigation system, or alternative watering system, shall be required. For smaller projects, an acceptable alternative would be the location of hose bibs in locations where hoses do not have to extend over parking lots or driveways to rear planting areas. The applicant shall contact the Public Utility District or applicable water purveyor to determine if any backflow prevention device is necessary; if so, such a device will be installed as required. Irrigation may be provided from shallow wells tapping ground water sources.

I. Maintenance. All landscaping and screening areas shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition. Broken, dead, or dying trees, shrubs, or other plants shall be replaced. All landscaping and screening shall be kept reasonably free of weeds and trash. Any property owner who fails to reasonably maintain landscaping and screening areas will be considered to have committed an offense under this code.

J. Performance Assurance/Bonding. Unless otherwise required by the hearing examiner, all landscaping and screening required under this chapter shall be installed prior to occupancy of the development. In the event that landscaping improvements cannot be installed prior to application for occupancy, a cash deposit or other assurance acceptable to the city equal to 120 percent of the estimated installation costs shall be required. Such deposit shall be accompanied by a letter which shall stipulate completion of all landscape development no later than six months after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or date of final approval, whichever is later. If these conditions are not met, the city may use the deposit to perform the landscape development.

K. Storm Water Management.

1. Storm water facilities and low impact development features landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this chapter may be used to meet any applicable minimum landscaping requirements.

2. To the greatest extent possible the planting areas required by this chapter should be used as storm water infiltration areas or low impact development features.

3. Low impact development features and planting areas used to treat, manage, or infiltrate storm water should be designed and constructed consistent with the Washington State Department of Ecology’s “Stormwater Manual for Western Washington” and the Puget Sound Partnership’s “Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.”

4. When trees or plants are located within, or adjacent to, an infiltration area the landscape architect shall submit evidence that they have coordinated with the engineer responsible for on-site storm water management. Based on information provided by the storm water engineer the landscape architect shall:

a. Specify tree and plant species suitable for the hydrologic and soil conditions anticipated or present in the planting area; and

b. Specify tree and plant species that will not detrimentally affect the ability of the planting area to manage storm water.

5. Landscaping plans shall identify areas of the site with suitable soils for storm water infiltration and LID features.

6. Any landscaping areas used for storm water infiltration, treatment, or storage shall be consistent with BMC Title 14. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.070 Minimum area requirements.

A. Minimum Area Requirements. The percentage of gross site area to be landscaped is to be regarded as the minimum. In the event that, because of lot configuration, adjacent land uses, or special circumstances, more landscaping is required to meet all requirements of this code, the higher amount of landscaping shall be required. The minimum landscaping area requirements indicated below may include landscaping around buildings, along road frontages, in parking and loading areas, and outdoor recreational use areas, as required in this section. Area within the right-of-way may be used to satisfy up to 20 percent of the minimum requirements.

	Zoning Classification	Percent of Gross Site Area

	Multifamily (R-2 and R-3)	15

	General/Heavy Commercial District (C-1 and C-2)	10

	Multifamily in Commercial District	15

	Semi-Public (R-S)	15

	Business District (B-1)	10

	Business Park District (BP)	10

	Industrial District (M-1)	5

	Commercial Uses in Industrial Districts	10

	Short Plats, Subdivisions, and Cluster Developments – see BMC 17.80.080 and 17.80.090 for requirements.

B. Minor Reductions. The minimum area requirements specified above in subsection (A) of this section may be reduced by up to 25 percent, if requested by the applicant, in cases where the normal requirement cannot be met due to lot size, the configuration of existing buildings and improvements, or topography.

C. Preexisting Developments/Alterations. Any development existing prior to the adoption of this section which does not satisfy the provisions of this section shall be considered a nonconforming use. Additions or alterations to these nonconforming uses shall require that landscaping be provided, as possible, commensurate with the extent of the alteration or addition, in compliance with the provisions of this section; provided, that compliance with BMC 17.80.090 shall be required as a minimum.

D. Phased Projects. Phased projects include but are not limited to shopping centers, large site developments proceeding in phases, subdivisions, cluster developments, and business parks. Before construction permits are issued for the first phase of any phased project, conceptual approval of the landscaping plan for the site as a whole is required.

1. Final approval of the landscaping plan for each phase is required before construction permits are issued for a phase.

2. Landscaping along a frontage road or perimeter screening may be required to be installed in the first phase. Criteria to be considered in the decision include but are not limited to the following:

a. Timing of phases of a project; and

b. Proximity to residential areas.

E. A licensed landscape architect shall be required to prepare the landscaping plans and supervise the installation of landscaping for all new development. This requirement may be waived by the community development director for simple small scale projects with minimal landscaping requirements. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.080 Street frontage requirements.

Planting areas along street frontage shall be as follows:

A. Minimum width: 10 feet. When lot depth is less than 200 feet, the minimum width may be reduced to five percent of the lot depth, but not less than six feet in width.

B. Maximum Spacing. One tree for every 30 feet of road frontage shall be planted, either in groupings or evenly spaced, with ground cover or shrubs used liberally.

C. Plant Varieties. Trees utilized in this area shall be of varieties that do not conflict with underground and overhead utilities. These trees may be selected from the city’s suggested list of plant materials, or any approved equivalent, based upon the specific constraints of the site.

D. Street Tree Requirements. Plantings shall also comply with the adopted Burlington tree plan as now or hereafter amended. Where the Burlington tree plan differs from these requirements, the Burlington tree plan shall control.

E. Exemptions.

1. Sidewalks and Pedestrian Access Points. Sidewalks and pedestrian access points may be located within the landscape buffer strip required by subsection (A) of this section.

2. Driveway approaches.

3. The landscape buffer requirements identified above in subsection (A) of this section shall not apply in zones where buildings are required to be located at the front setback or street edge. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.090 Perimeter landscaping.

Planting areas within side and rear setback areas which are not occupied by structures shall be as follows:

A. Minimum width: five feet, unless otherwise specified under the screening requirements of this chapter.

B. Exempt.

1. Areas adjacent to railroad rights-of-way on an industrial site shall be exempt.

2. Perimeter of industrial site or heavy commercial yard that is not substantially visible from the right-of-way or located where screening is required shall be exempt, but in no case shall exceed the maximum 25 percent modification per BMC 17.80.070(B).

C. Planting Requirements. A minimum of one tree shall be planted for every 150 square feet, or fraction thereof, of perimeter planting area. See Burlington tree plan for perimeter planting in the right-of-way. Shrubs and ground cover plantings shall be in quantities and spacing that will provide for 80 percent ground coverage within three years. When applicable, the screening requirements under BMC 17.80.105 shall supersede the requirements of this subsection.

D. Connecting Driveways. When connecting or joint driveways are provided between sites, the minimum area requirements under BMC 17.80.070(A) may be reduced by the area occupied by the driveway that would otherwise be landscaped under the requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.100 Parking lot landscaping.

The provisions of this section are intended to soften the visual effect created by large expanses of barren asphalt; increase the amount of permeable surface; and reduce the quantity and speed of runoff from the site.

A. Area of Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to the interior of parking areas providing 20 or more spaces.

B. Required area: 15 square feet of landscaping per parking space, excluding perimeter spaces.

C. Minimum Width. Planting islands shall have a minimum average width of eight feet.

D. Location of Plantings Areas. Parking area landscaping shall be located at the ends of parking columns, between the parking stalls oriented in the same direction as the stalls, or between rows of parking to break up and define parking areas.

E. Tree and Shrub Requirements. A minimum of one tree shall be required for every 150 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required landscaped area. Deciduous trees shall have a clear trunk at least five feet above ground and a minimum size of two inches diameter breast high (dbh). Low shrubs shall be provided on the perimeter of the landscaping islands, in addition to other ground cover or flowers. Other landscape materials shall comply with the general provisions of this section.

F. Landscape Protection. Any trees, shrubs, or plants which are susceptible to damage by pedestrian or motor vehicles shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards or other protective devices.

G. Pedestrian walkways may be included in landscaped areas and the standards of this section modified to accommodate them. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.80.105 Screening requirements.

When applicable, the requirements of this section shall supersede the requirements of other sections of this chapter.

A. Purpose. The requirements of this section are intended to reduce the visual impacts and incompatible characteristics of:

1. Abutting properties with different land use classifications;

2. Service areas and facilities, including loading and storage areas;

3. Parking areas located in front of buildings;

4. Any other use or area as required under this section or by the planning commission.

B. Landscaping. Screen planting shall consist of evergreen trees planted a maximum of 15 feet on center; deciduous trees for seasonal color and texture; and medium-sized shrubs (three to five feet at maturity) and ground cover plants at a density to form an effective barrier to cover 85 percent of the ground surface within two years.

C. Minimum Width. The screening area shall be 10 feet wide unless the use of an earth berm, fence, or wall is incorporated into the screening, as provided below:

1. Earth Berm Alternative. If an earth berm is incorporated into the screening plan, medium-sized shrubs and/or evergreen trees shall be spaced a maximum of four and one-half feet on center and the width of the screening area may be reduced to 10 feet.

2. Fence Alternative. If a fence option is selected, maximum spacing of medium-sized shrubs shall be six feet on center, and the width of the screening area may be reduced to seven feet. The fence shall be constructed of exterior weather-resistant wood, or acceptable alternative. If a cyclone fence is proposed, such fence shall include natural colored slats and shall be located so as to place the landscaping on the outside of the fence next to the buffered property or right-of-way.

3. Wall Alternative. If a wall at least five feet high is to be used for screening, the planting requirements shall be as specified under BMC 17.80.090, and the screening area may be reduced to five feet. Screen walls shall be constructed with masonry, block, or textured concrete, subject to design approval by the community development director or designee.

D. Uses Requiring Screening. The community development director or designee may require screening to protect adjacent properties from probable negative impacts of any permitted or conditional use in a district. Except as otherwise required by the community development director or designee, screening shall be required in the following instances:

1. Developments located in districts on the left side of the chart, below, shall provide screening when adjoining districts specified on the right side of the chart.

	District to be Developed	District to be Screened

	Multifamily Residential	Single-Family Residential

	Semi-Public	All Residential

	Commercial/Business	All Residential

	Industrial	All Residential Commercial

2. Mobile home parks shall have screening installed around the perimeter of the development in the required open space buffer, which shall not be less than 10 feet in width.

3. Churches, community clubhouses, and other similar conditional uses shall provide perimeter screening when adjoining a residential district.

4. Heavy industrial uses such as wrecking yards, gravel operations, concrete plants, lumber mills and similar uses shall provide screening at least 20 feet in width along property lines adjoining a residential, rural or agricultural district. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.85 ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING

Sections:

17.85.010    Title.

17.85.020    Application.

17.85.030    Purpose.

17.85.040    Authority.

17.85.050    General and exceptions.

17.85.060    Required off-street parking – Quantity.

17.85.070    Shared parking.

17.85.080    Cooperative parking.

17.85.090    Drive-in businesses.

17.85.100    Off-street parking area development and maintenance.

17.85.105    Development of required off-street parking spaces for single-family dwelling units.

17.85.110    Off-street parking lots – Location and screening.

17.85.115    Off-street parking plan design standards.

17.85.120    Pedestrian circulation and access.

17.85.125    Existing off-street parking reduction.

17.85.130    Fractional spaces.

17.85.135    Off-street loading space.

17.85.140    Design standards for private streets and roads.


17.85.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Access, Parking and Loading.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.020 Application.

The standards of this section shall apply to all new uses, structures, and development, and to the expansion or modification of existing uses, structures and developments. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for adequate, safe, and convenient off-street parking and loading areas for the different zones as described in this title by specifying requirements for off-street parking and loading, and describing design standards and other required improvements. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.050 General and exceptions.

A. Off-street parking and loading lots shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions of this chapter for every building hereafter erected, altered, enlarged, or relocated.

1. Any new building, use or structure shall provide the required parking to the standards specified herein.

2. Any parking lot hereafter physically altered shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, except that such lot which provides five percent of its area in landscaping shall be deemed to comply with chapter 17.80 BMC.

B. Parking Quantity Exceptions in General.

1. Parking Exceptions for Landmark Structures. The director may reduce or waive the minimum accessory off-street parking requirements for a use permitted in a landmark structure, considering the following elements:

a. A survey may be required of on- and off-street parking availability.

b. A determination that there is no feasible way to meet parking requirements on the lot.

c. Consideration of the types and scale of uses proposed or practical in the landmark structure and the controls imposed by the landmark designation.

2. Expansion of Existing Nonresidential Uses in Commercial and Business Zones. Additional parking spaces for nonresidential uses shall not be required for the expansion of existing structures if the minimum parking requirement would not be increased by more than 10 percent. If the minimum parking requirement would be increased by more than 10 percent, the parking spaces required for the entire expansion shall be provided. This provision may be used only once for any individual structure.

3. Whenever any existing, nonresidential use in a building is changed to another use in the same building, the requirements of this section shall apply in full to the new use if and only if the change in parking requirements between the old and new uses is greater than five spaces. Credit for on-street parking spaces that are located along the building’s street frontage shall be given.

4. Whenever there is a change from a residential use to a nonresidential use in an existing building, the requirements of this section shall apply in full to the new use; except that the planning commission may determine that a portion of the residential structure cannot be effectively utilized by the proposed commercial use and such area then may be excluded from the gross floor area used to compute the parking requirement.

5. Existing on-street parking spaces abutting a development site may be used to meet the requirements of this chapter, at a rate of one space for every 20 linear feet of abutting street frontage, except:

a. Spaces that are not available, or will not be available, due to roadway design, right-of-way constraints, or future plans shall not be included; and

b. Applicants may be required to provide a parking survey prepared by a qualified professional demonstrating that adequate on-street parking is reasonably available.

C. Parking Quantity Exceptions in the Downtown Special Planning Area.

1. No parking shall be required for new uses in existing structures, or when existing structures are remodeled.

2. No parking shall be required for the first 2,500 square feet of nonresidential floor space, or the nonresidential portion of a live-work unit.

3. No parking shall be required for any floor area used for human services or child care.

4. No parking shall be required for the addition of one residential unit to an existing building. If two units are added, one space will be required; three units will require two spaces, etc.

5. When an existing nonresidential structure is partially or completely converted to residential use, no parking shall be required for the first dwelling unit; provided, the lot area is not increased and any existing parking is screened and landscaped to the greatest extent practical.

D. Tandem Parking and Multifamily. Off-street parking for multifamily structures may be provided as tandem parking.

E. Parking and loading areas shall have reasonable access to a public street or alley.

F. Removal of required parking and/or loading spaces from practical use by obstruction, erection of buildings, or other actions as to reduce the parking and/or loading capacity or usefulness thereof below the minimum requirements established in this chapter is prohibited.

G. “Parking area” includes the parking spaces together with driveways and the access to public street. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.060 Required off-street parking – Quantity.

A. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined for each principal use of the land, building, or structure. For ancillary uses to the principal use, required parking shall be calculated the same as for the principal use, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. For uses not specifically identified in this chapter, parking shall be provided as specified for the use which, in the opinion of the director, is most similar to the use under consideration.

B. The total number of parking spaces provided for any use or development shall not exceed 120 percent of the minimum requirements identified in this section, except:

1. This limitation shall only apply to uses and developments that require 20 or more parking spaces; and

2. This limitation shall not apply to uses and developments where an alternative maximum number is prescribed by Burlington Municipal Code; and

3. Additional spaces may be provided in excess of 120 percent of the minimum requirement; provided, that any such spaces are located under a building with usable floor space; and

4. This limitation may be waived for publicly owned parking lots; and

5. This limitation may be waived if a traffic and parking study is submitted showing the need for additional parking. Such studies shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, shall be consistent with, and integrated into, any other traffic study prepared for the project, and shall be reviewed by the city engineer.

	USE	PARKING REQUIREMENT GENERAL

	ANIMALS

	Dog day care with no outside runs or kennels	1 space for each 500 square feet

	Kennels, boarding, outside runs	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Veterinary clinic, animal services, animal hospital with no outside runs or kennels	1 space for each 350 square feet

	ASSEMBLY

	Commercial recreation indoors (bowling, swimming, skating, bingo, dancing)	1 space for each 100 square feet of activity area

	Commercial recreation outdoors (miniature golf, batting, ball courts)	1 space for each 350 square feet, or 1 per cage, hole, court

	Community center, city	1 space for each 550 square feet

	Facilities for lectures, meetings, dances, receptions	1 space for each 8 fixed seats or 1 space for each 100 square feet of spectator assembly area not containing fixed seats

	Library	l space for each 80 square feet of floor area of all auditoriums and public meeting rooms; plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of other gross floor area open to the public

	Motion picture theatre, adult motion picture theatre	1 space for each 8 fixed seats or 1 space for each 100 square feet of spectator assembly area not containing fixed seats

	Museum	1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area of all auditoriums and public assembly rooms; plus l space for each 500 square feet of other gross floor area open to the public

	Performing arts theater	1 space for each 8 fixed seats or l space for each 100 square feet of spectator assembly area not containing fixed seats

	Private club, health, fitness, civic, social and other organization	1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area of all auditoriums and public assembly rooms; plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of other gross floor area open to the public

	Religious facility	1 space for each 80 square feet of all auditoriums

	Sports facility or stadium	1 space for each 8 fixed seats or l space for each 100 square feet of spectator assembly area not containing fixed seats

	Topless club	1 space per 200 square feet

	HEALTH AND FAMILY SERVICES

	Counseling service	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Day care, adult	1 space for each 10 clients or 1 space for each staff member, whichever is greater; plus 1 loading and unloading space for each 20 clients

	Commercial child day care centers and mini commercial child day care centers	1 space for each 10 children or 1 space for each staff member, whichever is greater; plus 1 loading and unloading space for each 20 children

	Family day care home	1 loading and unloading space

	Health care facility	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Hospital	2 per bed

	Medical facilities, clinic, laboratory, urgent care, triage	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Medical services, doctor, chiropractor, optometrist office, health care	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Nursing home, convalescent center, assisted living	1 space for each 2 staff members on site at peak staffing time; plus 1 space for each 6 beds or units

	Physical therapy, massage services	1 space for each 350 square feet

	INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING, WHOLESALING

	Auction house except animals	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Bulk storage of petroleum products unless incidental to primary use	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Cold storage plant	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Commercial laundry	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Concrete mixing or batch plant	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Construction services, contractor’s office and storage	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Equipment rental and leasing	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Enameling, galvanizing and electroplating	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Government facilities other than office	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Heavy equipment and trucks, repair, sales and leasing	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Laboratories such as water quality, soil testing, research and development	1 space for each 1,500 square feet

	Manufactured/mobile home sales lot	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Manufacturing and related activities such as processing, assembling, research and development	1 space for each 1,500 square feet

	Materials yards – lumber, stone, concrete products	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Mini-storage and/or household goods warehouse	1 space for each 30 storage units

	Motor freight terminals	l space for each 2,000 square feet

	Printing and publishing	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Retail and wholesale of products manufactured, processed, or assembled on site	1 space for each 1,500 square feet

	Salvage yard	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Storage warehousing	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Warehouse and distribution facilities	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Wholesale showroom	1 space for each 1,500 square feet

	Wood processing	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	LODGING

	Bed and breakfast inn	1 space for each dwelling plus 1 space for each 2 guest rooms or suites

	Hotels or motels	1 space for each sleeping room or suite

	RESIDENTIAL

	Accessory dwelling unit	1 space

	Adult family home	1 space for each dwelling unit

	Multifamily dwellings	General: 1-1/2 per 1 and 2 bedroom; 2 per 3 or more bedroom and guest parking at a rate of 1 space for every 3 units

Downtown special planning area: 1 per unit

	Apartment for adults age 55 and up	1 space for each dwelling unit and guest parking at 1 space for 3 units

	Artist’s studio dwelling	1 space for each dwelling unit

	Boarding and group housing	1 space for each dwelling unit

	Caretaker’s quarters	None

	Residential small lot development	1 space for each dwelling unit

	Duplex (two-family dwelling)	1 per 1 and 2 bedroom; 2 per 3 or more bedroom

1 per unit downtown

	Live-work unit up to 2,500 square feet	1 space for each unit

	Live-work unit greater than 2,500 square feet	1 space for each unit; plus the number of spaces required for the commercial or manufacturing activity conducted in the unit, based on the most similar nonresidential use

Downtown special planning area: See BMC 17.85.050(C)

	Mobile home park or trailer park	2 per unit plus guest parking at 1 space for 3 units

	Single-family dwelling including manufactured home	1 per 2 bedroom, 2 per 3 or more bedroom

1 downtown special planning area

	Townhouse	1 per 1 and 2 bedroom; 2 per 3 or more bedroom

1 downtown special planning area

	RETAIL AND SERVICE

	Banking and related financial institutions	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Business support services	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Car wash	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Communication utilities	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Custom and craft work	l space for each 1,000 square feet

	Dog day care	l space for each 500 square feet

	Drive-in business – high volume such as food, coffee, bank	1 space for each 200 square feet

	Eating and drinking establishments – all types	1 space for each 200 square feet

	Funeral home and mortuary services	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Gas station	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Ground floor businesses in downtown special planning area	None, maximum of 10 spaces

	Major durables sales, service, and rental such as furniture, appliance	l space for each 2,000 square feet

	Multipurpose convenience store such as grocery, hardware, drugs, variety	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Municipal buildings, city hall, police and fire stations	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Office, administrative	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	Office, customer service	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Personal and household retail sales and service, general	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Personal services such as barber, beauty shop, tan, tattoo	1 space for each 500 square feet

	Sales, service and rental of office equipment	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Shopping center or mall	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Small appliance repair	1 space for each 500 square feet

	Specialty food store – bakery, deli, cheese, wine, some seating	1 space for each 500 square feet

	Studios – art, music, photography	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	Trades and subcontractors – plumbing, electrical, HVAC	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	Woodworking	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	SCHOOLS/EDUCATION/TRAINING

	School, private elementary and secondary	1 space for each 80 square feet of floor area of all auditoriums and public assembly rooms, or if no auditorium or assembly rooms, 1 space for each staff member

	School, public elementary and secondary	1 space for each 80 square feet of floor area of all auditoriums or public assembly rooms, or 1 space for every 8 fixed seats in auditoriums or public assembly rooms containing fixed seats, for new public schools on a new or existing public school site

	Vocational or fine arts school	1 space for each 2 faculty and full-time employees; plus 1 space for each 5 students (based on the maximum number of students in attendance at any one time)

	TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES

	Dispatch facility – taxi, ambulance, limousine	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	Telecommunication tower	1 space

	Terminal – bus, rail, transit	1 space for each 200 square feet

	Transit vehicle base	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Utility substation or service facility	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	VEHICLE RELATED

	Automotive or boat parts or accessories sales	1 space for each 350 square feet

	Automobile wrecking yard	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Sales, service and rental of motorized vehicles including automobiles, motorcycles, trucks other than semis, boats	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Semi-tractor and trailer sales	1 space for each 2,000 square feet

	Towing service	1 space for each 1,000 square feet

	Vehicle repair, major and minor	1 space for each 2,000 square feet; minimum of 3 spaces

	** In addition, for all multifamily uses whose average gross floor area per dwelling unit, excluding decks and all portions of a structure shared by multiple dwelling units, exceeds 500 square feet shall be required up to a maximum additional 0.15 spaces per dwelling unit; and

When at least 50 percent of the dwelling units in a multifamily use have three bedrooms, an additional 0.25 spaces per bedroom for each unit with three bedrooms shall be required; and

Any multifamily use that contains a dwelling unit with four or more bedrooms shall be required to provide an additional 0.25 spaces per bedroom for each unit with four or more bedrooms.

(Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.070 Shared parking.

A. Shared Parking – General Provisions.

1. Shared parking shall be allowed between two or more uses to satisfy all or a portion of the minimum off-street parking requirement of those uses as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

2. Shared parking shall be allowed between different categories of uses or between uses with different hours of operation, but not both.

3. A use for which an application is being made for shared parking shall be located within 800 feet of the parking.

4. No reduction to the parking requirement shall be made if the proposed uses have already received a reduction through the provisions for cooperative parking.

5. The reduction to parking permitted through shared use of parking shall be determined as a percentage of the minimum parking requirement as modified by the reductions permitted in BMC 17.85.050.

6. An agreement providing for the shared use of parking, executed by the parties involved, shall be filed with the director. Shared parking privileges shall continue in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If the agreement is no longer in force, then parking shall be provided as otherwise required by this chapter.

B. Shared Parking for Different Categories of Use.

1. A business establishment may share parking according to only one of the following subsections: (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section.

2. If an office use and a retail sales and service use share parking, the parking requirement for the retail sales and service use may be reduced by 20 percent; provided, that the reduction shall not exceed the minimum parking requirement for the office use.

3. If a residential use shares parking with a retail sales and service use other than lodging uses, eating and drinking establishments or entertainment uses, the parking requirement for the residential use may be reduced by 30 percent; provided, that the reduction does not exceed the minimum parking requirement for the retail sales and service use.

4. If an office and a residential use share off-street parking, the parking requirement for the residential use may be reduced by 50 percent; provided, that the reduction shall not exceed the minimum parking requirement for the office use.

C. Shared Parking for Uses with Different Hours of Operation.

1. For the purposes of this section, the following uses shall be considered daytime uses:

a. Customer service and administrative offices;

b. Retail sales and services, except eating and drinking establishments, lodging uses, and entertainment uses;

c. Wholesale, storage and distribution uses;

d. Manufacturing uses; and

e. Other similar primarily daytime uses, when authorized by the community development director or designee.

2. For the purposes of this section, the following uses shall be considered nighttime or Sunday uses:

a. Auditoriums accessory to public or private schools;

b. Religious facilities;

c. Entertainment uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, and dance halls;

d. Eating and drinking establishments;

e. Lodging uses; and

f. Other similar primarily nighttime or Sunday uses, when authorized by the community development director or designee.

3. Up to 90 percent of the parking required for a daytime use may be supplied by the off-street parking provided by a nighttime or Sunday use and vice-versa, when authorized by the director, except that this may be increased to 100 percent when the nighttime or Sunday use is a religious facility.

4. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the sharing of parking is proposed. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.080 Cooperative parking.

A. Cooperative parking shall be permitted between two or more business establishments which are commercial uses according to the provisions of this section.

B. Up to a 20 percent reduction in the total number of required parking spaces for four or more separate business establishments, 15 percent reduction for three business establishments, and a 10 percent reduction for two commercial uses may be authorized by the director under the following conditions:

1. No reductions to the parking requirement shall be made if the proposed business establishments have already received a reduction through the provisions for shared parking.

2. The business establishments for which the application is being made for cooperative parking shall be located within 800 feet of the parking.

3. The reductions to parking permitted through cooperative parking shall be determined as a percentage of the minimum parking requirement as modified by the reductions permitted through BMC 17.85.050(B) and (C) and this section.

4. An agreement providing for the cooperative use of parking shall be filed with the director when the facility or area is established as cooperative parking. Cooperative parking privileges shall continue in effect only as long as the agreement to use the cooperative parking remains in force. If the agreement is no longer in force, then parking shall be provided as otherwise required by this chapter. New business establishments seeking to meet parking requirements by becoming part of an existing cooperative arrangement shall provide the director with an amendment to the agreement stating their inclusion in the cooperative parking facility or area. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.090 Drive-in businesses.

All banks, savings and loan associations, food dispensing establishments, and other businesses which maintain drive-in facilities which are intended to serve customers who remain in their motor vehicles during business transactions, or are designed in such a manner that customers must leave their automobiles temporarily in a driving lane located adjacent to the facility, shall provide stacking space for the stacking of motor vehicles as follows:

A. Stacking Space. The drive-in facility shall be so located that sufficient stacking space is provided for the handling of motor vehicles using such facility during peak business hours of such facility.

B. Driveway Location. The location of entrances and exits shall be determined by the public works director.

C. Shopping Centers. When located in a shopping center, drive-in facilities shall provide sufficient stacking space to handle peak business demands and shall not in any way obstruct the normal circulation pattern of the shopping center. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.100 Off-street parking area development and maintenance.

A. All parking areas, including interior driveways and access to a public street, shall be paved with permeable pavement, asphalt concrete, or cement concrete pavement. All asphalt pavement sections shall have a minimum pavement section consisting of two inches of Class “B” asphalt concrete, two inches of five-eighths-inch minus crushed rock, and six inches of Class “A” bank run gravel or approved equal. All permeable paving, concrete pavement sections, or any alternative asphalt pavement sections shall be designed to support the post development traffic loads anticipated due to the intended use.

B. Parking and circulation areas, access roads, and drive aisles shall be designed and constructed with LID features such as permeable pavement, rain gardens, or bioretention areas unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis.

C. In determining the feasibility of LID features, an engineering analysis shall be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site characteristics such as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic volumes. The analysis should be consistent with the Department of Ecology’s “Stormwater Manual for Western Washington” and the design and site evaluation guidance in the Puget Sound Partnership’s “Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.” The engineering analysis requirement identified above may be waived by the city engineer for simple small-scale projects when the feasibility of permeable pavement can be easily determined without the need for additional information or analysis; provided, that an engineering analysis shall be submitted for all projects involving 20 or more parking spaces.

D. All parking and circulation areas, access roads, and drive aisles shall be designed and constructed in accordance with any applicable requirements in BMC Title 14.

E. Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, unless permitted elsewhere by this title, dead storage, repair work, or dismantling of any kind.

F. Outdoor sales areas shall be paved and landscaped in accordance with this title.

G. If lighting is provided, it shall be arranged to reflect away from the residential area, also from any public street or highway.

H. Drainage facilities for storm water shall be provided for and be approved by the public works department.

I. Ingress and egress shall be approved as to location and design by the public works department.

J. Driveways and parking stalls shall be clearly marked.

K. Landscaping. See chapter 17.80 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.105 Development of required off-street parking spaces for single-family dwelling units.

For parking areas serving single-family dwellings, this section shall apply in lieu of BMC 17.85.100.

A. Required off-street parking spaces for one-family dwellings on separate lots smaller than 15,000 square feet in area shall be paved with permeable pavement, asphalt concrete, or cement concrete. Each required off-street parking space shall be connected to an improved public or private street by a driveway which shall be paved with permeable pavement, asphalt concrete, or cement concrete.

B. Required off-street parking spaces for one-family dwellings on separate lots of 15,000 or more square feet in area shall have an all-weather surface. Each required off-street parking space shall be connected to an improved public or private street by a driveway which shall have an all-weather surface. The construction of the all-weather surface shall be determined by the public works director.

C. A note shall be included on the face of subdivisions and short subdivisions identifying any applicable impervious surface limits.

D. Driveways for single-family dwellings may utilize a two track design to minimize impervious surface coverage. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.110 Off-street parking lots – Location and screening.

A. Required off-street parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served unless off-site parking is authorized in compliance with this chapter. Parking shall be located on each site in compliance with the parking layer requirements illustrated below:

1. First Layer. The area between the frontage line and the facade line.

2. Second Layer. The area between the facade line and 20 feet from the facade. Note that the second layer is not required on the secondary frontage.

3. Third Layer. That portion of the lot that is neither the first layer nor the second layer. Generally this portion of the lot extends to an alley or an interior lot line.


[IMAGE]


B. Surface Parking Location and Screening. The following requirements shall apply in addition to any other parking, landscaping, setback, or site design requirements:

1. Parking area and service yards must be screened from adjoining residences.

2. Where alley access is available, parking shall be located off the alley and no curb cuts shall be permitted for residential uses.

3. Parking located in the setback in front of the building shall be screened and landscaped with a streetscreen as defined in BMC 17.80.105.

4. Parking area illumination shall be directed away from residential uses.

5. Downtown special planning area including surface parking shall be located in the third layer and masked by a streetscreen or building, except that driveways and aprons may be located in the first or second layer.

6. Burlington Boulevard Corridor. Surface parking may be located in the first, second or third layer and masked by a streetscreen if the street frontage is not fully occupied by buildings.

C. Single-Family Dwellings. Required parking shall be located on the same lot as the building it serves.

D. Off-Site Parking. Required parking may be in areas other than on the premises if the required amount of parking area is set aside for a particular use in such a lot and such area is not located more than 800 feet from the premises and is in the same zone as the use. The lot or area to be utilized shall be legally encumbered by an easement or other appropriate means to ensure continuous use of the parking facilities.

E. Whenever required parking facilities are located off site, pedestrian facilities shall be provided connecting the satellite parking facility to the development being served, which are safe, durable and adequate to accommodate pedestrian use. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.115 Off-street parking plan design standards.

A. Parking stalls and drive aisles shall be consistent with the dimensions specified in Figure “A” below.

B. Up to 30 percent of the parking spaces required by this chapter may be compact spaces, except in the downtown special planning area where all of the required parking spaces may be compact.

C. Off-street parking lots shall comply with the barrier-free parking space requirements of the International Building Code.

D. The minimum parking space and aisle dimensions for the most common parking angles are shown on chart below. For parking angles other than those shown on the chart, the minimum parking space and aisle dimensions shall be determined by the community development director and shall be proportional to the dimensions shown below.


Figure A Minimum Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions

	Parking Angle	Stall Width	Curb Length	Stall Depth	Aisle Width	Unit Depth

	1-Way	2-Way	1-Way	2-Way

	0°	8.0	20.0	8.0	12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0	**

29.0	**

37.0

	30°	8.0*

Min. 8.5	16.0*

17.0	15.0*

16.5	10.0

10.0	20.0

20.0	**

43.0	**

53.0

	45°	8.0*

Min. 8.5	11.5*

12.0	17.0*

19.0	12.0

12.0	20.0

20.0	**

50.0	**

58.0

	60°	8.0*

Min. 8.5	9.5*

10.0	18.0*

20.0	18.0

18.0	20.0

20.0	**

58.0	**

60.0

	90°	8.0*

Min. 8.5	8.0*

8.5	15.0*

17.0	23.0

23.0	23.0

23.0	**

63.0	**

63.0

* For use with compact stalls only.

** Variable with compact and standard combinations.

E. Any parking spaces abutting a landscaped area on the driver or passenger side of the vehicle shall provide an additional 18 inches above the minimum space width requirement to provide a place to step other than in the landscaped area. The additional width shall be separated from the adjacent parking space by a parking space division stripe. The parking space depth may be reduced when vehicles overhang a walkway under the following conditions:

1. Wheelstops or curbs are installed.

2. The remaining walkway provides a minimum of 60 inches of unimpeded passageway for pedestrians.

3. The amount of space depth reduction is limited to a maximum of one and one-half feet for standard parking spaces and one and one-half feet for compact spaces including the wheelstop or curb.

F. Driveways may cross required setbacks or landscaped areas in order to provide access between the off-street parking facilities and the street, provided no more than 10 percent of the required landscaping or setback area is displaced by the driveway. Driveways may be used for parking when serving single detached dwellings but shall not be considered for purposes of calculating required parking.

G. Lighting shall be provided for safety of traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site, as required by the International Building Code. It shall be designed to minimize direct illumination of abutting properties and adjacent streets. The city council shall have the authority to waive the requirement to provide lighting. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.120 Pedestrian circulation and access.

A. All uses shall provide pedestrian access to the site. Pedestrian access shall be provided at all pedestrian arrival points for the development including the property edges, adjacent lots, abutting street intersections and mid-block crosswalks, existing transit stops and at least every 100 feet of consecutive street frontage. Pedestrian access shall be located as follows:

1. Access at property edges and to adjacent lots shall be coordinated with existing development to provide logical circulation patterns between developments.

2. Residential developments shall provide links between cul-de-sacs or buildings to allow pedestrian access from within the development and from adjacent developments to activity centers, parks, common tracts, open spaces, schools or other public facilities, transit stops and public streets.

3. Pedestrian walkways shall be located as follows:

a. If walkways run parallel to the parking row at least one walkway shall be provided for every two rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.
[IMAGE]


b. If walkways run perpendicular to the parking rows, access to the walkway shall be no further than five parking spaces. Landscaping, barriers or other means shall be provided between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.
[IMAGE]


B. Pedestrian walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Pedestrian walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access or any parking space is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination and as follows:

1. All developments which contain more than one building shall provide walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings.

2. All nonresidential buildings set back more than 100 feet from the public right-of-way shall provide for direct access from the building to the buildings on adjacent lots.

C. Pedestrian access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design standards:

1. Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic.

2. Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 60 inches of unobstructed width and shall be constructed using permeable pavement unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis, in which case an alternative hard surface approved by the city engineer shall be used.

3. Access shall be usable by the mobility impaired and shall be designed and constructed to be easily located by the sight-impaired pedestrian by either grade change, texture or other equivalent means.

4. A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved area accessible to vehicles.

5. If any parking space is more than 150 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination, a stop sign, stop line or other pavement marking and a speed bump shall be required at the end of every row of parking.

6. If any parking space is more than 200 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site destination:

a. At least one sheltered rest area shall be provided; and

b. Raised crosswalks or speed bumps shall be located at all points where a walkway crosses the lane of vehicle travel.

7. Where the building entrance is more than 250 feet from the public right-of-way, a sheltered rest area may be required at the public street.

8. Sidewalks and walkways should be sloped to drain towards adjoining landscaping, planting areas, or infiltration features. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.125 Existing off-street parking reduction.

Off-street parking facilities shall not be eliminated or reduced to an amount less than that required for new uses. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.130 Fractional spaces.

When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in requirements of a fractional space, any fraction up to one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions of one-half or over shall require one parking space. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.135 Off-street loading space.

Buildings devoted to retail trade, retail and wholesale food markets, warehouses, supply houses, wholesale and manufacturing trade, hotels, hospitals, laundry, dry cleaning establishments or other buildings where large amounts of goods are received or shipped shall provide loading and unloading space on the same premises as the building as follows:

A. Building of 6,000 square feet or more of floor area: one off-street loading and unloading space plus one additional off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet of floor area;

B. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in length and 14 feet in height;

C. Loading space, exclusive of driveways and/or corridors leading thereto, shall not be considered as providing off-street parking space. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.85.140 Design standards for private streets and roads.

Private streets and roads created to serve new development, including subdivisions, short subdivisions, binding site plans, and commercial and industrial development, shall be subject to the following standards and requirements:

A. A road maintenance agreement and access easement approved by the city engineer shall be recorded with Skagit County auditor’s office;

B. Streets and roads serving up to four dwelling units shall be at least 20 feet in width;

C. Streets and roads serving more than four dwelling units or carrying a traffic volume of up to 250 average trips per day, whichever is less, shall be at least 28 feet in width and a sidewalk shall be provided on at least one side in addition to the 28 feet of roadway width;

D. Streets and roads carrying a traffic volume of 250 average trips per day or more shall comply with the design standards and specifications applicable to public streets and roads in chapter 12.28 BMC;

E. Low impact development features such as bioretention areas, rain gardens, and permeable paving shall be incorporated into the design and construction of all private streets and roads unless demonstrated to be infeasible through an engineering analysis. In determining the feasibility of such low impact development features, an engineering analysis shall be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer. This analysis should consider site characteristics such as soil and ground water conditions, and anticipated traffic volumes. The analysis should be consistent with the Washington State Department of Ecology’s “Stormwater Manual for Western Washington” and the design and site evaluation guidance in the Puget Sound Partnership’s “Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound.”

F. All private streets and roads shall be designed and constructed consistent with any applicable requirements in BMC Title 14. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.90 PUBLIC UTILITIES

Sections:

17.90.010    Title.

17.90.020    Application.

17.90.030    Purpose.

17.90.040    Authority.

17.90.050    Permitted when.

17.90.060    Visual compatibility.

17.90.070    Protective fencing.

17.90.080    Setbacks.

17.90.090    Permit requirements.

17.90.100    Residential locations.


17.90.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Public Utilities.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public utility and telecommunication carriers which occupy, use, construct, or maintain utility or telecommunication facilities within the city. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.030 Purpose.

Reserved. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35.63, 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.050 Permitted when.

Public utility buildings, telephone exchanges, sewage pumping stations, electrical distribution substations, and similar developments necessary for the operation of a public utility shall be permitted subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter and any other applicable requirements. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.060 Visual compatibility.

A. If the installation is housed in a building, the building must conform architecturally with the surrounding buildings or with the type of building that will develop due to the zoning district.

B. An unhoused installation on the ground or a housed installation that does not conform to the architectural requirements of subsection (A) of this section must be sight-screened with evergreen trees, shrubs and landscaping planted in sufficient depth to form an effective sight barrier within five years. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.070 Protective fencing.

An unhoused installation of a dangerous nature such as an electrical distribution substation shall be enclosed with an eight-foot-high wire fence. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.080 Setbacks.

All buildings, installations and fences shall observe the setback requirements for buildings in the district in which they are located, except that in the R-1 district the side setback requirements shall be increased to 20 feet. Exceptions to these setback requirements may be permitted by variance. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.090 Permit requirements.

All applications to develop or construct utilities shall include a complete plot plan and elevations showing the entire development, and photographs showing the location and character of all adjoining land improvements in addition to all other applicable permit application requirements. Permits for utilities and utility development shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.90.100 Residential locations.

In residential zones utility developments shall require a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.95 SIGNS

Sections:

17.95.010    Title.

17.95.020    Application.

17.95.030    Purpose.

17.95.040    Authority.

17.95.050    General provisions.

17.95.060    Permit requirements.

17.95.070    Exceptions.

17.95.080    Review of signs/design standards.

17.95.090    Residential district sign regulations.

17.95.100    Commercial, business, and industrial district sign regulations.

17.95.105    Neighborhood business district sign regulations.

17.95.110    Areas zoned B-1 and C-1 and located in downtown on Fairhaven Avenue and Victoria Avenue sign regulations.

17.95.115    On-site traffic control and directories.

17.95.120    Electronic changing message sign requirements.

17.95.125    Permitted temporary or portable signs.

17.95.130    Off-premises signs.

17.95.135    Prohibited signs.

17.95.140    Variances.


17.95.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Signs.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, maintenance, alteration, expansion, or development of all signs, signage, and sign structures within the city of Burlington. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the regulation of signs, to assist businesses in contributing to the economic well-being of the community by increasing the overall effectiveness of visual communications, to provide a harmonious relationship of urban graphics and their settings, and to avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities and the community’s appearance. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.050 General provisions.

A. Conflicting Standards. All signs shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, except where more specific standards for signs are specified for a special planning area, zone, or district. In such case the more specific standards shall apply.

B. Signs Subject to State Approval. All signs visible to the traveling public from state highways are subject to the regulations and permit requirements of the State Department of Transportation. Where the regulations of the state and city differ, the more restrictive regulations shall govern.

C. Building Code Compliance. All signs for which a building permit is required shall comply with the applicable provisions of the building code adopted by the city and codified in BMC Title 15.

D. Address Display. The signing program for a multifamily, commercial or industrial development shall include the display of street numbers for the development on the sign, support structure, or building where it can be seen from adjacent roads, as specified in BMC 15.10.080.

E. Sign Clearances. A minimum of eight feet above sidewalks and 15 feet above driveways shall be provided under freestanding or projecting signs.

F. Setbacks. Signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision, public rights-of-way, improvements or future improvements, easements, or other similar conditions.

G. Illuminated Signs.

1. Internally illuminated signs, or lights used to indirectly illuminate signs, shall be placed, shielded or deflected so as not to shine into residential dwelling units or structures or impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle.

2. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner which may be confused with or construed to be traffic signals or control devices, or lights on an emergency vehicle.

3. No person shall construct, establish, create or maintain any stationary exterior lighting or illumination system or any interior system which is intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way used for vehicular traffic which system contains or utilizes:

a. Any exposed incandescent lamp with a wattage in excess of 25 watts unless a dimmer or sun screen is attached;

b. Any exposed incandescent lamp with an internal or external metallic reflector;

c. Any continuous or sequential flashing operation.

4. All lighted signs shall have low or soft illumination or be shielded.

H. Moving Signs. No sign, sign structure, or portion thereof shall be designed to rotate, flutter, or appear to move, except as specifically provided in this code.

I. Maintenance. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the sites upon which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from rust, corrosion, peeling paint, or other surface deterioration. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.

J. Nonconforming Signs. Legally established signs and sign structures which do not comply with the regulations and requirements in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 17.100 BMC as a nonconforming use, except that alteration to a nonconforming sign which reduces or does not increase its noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, including changes in display surface, sign area, height and setback, may be allowed subject to review under the provisions of BMC 17.95.080. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.060 Permit requirements.

A. A permit shall be required to erect, re-erect, construct, reface, alter, expand, or relocate any sign or sign structure unless the type of sign is specifically excepted pursuant to BMC 17.95.070.

B. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the director upon forms provided by the city. Sign permit applications shall include:

1. Two site (plot) plans showing the location of the affected site, lot, premises, building or buildings, and sign or signs, showing both existing signs and awnings and the proposed sign;

2. Two copies of a scale drawing of the proposed sign or sign revision, including size, height, copy, structural and footing details, material specifications, methods of attachment, illumination, landscaping, front and end views of awning, sample of canvas, soil, seismic and wind calculations, photograph of site and building marked to show where sign or awning is proposed, and any other information required to ensure compliance with appropriate laws;

3. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or property where the sign is to be erected, if not the applicant;

4. A permit fee per current fee resolution;

5. A list identifying the size and type of each existing sign located on the building, lot, site, premises, or business establishment. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.070 Exceptions.

The following shall not require a permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as an exemption from the other requirements of this chapter or other applicable laws and regulations.

A. Address signs are allowed without permit when the following conditions are met:

l. One sign allowed per street frontage displaying the street number and/or name of the occupant of the premises;

2. Such signs may be attached to the building or may be on a post no more than four feet high, and set back at least three feet from the public right-of-way;

3. Such signs may include identification of an on-premises professional office;

4. Such signs may not exceed two square feet in area;

5. Such signs shall be limited to a maximum letter height of eight inches.

B. Temporary signs as defined in subsection (B)(7) of this section are allowed without permit when the following conditions are met:

1. Only one sign is allowed for each street frontage of the property upon which the sign is located. Small directional signs may be placed at the end of the block where an occurrence requiring a sign is located with the property owner’s permission.

2. Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area and six feet in height; flags must not exceed 15 square feet in area.

3. Signs shall not be illuminated.

4. Signs must be set back a minimum distance of five feet from the frontage road and 10 feet from adjoining properties unless exceptions are made by the community development director or designee. Sign may not be placed on public street right-of-way or private property without an owner’s permission. Directional signs may not be placed in any improved roadway. Portable signs must be placed in a way that does not unduly obstruct foot or vehicular traffic.

5. Temporary signs shall not be placed upon public utility poles.

6. Signs shall be placed or erected at the time of the occurrence requiring the use of the sign and removed within 48 hours of the end of the occurrence requiring use of the sign.

7. Temporary signs include signs intended to be or allowed to be displayed for a limited period of time. Excepted temporary signs do not include ongoing commercial signage or readerboards. Temporary signs typically include the following:

a. Construction signs;

b. Real estate signs;

c. Directional signs;

d. Flags;

e. Garage sale signs;

f. Public notification signs; and

g. Signs, banners, streamers and other similar apparatus used in conjunction with a community event. A “community event” is an event of a public nature sponsored by the city or a community club, chamber of commerce, or other community organization.

Temporary signs that do not meet the description and conditions set forth above may be allowed pursuant to a permit pursuant to the conditions and terms of BMC 17.95.125.

C. Political Signs. Political signs on private property where allowed by the property owner or upon properties that lawfully constitute a public forum. Such signs shall be removed within one week after the election for which the sign is posted. Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size as viewed from one direction unless placed on an approved off-site location with greater allowed size limitations. Such signs shall observe the corner vision requirements of this title, and shall not be situated in a manner which creates a hazard.

D. Incidental signs located on the premises may be displayed on any window or door. Incidental signs are permanent signs that include emblems, decals, nameplates and other similar signs indicating residence, affiliation or membership in organizations, acceptance of credit cards, brand names of items sold, and other such information which pertains to the use of the premises.

E. Temporary Window Signs. Posters and other signs of a temporary nature which advertise or inform the public of current prices or events may be displayed on the inside of any window or door of a business located in a commercial, business, or industrial district, covering a maximum of 20 percent of the window or door area.

F. Within a Building. Any sign which is located within a building and which is clearly intended to be visible primarily to people located within the building. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.080 Review of signs/design standards.

The size, design, color, lighting, location and supporting structures of nonexempt signs shall comply with the following provisions, in addition to other applicable provisions of this chapter:

A. Legibility. All forms of sign copy shall be of a size, color, style, spacing, and shape to produce a legible, concise, and uncluttered message as viewed from adjacent public roads or from an internal circulation road or walkway towards which it is oriented.

B. Design. Signs shall be designed using shapes, graphics, colors, materials, and lighting which are coordinated, integrated into, and a natural extension of the design of the building, development or business identified. On-building signs shall be incorporated into the design of the building and shall not be placed in locations which interrupt, detract from or change the architectural lines of the building.

C. Coordination. In multi-tenant developments, every effort shall be made to coordinate the size, placement, and colors of signs to promote a pleasing image and avoid a confusing, cluttered appearance, while retaining individual business identity through the use of letter style, logos or symbols. An overall sign program addressing the requirements of this section shall be required for multi-tenant developments, and it shall be the responsibility of the owner/manager of the development to inform all tenants of the requirements of the approved sign program.

D. Sign Structure. When visible, the supporting structure of the sign shall be incorporated into the overall sign design, and shall be in scale with the sign. The sign structure, and any street numbers included on the sign structure, shall not be counted for purposes of determining sign area. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.090 Residential district sign regulations.

Only those sign types listed below or identified as exceptions in BMC 17.95.070 shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones.

A. Residential Nameplate Signs.

1. Permitted sign types: building-mounted only.

2. Maximum sign area: two square feet.

3. Maximum number: one for each dwelling unit.

4. Location and setback requirements: may be mounted on a dwelling unit or accessory structure.

5. Permitted illumination: external illumination only.

B. Home Occupation Signs.

1. Permitted sign types: interior, building-mounted, or freestanding.

2. Maximum sign area: six square feet (24 inches by 36 inches).

3. Maximum number: one sign.

4. Location and Setback Requirements. Home occupation signs must be located on the same lot as the dwelling unit housing the home occupation and:

a. Interior signs shall be located within the building housing the home occupation; and

b. Building-mounted signs shall be affixed to the building housing the home occupation; and

c. Freestanding signs shall be located within 10 feet of the building housing the home occupation. Freestanding signs shall be subject to a maximum height of four feet, six inches.

5. Permitted illumination: external illumination only.

C. Signs Identifying Multifamily Developments or Subdivisions.

1. Permitted sign types: freestanding signs only.

2. Maximum sign height: five feet.

3. Maximum sign area: 30 square feet.

4. Maximum Number. One sign shall be allowed for each development or complex, even when more than one tax lot or ownership is included in the development, except as follows:

a. When an additional sign is needed to provide identification of the development at major public access points located on two different roads; or

b. When two single-faced signs oriented in two different directions are proposed in lieu of a two-sided identification sign.

c. In business park developments, additional signage may be permitted to identify the residential portions of the development, as well as the commercial or industrial portions.

5. Location and Setback Requirements. Signs shall be situated in a manner so as not to adversely affect safety, corner vision, public rights-of-way improvements or future improvements, easements, or other similar conditions.

6. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC 17.95.050(G).

D. Noncommercial Public Service Signs.

1. Permitted sign types: freestanding, building-mounted, and readerboard.

2. Maximum sign height: see BMC 17.95.100(B).

3. Maximum Sign Area.

a. Freestanding signs: 24 square feet per side.

b. Building-mounted signs: see BMC 17.95.100(E).

4. Maximum Number.

a. Freestanding signs: one freestanding sign on each premises.

b. Building-Mounted Signs. Building-mounted signs shall be subject to the maximum area limits specified in BMC 17.95.100(E).

5. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC 17.95.050(G), except that internally illuminated signs in residential zones shall be turned off between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

6. Special Standards. Readerboard signs that are not electronic are allowed; provided, that the area of the readerboard shall be included within the total allowable square footage for signage. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.100 Commercial, business, and industrial district sign regulations.

A. General. The following regulations and standards shall apply to all on-premises signs located in the B-1, BP, C-1, C-2, and M-1 zones; provided, that this section shall not apply to signs located within the downtown special planning area which shall be subject to the standards in BMC 17.95.110. Only those signs listed below shall be permitted.

B. Freestanding Signs, Individual on Premises. Individual businesses or uses that are not located in a multiple-tenant development may be identified by a single freestanding on-premises sign. The following regulations shall apply to all freestanding signs located in the B-1, BP, C-1, C-2, and M-1 zones, except for freestanding signs located within a multiple-tenant development which shall be subject to the requirements identified in subsections (C) and (D) of this section:

1. Maximum sign height: 25 feet except that:

a. Freestanding on-premises signs located within 500 feet of an I-5 interchange which are associated with a use catering to freeway travelers such as a gas station, eating and drinking establishment, or hotel may have a maximum height of 50 feet; and

b. Freestanding on-premises signs located on lots with freeway frontage may be 45 feet in height.

2. Maximum sign area: 50 square feet as viewed from one direction except that:

a. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if the site is larger than one-half acre; and

b. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if identification of more than one use within a development is included on the sign; and

c. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted if the sign uses natural materials (carved or sand-blasted wood, or marble or stone) and indirect illumination; and

d. An additional 30 square feet may be permitted for freestanding on-premises signs located within 500 feet of an I-5 interchange or on lots with freeway frontage when associated with a use catering to freeway travelers; and

e. Sign area may be increased by a maximum of 20 square feet for time and temperature only if a time and/or temperature display is incorporated in the design of the sign, as further regulated in BMC 17.95.120; and

f. For developments over 30 acres in size, an additional 30 square feet of sign area is allowed for each tenant larger than 10,000 square feet in size up to a maximum of 350 square feet.

3. Maximum number: one sign for each tenant or use.

4. Location and Setback Requirements.

a. All freestanding on-premises signs shall be located on the same site or premises as the tenant or use with which they are associated; and

b. All freestanding on-premises signs shall be located within a landscaped planter with protective curbs located at least three feet from all support elements; and

c. All freestanding on-premises signs with a sign area greater than 50 square feet, or a sign height exceeding 25 feet, shall be subject to a property line setback of 10 feet. This setback shall be measured from the outer edge of the sign closest to the property line.

5. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC 17.95.050(G).

C. Development Complex Signs, Primary. The following standards and regulations shall apply to all multiple-tenant developments and to freestanding signs located in a multiple-tenant development:

1. Maximum sign height: see subsection (B)(1) of this section.

2. Maximum sign area: see subsection (B)(2) of this section.

3. Maximum Number. One development complex sign shall be allowed for each multiple-tenant development, even when more than one tax lot or ownership is included in the development, except that:

a. Two additional signs may be used to identify a multiple-tenant development if the development has access points located at different major arterials; provided, that the additional signs shall be located at an arterial point; and further provided, that only one such sign shall be located at each access point; and

b. Two single-faced signs oriented in opposite directions may be used in lieu of a single double-faced identification sign.

4. Location and Setback Requirements. Development complex signs shall be located within the multiple-tenant development with which they are associated and may only be used to advertise the development and the tenants and uses located within the development.

5. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be permitted. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to BMC 17.95.050(G).

D. Development Complex Signs, Supplemental. A monument sign may be used to identify individual tenants within a multiple-tenant development which are not otherwise identified by a primary development complex sign subject to the following:

1. Permitted sign types: freestanding only.

2. Maximum sign height: six feet.

3. Maximum sign area: 36 square feet.

4. Maximum Number. Only one monument sign shall be allowed for each tenant or business.

5. Location and Setback Requirements.

a. Each sign shall be located in front of the tenant or business it identifies; and

b. Each sign shall be located within a landscaped area surrounded by curbing located at least three feet from the base of the sign unless the sign is located next to a sidewalk.

c. Each sign shall be located at least 50 feet from any primary development complex sign and 100 feet from any supplemental development complex sign.

d. Signs shall not be located within a radius of 20 feet of the corner of any two streets or the corner of a driveway and street.

6. Material and Design Requirements. Colors and materials shall be the same, or substantially the same, as those used on the building housing the tenant or business identified by the sign.

7. Permitted Illumination. Internal or external illumination may be used subject to the general illumination standards in BMC 17.95.050(G).

E. Building-Mounted Signs. Building-mounted signs identifying the use of space within the building on which the sign is mounted may be permitted subject to the following conditions:

1. Maximum Sign Area. The total combined area of all building-mounted signs on a building frontage shall be limited to two square feet for each linear foot of building frontage, except that if a tenant is not identified by any other sign 60 square feet may be permitted regardless of frontage length.

2. Permitted Illumination. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated subject to BMC 17.95.050(G).

F. Movie Theaters. The following additional provisions shall apply to on-premises signs advertising movie theaters:

1. Movie theaters with freeway frontage or located within 500 feet of a freeway interchange may have up to two freestanding signs provided one freestanding sign is located along an arterial and one sign is located along the freeway frontage. Signs permitted by this provision shall be limited to 100 square feet per sign face.

2. Readerboards may be incorporated into freestanding signs or building-mounted signs; provided, that no moving messages shall be permitted; and further provided, that the total area of any such sign does not exceed the maximum permitted sign area.

G. Permitted Temporary and Portable Signs. The following regulations shall apply to temporary and portable signs permitted pursuant to BMC 17.95.125:

1. No more than a combination of one portable sign and two banners shall be permitted for any business.

2. In addition to permanent signage, a business may also display one movable sign during business hours up to a maximum size of six square feet per sign face.

3. Signs shall be secured, anchored, weighted or staked to handle wind loads of 50 miles per hour.

4. In the retail core, signs shall be located behind the sidewalk on private property.

5. In downtown, signs shall be located within the area for outdoor display of goods, as provided in BMC 17.45.080(B)(2) of this section, or other approved location.

6. Well-maintained banners may be used for promotions if securely anchored.

7. Up to two well-maintained blade banners per street front may be used on private property and not extend over public right-of-way, if securely anchored.

H. Walking Advertisers. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing location, supervision and public safety. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.105 Neighborhood business district sign regulations.

A. General. The following regulations and standards shall apply to all on-premises signs located in the MR-NB and R-S zones. Only those signs listed below shall be permitted.

B. Permitted sign types: building-mounted or freestanding.

C. Maximum sign height: Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of five feet.

D. Maximum sign area: 20 square feet.

E. Maximum number: one sign for each building or premises.

F. Location and Setback Requirements. Freestanding signs shall be located in front of, and within 15 feet of, the building they are associated with.

G. Permitted Illumination. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited. Externally illuminated signs shall be subject to the general standards in BMC 17.95.050(G).

H. Permitted Temporary and Portable Signs. The following regulations shall apply to temporary and portable signs:

1. No more than a combination of one portable sign and two banners shall be permitted for any business.

2. In addition to permanent signage, a business may also display one movable sign during business hours up to a maximum size of six square feet per sign face.

3. Signs shall be secured, anchored, weighted or staked to handle wind loads of 50 miles per hour.

4. In the retail core, signs shall be located behind the sidewalk on private property.

5. In downtown, signs shall be located within the area for outdoor display of goods, as provided in BMC 17.45.080(B)(2), or other approved location.

6. Well-maintained banners may be used for promotions if securely anchored.

7. Up to two well-maintained blade banners per street front may be used on private property and not extend over public right-of-way, if securely anchored.

I. Walking Advertisers. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing location, supervision and public safety. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.110 Areas zoned B-1 and C-1 and located in downtown on Fairhaven Avenue and Victoria Avenue sign regulations.

A. General. In addition to any other applicable standards or requirements identified in this chapter, signs located within the downtown special planning areas shall be reviewed for conformance with the downtown design guidelines as adopted in the comprehensive plan.

B. Permitted Sign Types. Each building or premises may have either a freestanding sign or a building-mounted sign. Building-mounted signs may be projected signs.

C. Maximum Sign Height. Maximum sign height shall be 25 feet.

D. Maximum Sign Area. Maximum sign area shall be 25 square feet.

E. Maximum Number. A single sign is permitted for each building or premises.

F. Special Standards. Building-mounted signs which project over a sidewalk or alley (within the right-of-way) shall have at least eight feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk to the bottom of the sign, or 15 feet of clearance from an alley to the bottom of the sign. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.115 On-site traffic control and directories.

A. Traffic Control. Signs which direct the flow of traffic to, from and within the site area shall observe the corner vision requirements of the district and shall be a maximum of three square feet per side. See BMC 17.70.050 and 17.70.060.

B. Directories. An on-site sign oriented primarily towards vehicle circulation which identifies and directs traffic to a number of tenants, uses or buildings within the development, including informational signs, shall be limited in area to a maximum of two square feet per tenant, use or building specifically identified, up to a maximum of 40 square feet, and shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Directories oriented toward pedestrian circulation areas, including those attached to buildings, shall be a maximum of 24 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

C. Menu Boards. On-site menus oriented toward internal circulation drives shall not exceed a combined area of 40 square feet. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.120 Electronic changing message sign requirements.

A. A time and temperature sign is permitted up to a maximum of 20 square feet in area for time and temperature only, in locations specified in BMC 17.95.100.

B. An LED gas price sign is permitted with digit heights of six, eight, 12, 15, 22 and 30 inches for gas prices only, in locations specified in BMC 17.95.100, to be included in maximum sign area.

C. Electronic message center signs and other changeable copy signs shall be incorporated into a permanent identification sign which is otherwise permitted by this chapter. Approval for electronic message center signs shall not be granted unless the following conditions are satisfied:

1. Only one electronic message center sign shall be used in a development;

2. The changeable copy sign or electronic message center shall be integrated into a nonelectronic sign and the electronic portion of the sign shall not exceed:

a. Eighty square feet in sign area for signs 40 feet or less in height;

b. One hundred fifty square feet in sign area for signs over 40 and less than 50 feet in height;

c. Two hundred fifty square feet in sign area for signs 50 feet in height;

d. Sign pole width shall be a maximum of one-fourth of the sign width;

3. Electronic message centers and changeable copy signs may be used only to advertise activities conducted or goods and services available on the property on which the sign is located, or to present public service information;

4. Electronic message center signs are only permitted for a multiple-tenant development complex, a group of businesses, or an individual business;

5. Location shall be within 100 feet of the Interstate 5 right-of-way and the sign shall be oriented to Interstate 5, separated along each side of I-5 by 1,500 feet;

6. The display shall comply with WAC 468-66-050 as summarized and amended here: Electronic signs may be used only as on-premises signs and/or to present public service information as follows:

a. Advertising messages on electronic signboards may contain words, phrases, sentences, symbols, trademarks, and logos. A single message or a message segment must have a static display time of at least two seconds after moving onto the signboard, with all segments of the total message to be displayed within 10 seconds. A one-segment message may remain static on the signboard with no duration limit.

b. Displays must appear as a picture that holds in a static position for a minimum of four seconds.

c. Displays shall not appear to flash, undulate, or pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking or chasing lights. Displays shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it moves onto, is displayed on, or leaves the signboard.

d. No electronic sign lamp may be illuminated to a degree of brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility. In no case may the brightness exceed 8,000 nits or equivalent candelas during daylight hours, or 1,000 nits or equivalent candelas between dusk and dawn. Signs shall be programmed to automatically adjust illumination for all times of day and night.

D. No other signs or illuminating devices shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.125 Permitted temporary or portable signs.

The following regulations shall apply to all temporary or portable signs not exempt under BMC 17.95.070:

A. Special Events Sign Permit. Temporary signs, banners, lights, streamers, inflatables, balloons, and other similar apparatus used in conjunction with a special event may be used after obtaining a special event permit subject to the following conditions:

1. Time Period and Duration. The display of apparatus specified shall not exceed a total time period of four weeks in any calendar year; provided, that temporary displays for outdoor sales of vehicles that are maintained in good repair may be used as desired except in the retail core.

2. Hazards. No sign, light, electric cord, streamer, banner, or other apparatus shall be situated or used in a manner which creates a hazard.

B. Temporary Portable Identification Signs. One portable identification sign may be used to temporarily identify a new business until permanent identification signs are installed, or to identify an existing business while permanent signs are being repaired or replaced, under the following conditions and limitations:

1. Maximum Size. No portable identification sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area.

2. Setbacks. Portable signs shall observe corner vision requirements, and shall in no case be placed in the public right-of-way.

3. Anchoring. All signs shall be physically anchored to the premises in a manner which both prevents the sign from being moved or blown from its approved location, and allows the prompt removal of the sign.

4. Illuminated Signs. No portable identification sign shall have flashing lights or arrows or any other apparatus which may be construed to be a traffic control device. All illuminated signs requiring an outside power source shall use a state-approved power outlet.

5. Hazards. No portable sign or associated apparatus shall be situated or used in a manner which creates a hazard. The city retains the right to remove a portable sign that, in the judgment of the city officials, may create a hazardous situation.

C. Walking Advertisers. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to advertise a business, event, sale or season/holiday with a permit describing location, supervision and public safety. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.130 Off-premises signs.

Off-premises signs shall not be allowed except as herein provided:

A. Billboards (Outdoor Advertising Structures). New billboards shall not be allowed in any zoning district. Billboards may be allowed to relocate from one location within the city to another. Such relocated billboards shall not be allowed in any zoning district except the general commercial, heavy commercial and industrial districts.

B. Political Signs. Signs which support or oppose ballot measures, persons running for political office, and other issues subject to a vote by the public may be allowed subject to the following conditions:

1. Approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed;

2. Location. Such signs shall not be posted in state, county or city rights-of-way, on telephone poles, traffic signs, or other public apparatus. Such signs shall observe the corner vision requirements of this title, and shall not be situated in a manner which creates a hazard;

3. Size. Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size as viewed from one direction;

4. Time Limit. Such signs shall not be posted more than four months before the affected election, and shall be removed within one week after the election for which the sign is posted.

C. Temporary Directional Signs. The intent of this provision is to allow the infrequent, and not the regular, use of signs of a temporary nature. Off-premises directional signs of a temporary nature such as those used to direct persons to open houses, garage sales, or special events of short (two days’) duration may be allowed subject to the following conditions:

1. Any such sign which is visible from a state highway shall be subject to approval by the State Department of Transportation.

2. All such signs shall comply with subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section.

3. Time Limit. All such signs shall be removed at the end of the day on which the event, open house or garage sale is conducted and shall not be used repeatedly, contrary to the stated intent.

4. The city shall have the authority to immediately remove and dispose of any such sign found to be in violation of this subsection.

D. Permanent Off-Premises Directional Signs. The intent of this provision is to provide directional and locational information to the general public about places of general interest, such as tourist information services, school or public recreational facilities, shopping malls, restaurants, lodging, business directories designed to be compatible with the city’s urban wayfinding program, central business or other special districts, historic sites, and regional developments; or to provide information of a general community nature, such as those found at city entrance locations identifying the city and historic dates, or listing local service clubs and organizations or to provide business identification for sites located on a dead-end street. Such signs may be allowed, subject to the following:

1. Any such sign which is visible from a state highway shall be subject to approval by the community development director or designee of transportation.

2. Approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed.

3. Location. Any such sign shall not be placed where it may cause a hazard, or obstruct the vision of any driver.

4. Size. Shall be no larger than necessary to clearly inform or direct the public. City identification/community service club type signs shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. Business identification directional signs on dead-end streets and business directories shall be designed to be generally compatible with the city’s urban wayfinding signage program and the design shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

5. Illumination. May be indirectly illuminated.

6. Design. All such signs shall be designed using materials, colors, lettering and other graphics which shall be established by planning commission. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.135 Prohibited signs.

A. Prohibited signs are subject to removal by the city at the owner’s or user’s expense. Prohibited signs on public property may be summarily removed by the city. Prohibited signs on private property shall be subject to code enforcement action for removal pursuant to this section.

B. The following signs or displays are prohibited in all zones within the city, whether located on public or private property, except those expressly permitted as temporary signs in BMC 17.95.125:

1. Abandoned or obsolete signs;

2. Animated or moving signs;

3. Dilapidated, nonmaintained signs;

4. Flashing signs and strobe lights, holographic displays;

5. Inflatable advertising devices;

6. Mylar balloons;

7. Obstructing signs which obstruct or interfere with free access to or egress from a required exit from a building or structure, or do not meet corner vision requirements;

8. Off-premises signs except those expressly allowed in this chapter;

9. Pennants, streamers, ribbons, spinners, whirlers, propellers, festoons, blinking lights, or similar items that attract attention through movement, reflection or illumination;

10. Portable signs include any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. Examples of portable signs include but are not limited to wire stake signs, A-frame, sandwich board signs and portable readerboard signs. See BMC 17.95.125(B) for exceptions;

11. Persons carrying or wearing portable advertising signs or costumes designed to advertise a business. See BMC 17.95.125(C) for exceptions;

12. Signs mounted on the tops of roofs, projecting above parapet walls, are prohibited. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.95.140 Variances.

Relief from or modifications of the size limits of signs regulated by this chapter require a zoning variance as provided in BMC 14A.05.150. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.100 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, LOTS AND USES

Sections:

17.100.010    Title.

17.100.020    Application.

17.100.030    Purpose.

17.100.040    Authority.

17.100.050    Continuance of nonconforming structures and uses.

17.100.060    Nonconforming lots.

17.100.070    Nonconforming uses.

17.100.080    Nonconforming structures and developments.

17.100.090    Abatement of nonconforming structures and uses.

17.100.100    Amortization and abatement of nonconforming signs.


17.100.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.020 Application.

This chapter shall apply to buildings, structures, lots, developments, and uses which become nonconforming as a result of the application of this title to them, or from classification or reclassification of the property under this title, or any subsequent amendments thereto. This chapter must be read along with chapter 14.15 BMC, Critical Area Regulations, and the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.030 Purpose.

Over time the adoption and amendment of regulations has resulted in lots, uses, structures, and developments which were lawful when established but would be prohibited or restricted by the regulations currently in effect. The purpose of this chapter is to permit the continuation and maintenance of nonconforming lots, uses, structures, and developments, but generally prohibit their expansion, modification, or reconstruction except in limited circumstances. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, 36.70B, and 36.70C RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.050 Continuance of nonconforming structures and uses.

Any legally existing nonconforming structure or use may be continued and maintained in conformance with provisions of this chapter, provided no enlargement of area, space or volume occupied by the nonconforming use occurs. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.060 Nonconforming lots.

A. If any parcel of land with a minimum lot size or lot dimension which is less than that prescribed for by the district in which such parcel is located was subdivided into lots according to a plat of record on or before the effective date of this title, or any subsequent amendments to this title, then the fact that the parcel of land does not meet the minimum lot size or lot dimension requirements as set forth in this title shall not prohibit the property from being utilized; provided, that all other regulations prescribed for that district by this title are complied with, except as provided for in chapter 17.70 BMC.

B. Adjacent undeveloped lots in common ownership which do not meet current requirements for area or dimension shall be considered a single combined lot of record if the combination would have the effect of remedying or minimizing the extent of the nonconformity. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.070 Nonconforming uses.

Changes of use, tenancy, ownership or management may occur to any existing legally established and continued nonconforming use under one or more of the following circumstances:

A. Any part of a structure occupied by an existing legally established and continued nonconforming use may be changed to a use which, in the opinion of the community development director or designee, is of the same or of a more restrictive nature. When the use of a nonconforming structure is hereafter changed to a more restrictive use, the structure shall not thereafter be used for a less restrictive use.

B. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing legally established and continued nonconforming use provided there is no change in the nature, character or occupancy classification of such nonconforming use except as authorized within this chapter.

C. Structures or lands which are nonconforming as to use regulations shall not be enlarged or intensified in any manner unless the enlargement within such structures or lands conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming use, within a nonconforming structure, shall not expand into any portion of the nonconforming structure.

D. This subsection also does not allow the expansion of any nonconforming hazardous material storage. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.080 Nonconforming structures and developments.

A. Maintenance and Repairs. Ordinary maintenance of a nonconforming structure which includes minor interior and exterior repairs and incidental alterations is permitted. Minor maintenance and repair may include but is not limited to painting, roof repair and replacement, plumbing, wiring, mechanical equipment replacement, and weatherization. Incidental alterations may include construction of nonbearing walls or partitions.

B. Alterations and Expansions. No structural alterations, as defined by the International Building Code, shall be made except as required by law or ordinance; provided, that the cost of such work shall not exceed 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such structure as established by the most current Skagit County assessor’s tax roll.

C. Damage and Replacement. A nonconforming structure having been damaged or partially destroyed to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such structure as established by the most current Skagit County assessor’s tax roll may be restored to its original condition, as authorized by the city’s building official, and its immediately preceding or existing use at the time of partial destruction may be continued or resumed. Restoration shall begin within one year and be completed within two years of the date of partial destruction. If restoration is not started within one year, then the reuse and occupancy of the structure shall conform to all the regulations of the district in which the use is located.

D. Structures and developments which are nonconforming as to percentage of site coverage, setbacks, building height or density shall not be enlarged unless such enlargement conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located.

E. Nonconforming residential structures are allowed to provide maintenance, alterations and additions which may exceed the requirements of this chapter; provided the total number of dwelling units does not increase and all other development standards of the district are complied with.

F. This chapter shall not prevent the following provided the total value of the improvements, over the lifetime of the nonconforming use, does not exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the nonconforming use as established by the most current Skagit County assessor’s tax roll; and the nonconforming use or structure is not expanded except as allowed by subsection (D) of this section; provided further, that any replacement of a nonconforming structure, or parts thereof, must comply with the appropriate development standards unless a variance is granted pursuant to this title:

1. Strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any nonconforming structure or part thereof which is declared to be unsafe or a hazard to the public by the order of a city official charged with protecting the public safety;

2. Lessening a hazardous situation, nuisance or other adverse environmental impact;

3. Bringing the structure or use into more conformance with this title;

4. Adapting the structure to new technologies or equipment;

5. Improvements which do not increase the intensity of the nonconforming use.

G. This subsection does not allow the expansion of a use or structure which would be inconsistent with a previously authorized conditional use permit, special property use permit, contract rezone, or binding agreement between the city and the property owner.

H. When a building or structure is moved to another location it must then be made to conform to the requirements of the district to which it is moved, unless specifically allowed elsewhere by this title.

I. This section also does not allow the expansion of any nonconforming hazardous material storage. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.090 Abatement of nonconforming structures and uses.

Nonconforming structures and uses shall be abated if one or more of the following circumstances exist:

A. If a nonconforming use is discontinued and changed to a conforming use, any future use of the structure or land shall be in conformity to the regulations of the district in which structure or land is located.

B. Any structure or portion of a nonresidential structure, or parcel of land occupied by a nonconforming use which becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of 180 days shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. Residential uses in commercial or industrial zones which are unoccupied for more than 180 days may be allowed to reoccupy if a variance is issued pursuant to this title.

C. If a nonconforming structure sustains damage or destruction which exceeds 50 percent of the current assessed valuation of the structure as established by the Skagit County assessor’s office, reconstruction of such damaged structure or reuse of occupancy shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located and it shall be treated as a new building. This subsection shall not apply to single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.100.100 Amortization and abatement of nonconforming signs.

All off-premises advertising and directional signs that do not comply with the requirements of chapter 17.95 BMC shall be given an amortization period of six months that commences upon notification of the sign owner and/or property owner. Following such notification, the nonconforming sign shall be abated within six months. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.105 ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES

Sections:

17.105.010    Title.

17.105.020    Application.

17.105.030    Purpose.

17.105.040    Authority.

17.105.050    Procedure.

17.105.060    Applications for EPF projects.

17.105.070    CUP-EPF review criteria.

17.105.080    Building permit application.

17.105.090    Special provisions for secure community transition facilities (SCTFs).

17.105.100    Processing timelines.

17.105.105    CUP city council authority – Final decision.


17.105.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Essential Public Facilities.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.020 Application.

A. This chapter establishes the criteria that the city shall use in making a decision upon an application for an essential public facility (EPF). The community development director or designee shall develop a list of essential public facilities at the time of a request for conditional use permit by an applicant. These facilities shall meet the definition of essential public facilities under BMC 17.01.050 and the list shall be part of the record for the application.

B. This chapter shall serve to establish the process for permitting those uses determined to be EPFs and which satisfy the criteria set forth under BMC 17.105.070. The director shall determine whether a proposed facility shall be reviewed as an EPF and subject to this review process. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.030 Purpose.

A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a siting process for essential public facilities (EPFs). This process involves the community and is intended to assist in the identification and minimization of adverse impacts.

B. Essential public facilities are defined in BMC 17.01.050. EPFs include, but are not limited to, those facilities which are difficult to site, such as airports, state educational facilities, state and regional transportation facilities, state and local correctional facilities, solid waste handling facilities and in-patient facilities (including substance abuse and mental health facilities). The Growth Management Act mandates that no local development regulation may preclude the siting of essential public facilities. Secure community transition facilities as defined in BMC 17.01.050 are also included.

C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to waive the city’s rights to assert lead agency status to conduct environmental review under Washington State’s Environmental Policy Act pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW and chapter 197-11 WAC as now and hereafter amended. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in chapter 36.70A RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.050 Procedure.

Applications that seek approval for an EPF as defined by BMC 17.01.050 and listed under BMC 17.105.020 shall follow the procedures established in chapter 14A.05 BMC for a Type IV EPF conditional use permit process. In addition to the decision criteria described in BMC 17.105.070, secure community transition facilities as defined in BMC 17.01.050 shall also be consistent with the decision criteria described in BMC 17.105.090. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.060 Applications for EPF projects.

All proposed projects determined to be EPFs shall be reviewed and conditioned in accordance with all requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code including the conditional use permit procedure, set forth in this chapter and referred to as the CUP-EPF review procedure. All EPF applications shall contain the following information:

A. A detailed written description of the proposed and potential public services to be provided, including a proposed site plan, the proposed service area of the facility, the source or sources of funding, and identification of any applicable public regulatory agencies or regional state or federal project agency sponsors and the federal or state authority which the agency has been granted for siting decision making; and

B. A written statement of the need, in statistical or narrative form, for the proposed project currently and over the following 10-year period; and

C. An inventory of known, existing or proposed facilities, by name and address, within Skagit County, or within the region, serving the same or similar needs as the proposed project; and

D. An explanation of the need and suitability for the proposed facility in the proposed city location(s); and

E. An assessment of the suitability of the proposed location in the city or another jurisdiction in terms of local, county, regional and/or state needs in order to minimize public costs (where appropriate) and environmental impacts, to discern the suitability of the facility’s location in the city or within another jurisdiction, to determine the number of jurisdictions affected or served by the proposed EPF, and to decide what, if any, inter-jurisdictional approach is most appropriate or available; and

F. An analysis of the environmental, social, economic, financial and infrastructure impacts of the proposed EPF, including an assessment of the proportionate financial impacts on affected jurisdictions, consideration copies of agreements which allocate the financial burdens of the proposed project on the city and other jurisdictions, and the approximate area within which the proposed project could potentially have adverse impacts, such as increased traffic, public safety risks, noise, glare, emissions, or other environmental impacts; and

G. An analysis of the proposal’s consistency with the city’s comprehensive plan and development regulations, and plans and policies of other affected jurisdictions, including but not limited to Skagit County countywide planning policies; and

H. Documentation of public involvement efforts to date, including public and agency comments received, and plans for future public participation; and

I. All application materials required by other chapters of the Burlington Municipal Code for components of the project not covered by this chapter; such as platting requirements, critical area code compliance, traffic concurrency, comprehensive plan and zoning, etc., so that code compliance for all components of the project can be reviewed together; and

J. Such information as requested by the community development director or designee as determined necessary to complete the preliminary analysis or to otherwise assist the community development director or designee in making recommendation(s) and the city council in making the final determination on the CUP-EPF. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.070 CUP-EPF review criteria.

A. Essential public facilities shall be subject to classification and identification as follows:

1. Type One – Regional EPFs. These are major essential public facilities that provide public services to more than one county and where the provider has statutory authority to site and construct the facility and where a regional, intergovernmental siting process has been followed. These facilities may include, but are not limited to, regional transportation facilities, such as regional airports, state correction facilities, and state educational facilities.

2. Type Two – Local EPFs. These are local or interlocal facilities serving residents or property serving Skagit County. A “local EPF” means an essential public facility that is not a regional EPF.

3. To enable the city to determine the project’s classification, any public or private entity proposing to site an EPF in the city shall provide the application materials set forth in BMC 17.105.060 to the community development director or designee once it is known that the EPF is likely or required to be built.

4. The community development director or designee shall review the application for an EPF upon receipt and determine whether the proposed project shall be identified as an EPP and if so whether the EPF shall be classified as a regional EPF or local EPF. A determination shall be made within 45 days following the director’s written notice to the applicant of receipt of sufficient material and information set forth in BMC 17.105.060. The community development director or designee shall provide notice of determination to the applicant and publish notice of the determination in a newspaper of general circulation within Skagit County.

5. The community development director’s or designee’s determination shall be an administrative determination subject to appeal and procedures established in BMC 14A.05.060(A).

B. Notification and involvement of community and jurisdictions for EPFs shall be as follows:

l. Type One Facilities. In addition to such other notice as may be required by law before the siting decision, and at least 90 days before submitting an application for a type one essential public facility, the prospective applicant shall notify the affected public and jurisdictions of the general type and nature of the proposal, identify sites under consideration for accommodating the proposed facility, and identify opportunities to comment on the proposal. Applications for specific projects shall not be considered complete in the absence of proof of a published notice and notice to the city regarding the proposed project. Published notice shall be in a newspaper of general circulation in the affected area. This notice shall include the information described above and shall be published at least 90 days prior to the submission of the application. It is expected that an environmental impact statement may be required for most type one facilities in accordance with the SEPA environmental review process. Nothing from this chapter will preclude the city from consulting with the Skagit County council of governments which may provide the project sponsor and affected jurisdictions with their comments or recommendations regarding alternative project locations during this process. The purpose of this provision is to enable potentially affected jurisdictions and the public to collectively review and comment on alternative sites for major facilities before the project sponsor has made their siting decision.

2. Type Two Facilities. Type two essential public facilities shall be required to provide a notice of application as required by BMC Title 14A in addition to any standard notification requirements for conditional uses.

C. Conditional Use Permit Required.

1. An EPF shall be a conditional use in all zones. In the event of a conflict with any other provision within the Burlington Municipal Code, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

2. In addition to the conditional use permit, other development review permits might be necessary depending upon the site that is selected. For example, a plat or critical area mitigation could be necessary.

3. An EPF application and approval process shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter and the procedures established in BMC Title 14A for a conditional use permit.

4. In addition to the conditional use permit application fee, an additional cost reimbursement agreement with the applicant may be required for additional costs, including but not limited to costs for independent consultant review set forth in subsection (D) of this section, associated with review of an EPF application under the criteria established in this chapter.

D. Independent Consultant Review.

1. The community development director or designee may require independent consultant review of the proposal to assess its compliance with the decision criteria contained in this chapter.

2. If independent consultant review is required, the applicant shall deposit funds or other security in an amount and in a form acceptable to the community development director or designee to defray the cost of such review. Unexpended funds will be returned to the applicant following the final decision on the application without interest.

E. Decision Criteria for Type One Facilities – Regional Essential Public Facilities. City council must approve or approve with conditions, a conditional use permit for a type one EPF in accordance with the following criteria:

1. The sponsor has provided a meaningful opportunity for public participation in the siting decision and development of mitigation measures that is appropriate in light of the project’s scope, applicable requirements of the county code, and state or federal law;

2. The proposal complies with applicable requirements of BMC Title 14A and all other applicable provisions of the city code except BMC 14A.05.140;

3. The proposal shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and types of uses of the underlying zoning of the proposed site including being consistent with the environmental impacts of the underlying zoning permitted uses;

4. The project site meets the facility’s minimum physical site requirements, including projected expansion needs. Site requirements shall be determined by the minimum size of the facility, setbacks, access, support facilities, topography, geology, and on-site mitigation needs;

5. The proposal, as conditioned, adequately mitigates significant adverse impacts to life, limb, property, the environment, public health and safety, transportation systems, economic development and other identified impacts;

6. The proposal, as conditioned, adequately mitigates for any probable significant adverse impact on critical areas or resource lands, except for lineal facilities, such as highways, where no feasible alternative exists;

7. The proposal incorporates specific features to ensure it responds appropriately to the existing or planned character, appearance, quality of development, and physical characteristics of the site and surrounding property; and

8. The project sponsor has proposed mitigation measures that are consistent with the Uniform Relocation Assistance Act, chapter 8.26 RCW, chapter 486-100 WAC, as now exists or is hereafter amended when otherwise required by law.

F. Decision Criteria for Type Two Facilities – Local Essential Public Facilities. City council may approve, or condition its approval, of a conditional use permit for a local EPF only when the proposal meets all of the following criteria:

1. The proposal shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and types of uses of the underlying zoning of the proposed site including being consistent with the environmental impacts of the underlying zoning permitted uses;

2. The project applicant has demonstrated a need for the project, as supported by an analysis of the projected service population, an inventory of existing and planned comparable facilities, and the projected demand for the type of facility proposed;

3. If applicable, the project would serve a significant share of the city’s population, and the proposed site will reasonably serve the project’s overall service population;

4. The applicant has reasonably investigated alternative sites, as evidenced by a detailed explanation of site selection methodology;

5. The project is consistent with the applicant’s own long-range plans for facilities and operations;

6. The project has fewer impacts in the particular geographic area in contrast with other available locations;

7. The applicant has provided a meaningful opportunity for public participation in the siting decision and development of mitigation measures that is appropriate in light of the project’s scope, applicable requirements of the city code, and state or federal law;

8. The proposal complies with applicable requirements of all other applicable provisions of the city code;

9. The project site meets the facility’s minimum physical site requirements, including projected expansion needs. Site requirements shall be determined by the minimum size of the facility, setbacks, access, support facilities, topography, geology, and on-site mitigation needs;

10. The proposal, as conditioned, adequately mitigates significant adverse impacts to life, limb, property, the environment, public health and safety, transportation systems, economic development and other identified impacts;

11. The proposal shall not have any probable significant adverse impact on critical areas or resource lands, except for lineal facilities, such as highways, where no feasible alternative exists;

12. The proposal incorporates specific features to ensure it responds appropriately to the existing or planned character, appearance, quality of development, and physical characteristics of the site and surrounding property;

13. Major public facilities which generate substantial traffic should be sited near major transportation corridors;

14. The project sponsor has proposed mitigation measures that are consistent with the Uniform Relocation Assistance Act, chapter 8.26 RCW, chapter 486-100 WAC, as now exists or is hereafter amended when otherwise required by law;

15. The proposal will not be materially detrimental to uses or property in the immediate vicinity;

16. The proposal is compatible with and incorporates specific features, conditions, or revisions that ensure it responds appropriately to the existing or intended character, appearance, quality of development, and physical characteristics of the site and surrounding property; and

17. Parity exists with the uses permitted in the same general area in their freedom from nuisance-generating features in matters of noise, odors, air pollution, wastes, vibration, traffic, physical hazards, and similar matters. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.080 Building permit application.

A. Any building permit for an EPF approved under this chapter shall comply with all conditions of approval in the conditional use permit. In the event a building permit for an EPF is denied, the community development director or designee shall submit in writing the reasons for denial to the project sponsor.

B. No construction permits may be applied for prior to approval of a conditional use permit for an EPF unless the applicant signs a written release acknowledging that such approval is neither guaranteed nor implied by the community development director or designee’s acceptance of the construction permit applications. The applicant shall expressly hold the city harmless and accept all financial risk associated with preparing and submitting construction plans before a final decision is made under this chapter. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.090 Special provisions for secure community transition facilities (SCTFs).

A. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish standards for secure community transition facilities (SCTFs) in compliance with chapter 71.09 RCW, and to maintain compatibility with other land uses and services permitted within the city. The standards in this section apply to all SCTFs in addition to the conditional use permit process set forth under BMC 14A.05.140; the standards of this section are not subject to variance.

B. SCTFs conforming with the standards set forth below (in addition to approval under standards set forth pursuant to BMC 17.105.070, criteria for EPFs) may be approved by conditional use permit. The following additional siting criteria apply to SCTFs:

1. SCTFs should be located near transit facilities, as appropriate.

2. No SCTF shall be permitted within one mile from any existing SCTF, work release, prerelease, or similar facilities, and shall not result in disproportionate grouping of similar facilities pursuant to RCW 71.09.250(8) and (9).

3. On-Site Facilities Required. Each SCTF shall have the capability to provide on-site dining, on-site laundry or laundry service, and on-site recreation facilities to serve the residents.

4. SCTFs shall not be permitted adjacent to, immediately across a street or parking lot from, or within the line of sight of a risk potential activity or facility in existence at the time a conditional use is applied for consideration. “Risk potential activity” or “risk potential facility” means an activity or facility that provides a higher incidence of risk to the public from persons conditionally released from the special commitment center. Risk potential activities and facilities include: public and private schools, school bus stops, licensed day care and licensed preschool facilities, public and private parks, publicly dedicated trails, sports fields, playgrounds, recreational and community centers, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques, public libraries, public and private youth camps, and others identified by the community development director or designee following the hearings on a potential site required in RCW 71.09.315. “Within the line of sight” means that it is possible to reasonably visually distinguish and recognize individuals.

5. Siting of SCTFs shall be in accordance with the siting criteria of chapter 71.09 RCW, and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. In addition, no SCTFs shall be sited closer than 1,000 feet from any residentially zoned or utilized property.

6. SCTFs shall provide the following staffing and security measures:

a. The owner and operator of the SCTF shall submit and maintain a plan for staffing, security measures, procedures for immediate public notification of escapes, and escapee search procedures (“the plan”), all in a form and content satisfactory to the director. The security measures shall indicate the types of security measures/facilities proposed for the SCTF including, but not limited to, constant electronic monitoring of residents, site security measures/equipment, and site access and control consistent with chapter 71.09 RCW, unless otherwise ordered by a court. The plan, along with documentation of the director’s concurrence in or rejection of the plan, shall be included in materials submitted to and reviewed by the planning commission; provided, that the security plan made part of the public record shall not be in such detail that security of the facility would be compromised.

b. The owner and operator of the SCTF shall enter into a contract with the city, in a form and content satisfactory to the city attorney, committing the owner and operator to comply with and maintain the plan for the life of the facility.

c. The applicant shall install an eight-foot-high fence, in character with the surrounding area, between the facility and all property boundaries. This fence shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property boundaries and screening landscaping as defined within BMC 17.80.105 shall be installed between the property boundary and the fence. The planning commission may waive or lessen this requirement upon finding that due to existing site features or the type or character of adjoining uses, the privacy and security of the occupants of adjoining properties can be maintained in the absence of a fence or with a lower fence, or with reduced landscaping requirements.

d. The facility shall have a backup power source.

7. The total number of SCTF beds in an SCTF shall be no greater than the total number of beds required to be sited in a county under RCW 71.09.250(7)(a). The number of SCTF beds in a proposed SCTF shall be reduced below the maximum number required in a county when public safety and security considerations including site characteristics, program components, average response time of emergency services to the general area, and proximity of proposed site to risk activity exists and alternative siting is available elsewhere within the county.

C. Application Materials. In addition to the regular application materials required for a land use review pursuant to BMC Title 14A and BMC 17.105.060, an application for an SCTF shall also include:

1. The siting process used for the SCTF, including alternative locations considered.

2. An analysis showing that consideration was given to potential sites such that siting of the facility will not result in a concentration of similar facilities in a particular neighborhood, community, jurisdiction, or region.

3. Proposed mitigation measures, including the use of buffering from adjoining uses.

4. A general overview of planned security for the facility.

5. A schedule and analysis of all public input solicited or to be solicited during the siting process.

6. Notice of the application to all property owners and occupants of record within one mile of the proposed site. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.100 Processing timelines.

A. Notice of the city council final decision following the public hearings on a project permit application shall be issued within 120 days from when the permit application is determined by the director to be technically complete for processing.

B. In determining the number of days that have elapsed after an application is technically complete, the following periods shall be excluded:

1. Any period during which the city asks the applicant to correct plans, perform required studies, or provide additional required information. The period shall be calculated from the date the city mails notification to the applicant of the need for additional information until the date the city determines whether the additional information satisfies the request for information, or 28 days after the applicant supplies the information to the city, whichever is earlier. If the information submitted by the applicant under this subsection is insufficient, the city shall mail notice to the applicant of the deficiencies and the provisions of this subsection shall apply as if a new request for information had been made;

2. Any period during which an environmental impact statement is being prepared;

3. The period specified for administrative appeals of project permits;

4. Any period during which processing of an application is suspended pursuant to verification of compliance with required notice requirements; and

5. Any period of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the city.

C. The time periods established by this section shall not apply to a project permit application:

1. That requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or a development regulation in order to obtain approval;

2. That is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case a new 120-day time period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete;

3. That requires approval of a development agreement by the city council;

4. When the applicant consents to an extension; or

5. During any period necessary for reconsideration of a planning commission’s decision.

D. The city shall notify the applicant in writing if a notice of final decision on the project has not been made within the time limits specified in this section. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits have not been met and an estimated date of issuance of a notice of final decision.

E. Failure of the city to make a final decision within the timelines specified by this chapter shall not create liability for damages. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.105.105 CUP city council authority – Final decision.

A. The designated hearing body, giving substantial weight to the recommendations of the staff report, shall review the application under the following criteria:

l. Whether the proposed action as recommended by city staff is consistent with the criteria established under BMC 17.105.070 and 17.105.090 if applicable;

2. Whether modifications to recommended conditions or restrictions, if any, are adequate to mitigate impacts in a manner which meets the standards of this code and any related development agreement; and

3. Whether project conditions cumulatively are reasonable and would not preclude development of the EPF.

B. Recognizing that RCW 36.70A.200(2) prohibits the city from precluding the siting of an essential public facility, if the permit application proposes siting of a project in a location other than the city’s preferred location as recommended by city staff or otherwise designated under the city’s comprehensive plan or zoning code, the applicant shall present information as to why the city’s preferred location, rather than the location applied for, will preclude development of the project. The applicant shall provide any engineering, financial and other studies and information necessary to explain its position, unless it has already done so through the comprehensive projects, such as roads and highways, proposed by the Washington State Department of Transportation. The city council, with additional analysis and input from city staff if requested, shall make findings and a decision as to whether siting the project at the city’s preferred location would be impossible, impracticable, or otherwise preclusive. The said findings and decision shall not be deemed, however, to preclude the authority of a regional decision-making body, under law now existing or subsequently amended, to determine, where a regional EPF shall be sited, assuming applicable laws and legal requirements are complied with. This section shall not apply to the siting of SCTFs.

C. As a condition of approval pursuant to BMC 17.105.070, the city council may:

1. Increase requirements in the standards, criteria, or policies established by this title;

2. Stipulate the exact location as a means of minimizing hazards to life or limb, property damage, impacts to the environment, erosion, underground collapse, landslides, or transportation systems;

3. Impose conditions necessary to avoid, minimize or mitigate any adverse impacts identified as a result of the project;

4. Require the posting of construction and maintenance bonds sufficient to secure to the city the estimated cost of construction, installation and maintenance of required improvements;

5. Impose any requirement that will protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and

6. Impose conditions as may be deemed necessary to establish parity with uses permitted in the same zone in their freedom from nuisance generating features in matters of noise, odors, air pollution, wastes, vibration, traffic, physical hazards, and similar matters. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.110 AGRICULTURAL HERITAGE CREDIT PROGRAM

Sections:

17.110.010    Purpose.

17.110.020    Application.

17.110.030    Definition of terms used in this chapter.

17.110.040    General requirements.

17.110.050    Procedure to sell or transfer development rights from sending site.


17.110.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the agricultural heritage credit program is to provide additional residential density in specific zoning districts in exchange for a fee dedicated to transfer and/or purchase of development rights through the Skagit County farmland legacy program. The program provides a voluntary, incentive-based process for permanently preserving agricultural lands that provide a public benefit. The provisions of this program are intended to supplement land use regulations, resource protection efforts and open space acquisition programs and to encourage increased residential development density inside the city where it can best be accommodated with the least impacts on the natural environment and public services by:

A. Providing an effective and predictable incentive process for agricultural land property owners to preserve lands with a public benefit;

B. Providing an efficient and streamlined administrative review system to ensure that transfers of development rights to receiving sites are evaluated in a timely way and balanced with other county goals and policies, and are adjusted to the specific conditions of each receiving site. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.110.020 Application.

A. The MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning district areas as shown on the official zoning map of the city of Burlington are a receiving zone for Burlington.

B. Agricultural heritage credits are assigned towards the purchase of development rights from land zoned agriculture natural resource in the Skagit County zoning ordinance and designated as significant open space connections on the development right acquisition area map, attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. The residential use in the receiving zone shall be permitted at the rate of one additional residential dwelling unit per Burlington agricultural heritage credit.

D. The applicant may opt to acquire development rights from farmland that is included in the Skagit farmland legacy program and transfer those rights into the receiving zone at a rate comparable to the Burlington agricultural heritage credit formula. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.110.030 Definition of terms used in this chapter.

A. “Burlington agricultural heritage credit program” means a voluntary program where density of new development may be increased as specified in this title through the purchase of heritage credits at a set price established by resolution1 directly from the city of Burlington and the funds are used by the Skagit farmland legacy program towards the purchase of farmland development rights through an interlocal agreement/contract.

B. “Development right” means one residential unit of credit. This is calculated for unincorporated Skagit County in the agriculture natural resource land zoning district (AgNRL) at the rate of one residential unit per 40 acres of farmland, or at the rate of one residential unit per county certified lot of record for development. The farmland legacy program will accumulate Burlington heritage credits until a willing seller is identified and there is enough funding to acquire one or more development rights from agricultural resource land in the area specified on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. “Receiving site” means the site in the recipient zoning district that will receive the increased density by purchasing Burlington heritage credits at a set fee or transferring development rights from the sending site. Receiving sites in the city of Burlington are further described in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts.

D. “Sending site” means the site that is to be preserved as agricultural resource land by selling or transferring its residential development rights to the Skagit farmland legacy program or other entity approved by the Skagit farmland legacy program. Sending sites shall be maintained permanently as agricultural lands and no structures may be built on the land. Sending sites may not be in public ownership. If the sending site consists of more than one tax lot, the lots must be contiguous. For purposes of this section, lots divided by a street are considered contiguous if the lots would share a common lot line if the street was removed. See Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, for land generally eligible as sending sites for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.110.040 General requirements.

A. Property eligible for increased residential density is described in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts.

B. Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall be used by the Skagit farmland legacy program for the acquisition of residential development rights on agricultural resource land in target locations to protect the agriculture natural resource land around the Burlington urban growth area as identified on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. The residential development rights of agricultural resource land shall be considered as interests in real property and may be transferred by sale or gift in part or in total as provided in this section. Once used, credits for residential development rights shall not be used again and the residential development rights of the subject property providing them shall be considered severed forever.

D. Residential development rights on agricultural natural resource land may be transfered to a specific parcel in Burlington or sold to an individual(s) or other entity such as the Skagit farmland legacy program.

E. On the receiving site, the purchase of Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall increase the underlying zoning density by one dwelling unit per heritage credit, as further designated in the MR-NB, B-1, C-1 and R-3 zoning districts. Owners of the parcels within the recipient zone districts gain additional density for their property when they purchase Burlington agricultural heritage credits for the receiving site. Detailed use and development standards for the receiving site are specified in each zoning district.

F. Burlington agricultural heritage credits shall be allocated to a specific receiving site.

G. Conservation easements shall be required for land contained in the sending site to indicate development limitations on the sending site. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.110.050 Procedure to sell or transfer development rights from sending site.

Note: this process may be amended by the farmland legacy program.

A. The farmland legacy program will receive Burlington heritage credit fees collected by the city and use those fees to acquire residential development rights on agriculture natural resource land in the areas identified around the Burlington urban growth area on Map Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B. Property owners participating in the farmland preservation program will use the following process to sell or transfer their residential development rights:

1. An owner of real property desiring to sell or transfer development rights shall submit an application for severance of development rights (sending site certification) to the Skagit farmland legacy program or other such entity as the city council may nominate. The farmland legacy program shall determine the form of the application and the information required for a complete application. The farmland legacy program shall determine if the application may be accepted. Responsibility for preparing a completed application rests exclusively with the applicant. Application for sending site certification shall include:

a. A legal description of the site;

b. A title report;

c. A brief description of the site resources and public benefit to be preserved;

d. A site plan showing the proposed conservation easement area, existing and proposed dwelling units, submerged lands, any area already in a conservation easement or other similar encumbrance and any other area, except setbacks, required by Skagit County to remain open.

2. The applicant shall submit a Skagit County lot certification if the lot is less than 40 acres in size and the farmland legacy program shall determine the number of residential development rights available for severance.

3. A preliminary estimate of value is defined by reviewing the site selection criteria and pricing formula and the estimate is transmitted to the conservation futures committee for approval and any additional steps required by the farmland legacy program.

4. To sever residential development rights approved by the farmland legacy program, the property owner shall execute a restrictive easement, (the “conservation easement”), granting to the farmland legacy program or a tax exempt organization or other governmental agency, as approved by the farmland legacy program. The conservation easement shall preclude subdivision of the subject property. If the sending site includes federal funds, an appraisal is ordered.

5. Once development rights have been severed from a sending area property in accordance with this code, the property owner may sell or transfer the development rights by executing and recording with the Skagit County auditor a deed of residential development rights, using a deed form prescribed by the farmland legacy program. The deed shall describe the number of development rights being sold or transferred.

6. The certificate of residential development rights and the restrictive easement shall be recorded by the escrow agent of the farmland legacy program with the Skagit County auditor. The owner shall provide a copy of the recorded documents to the farmland legacy program. When the documents have been recorded and the recorded documents have been received by the department, the severance is complete.

C. Procedure to Acquire and Use Burlington Agricultural Heritage Credits.

1. A request to increase residential density within a receiving area by purchasing Burlington agricultural heritage credits must be part of a land use permit application under chapter 14A.05 BMC. The site plan must indicate the number of Burlington agricultural heritage credits necessary to implement the project.

2. Prior to final approval of the site plan, the applicant must buy Burlington agricultural heritage credits at the rate of one credit per additional dwelling unit.

3. The site plan, referencing the Burlington agricultural heritage credits, shall be recorded by the owner with the Skagit County auditor. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).1

Fee is based on initial study “Demand for and Value of Density (Heritage) Credits,” June 2009, and study shall be updated once every five years to ensure accurate economic basis for fee. 


Chapter 17.115 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

17.115.010    Title.

17.115.020    Application.

17.115.030    Purpose.

17.115.040    Authority.

17.115.050    Created – Membership – Appointment – Tenure – Compensation.

17.115.060    Organization – Meetings – Rules and records.

17.115.070    Quorum.

17.115.080    Powers and duties – Statutory authority.

17.115.090    Powers and duties – Designated.

17.115.100    Recommendation to city council.


17.115.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Planning Commission.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all actions of the planning commission as defined herein. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish the planning commission for proposed developmental action as specified in this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.040 Authority.

This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in chapters 35.63 and 35A.63 RCW allowing the creation of a planning commission and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.050 Created – Membership – Appointment – Tenure – Compensation.

The commission shall consist of seven in number, who shall be selected as follows:

A. The seven members shall be selected and appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council.

B. The term of office of the seven commissioners first appointed shall be designated from one to six years in such manner as to provide that the fewest possible terms will expire in any one year. Thereafter the term of office for each appointed member shall be six years. The terms of the first seven members appointed shall be fixed and designated by the mayor at the time of the appointment.

C. Vacancies occurring otherwise then through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term.

D. The members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and they shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.060 Organization – Meetings – Rules and records.

The commission shall elect its own chair and create and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. Planning commission meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act and the time and date of each meeting shall be published in advance of the meeting. It shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a written record of its meetings, regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall be a public record. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.070 Quorum.

A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any action taken by a majority of those present at any regular or special meeting of the commission shall be taken as the action of the commission. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.080 Powers and duties – Statutory authority.

The planning commission shall have the powers and perform the duties specified in chapter 35.63 RCW, including amendments enacted after the effective date of the ordinance. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.090 Powers and duties – Designated.

A. The commission may act as the research and fact finding agency of the municipality. To that end it may make such surveys, analyses, researches and reports as are generally authorized or requested by the council.

B. The commission shall review proposed development projects for compliance with ordinances and plans for the physical development of the city, in such measure as is reasonably necessary or requisite in the interest of the general public and as further specified in the zoning and subdivision codes.

C. The commission shall make recommendations to the council on adopting area-wide rezoning and development code text changes and subdivision ordinances.

D. The commission shall make recommendations to the council on the adoption of a comprehensive plan and amendments to the plan.

E. The commission shall make recommendations to the council as specified in BMC 17.115.100. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.115.100 Recommendation to city council.

A. The city council shall refer to the planning commission for its recommendation and report on:

1. All recommendations as required by the city zoning ordinance;

2. Adoption of the comprehensive plan and any amendments to the plan.

B. The commission shall make its written recommendation within 30 days subsequent to the date it has completed its public hearing or public meeting as required by ordinance. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.120 HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

17.120.010    Title.

17.120.020    Application.

17.120.030    Purpose.

17.120.040    Authority.

17.120.050    Creation of office.

17.120.060    Appointment.

17.120.070    Qualifications.

17.120.080    Removal.

17.120.090    Conflict of interest and appearance of fairness.

17.120.100    Freedom from improper influence.

17.120.110    Rules.

17.120.120    Duties.

17.120.130    Public hearings.

17.120.140    Examiner’s decision.

17.120.150    Notice of examiner’s decision.

17.120.160    Decision final action by city.

17.120.170    Conflicting code provisions and rules of procedure.


17.120.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Hearing Examiner.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all zones as set forth in this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a quasi-judicial hearing system which will ensure procedural due process and appearance of fairness in regulatory hearings and will provide an efficient and effective hearing process for quasi-judicial matters. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.040 Authority.

This title is created pursuant to the authority set forth in chapter 35A.63 RCW and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.050 Creation of office.

The office of hearing examiner, hereinafter referred to as “examiner,” is created. The examiner shall perform the duties and functions specified in this chapter, together with such other quasi-judicial duties and functions as may be delegated by the mayor and city council. Unless the context requires otherwise, the term “examiner” as used herein shall include any examiner pro tem who may be appointed. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.060 Appointment.

The examiner shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the city council. The terms of the examiner’s employment shall be specified by a professional service contract. An examiner pro tem may also be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council. An examiner pro tem shall serve in the event of absence or disqualification of the examiner. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.070 Qualifications.

The examiner shall be appointed solely with regard to his or her qualification for the duties of the office, and will have such training and experience as will qualify the examiner to conduct administrative and quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge such other functions conferred upon the examiner by the mayor and city council. The examiner shall hold no other elective or appointive office or position in city government. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.080 Removal.

The examiner may be removed from office for cause by the mayor, subject to confirmation by majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.090 Conflict of interest and appearance of fairness.

The examiner shall not conduct or participate in any hearing or decision in which the examiner has a direct or indirect personal interest which might influence the examiner or interfere with the examiner’s decision-making process. Any actual or potential conflict of interest shall be disclosed to the parties immediately upon discovery of such conflict. The hearing shall then be conducted by an examiner pro tem.

The appearance of fairness doctrine, as specified in chapter 42.36 RCW, shall apply to all proceedings conducted by the examiner, and may result in the examiner’s disqualification when necessary. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.100 Freedom from improper influence.

No council member, city official, or any other person shall attempt to interfere with or improperly influence the examiner in the performance of his or her designated duties. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.110 Rules.

The examiner shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the scheduling and conduct of bearings and other procedural matters related to the duties of the office. The rules shall provide that all public hearings be held after 6:00 p.m., except under special circumstances authorized by the mayor. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.120 Duties.

The examiner is vested with the duty and authority to hold public hearings and render decisions on the following matters:

A. Type III land use decisions as specified in chapter 14A.05 BMC;

B. Appeals of Type I and II land use decisions as specified in chapter 14A.05 BMC;

C. Appeals of final administrative decisions made under chapter 8.12 BMC;

D. Complaints by citizens or city staff seeking administrative enforcement of provisions of city land use codes or conditions in development permits and approvals;

E. Violation notices, penalties, and other final administrative decisions made under chapter 8.12 BMC;

F. Such other regulatory, enforcement or quasi-judicial matters as may be assigned to the examiner by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.130 Public hearings.

Where public hearings are required by state statute or city code, the examiner shall hold at least one such hearing prior to rendering a decision on any matter. All testimony at any such hearing shall be taken under oath. Public notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given as required by city code. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.140 Examiner’s decision.

Within 15 calendar days after the conclusion of a hearing unless a longer period is agreed to by the applicant in writing or verbally on the record at the public hearing, the examiner shall render a written decision which shall include at least the following:

A. Findings of fact based upon the record and conclusions therefrom which support the decision;

B. The decision shall state whether the application is either granted, granted in part, granted with conditions, modifications or restrictions, returned to the applicant for modification, denied with prejudice or denied without prejudice;

C. If a time limit exists for filing an administrative or judicial appeal of the decision, said time limit shall be disclosed. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.150 Notice of examiner’s decision.

Not later than five calendar days following the rendering of a written decision, copies thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and other parties of record as defined in BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.160 Decision final action by city.

Unless specifically provided otherwise by ordinance or state law, all decisions of the hearing examiner shall be final action by the city. Hearing examiner decisions shall be appealable pursuant to chapter 14A.05 BMC. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.120.170 Conflicting code provisions and rules of procedure.

Any and all provisions of this code, and any and all provisions of the rules of procedure adopted by the examiner which are in conflict with this chapter, are superseded. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Chapter 17.125 AMENDMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.125.010    Title.

17.125.020    Application.

17.125.030    Purpose.

17.125.040    Authority.

17.125.050    Comprehensive plan text and map amendments.

17.125.060    Development agreements associated with a comprehensive plan amendment.

17.125.070    Area-wide rezones.

17.125.080    Site-specific zoning map amendments.

17.125.090    Development regulation text amendments.


17.125.010 Title.

This chapter shall be called “Amendments to Comprehensive Plan and Development Regulations.” (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.020 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all zones as set forth in this title. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.030 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and criteria for amending the city’s zoning map, development regulations, comprehensive plan, and comprehensive plan map. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.040 Authority.

This title is created pursuant to the authority set forth in chapters 35A.63, 36.70A, and 36.70B RCW and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.050 Comprehensive plan text and map amendments.

A. General. Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.130(2)(a) and the process set forth in BMC Title 14A, proposed updates to the comprehensive plan shall be processed only once a year except for the adoption of original subarea plans, amendments to the shoreline master program, the amendment of the capital facilities chapter concurrent with the adoption of the city budget, in the event of an emergency or to resolve an appeal of the comprehensive plan filed with the Growth Management Hearings Board.

B. Amendment Procedures. Comprehensive plan text and map amendments are classified as Type IV decisions and shall be processed pursuant to BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.060 Development agreements associated with a comprehensive plan amendment.

A. Pursuant to RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210, the city may enter into a development agreement with a person having ownership or control of real property within its jurisdiction as part of a comprehensive plan amendment and associated rezone. A development agreement and subsequent rezone shall be consistent with applicable development regulations set forth in BMC Title 14A.

B. Development agreements associated with a comprehensive plan amendment are classified as Type IV decisions and shall be processed in compliance with the comprehensive plan amendment and the regulations of RCW 36.70B.170 through 36.70B.210.

C. Development agreements associated with a comprehensive plan amendment and subsequent rezone may be used at the city council’s discretion. Development agreements may be used to place restrictions on a proposed amendment to minimize the impacts of future development.

D. Development Agreement Contents. For the purpose of this section, development standards may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Project elements such as permitted uses, residential densities, and nonresidential densities and intensities or building sizes;

2. The amount and payment of impact fees imposed or agreed to in accordance with any applicable provisions of state law, any reimbursement provisions, other financial contributions by the property owner, inspection fees, or dedications;

3. Mitigation measures, development conditions, and other requirements under chapter 43.21C RCW;

4. Design standards such as maximum heights, setbacks, drainage and water quality requirements, landscaping, and other development features;

5. Affordable housing;

6. Parks and open space preservation;

7. Phasing;

8. Review procedures and standards for implementing decisions;

9. A build-out or vesting period for applicable standards; and

10. Any other appropriate development requirement procedure.

E. The final decision authority for approval of the development agreement and development plan shall be the city council as set forth in BMC Title 14A.

F. The decision of the city council on a development agreement and plan in conjunction with a comprehensive plan amendment and subsequent zoning change is the final decision of the city and may be appealed pursuant to chapter 36.70C RCW.

G. A development agreement shall be recorded with the Skagit County auditor at the applicant’s expense. During the term of the development agreement, the agreement is binding on the parties and their successors.

H. The city will process and decide upon an application for an amendment as if it were an application for a new development agreement in a manner set forth above, unless it is deemed a minor modification as set forth in subsection (I) of this section.

I. Modifications of Development Plan.

1. The director of community development may approve minor modifications to the development plan pursuant to BMC Title 14A.

2. Criteria for approving minor modifications include but are not limited to the following:

a. Shall conform to the terms of the development agreement;

b. Shall not reduce landscaping, buffering, or open space areas;

c. Shall not reduce setback requirements;

d. Shall not result in an increase in height of any structure;

e. Shall not result in a change in ingress or egress;

f. Shall not increase any adverse impacts or undesirable effects;

g. Shall not significantly alter the project. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.070 Area-wide rezones.

A. Area-wide rezones shall be considered only in conjunction with updates to the comprehensive plan text and maps to ensure full consideration of the cumulative effects of all changes.

B. Area-wide rezones are classified as Type IV decisions and shall be processed pursuant to BMC Title 14A. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.080 Site-specific zoning map amendments.

A. Site-specific zoning map amendment requests, which are consistent with the comprehensive plan map, may be submitted at any time. Site-specific zoning map amendments consistent with the comprehensive plan map shall be processed as a Type III review pursuant to BMC Title 14A. Amendments to the zoning map which are not consistent with the comprehensive plan map shall be processed as a Type IV review and may only be considered in conjunction with a corresponding amendment to the comprehensive plan.

B. All site-specific zoning map amendment requests must meet all of the following criteria:

1. The requirements of RCW 36.70A.070(6), Concurrency;

2. The requested map amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan;

3. The map amendment bears a substantial relation to the public health, safety and welfare;

4. The map amendment is warranted in order to achieve consistency with the comprehensive plan or because of a need for additional property in the proposed zoning district classification, or because the proposed zoning classification is appropriate for reasonable development of the subject property;

5. Property is adjacent and contiguous (which shall include corner touches and property located across a public right-of-way) to property of the same zoning classification;

6. The map amendment will not be materially detrimental to uses or property in the immediate vicinity of the subject property;

7. The map amendment has merit and value for the community as a whole. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


17.125.090 Development regulation text amendments.

A. The text of the city’s development regulations may be amended at any time provided the amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and does not interfere with its implementation. Text amendments that are consistent with the comprehensive plan shall be processed as a Type IV review pursuant to BMC Title 14A.

B. Text amendments which are not consistent with the comprehensive plan shall be processed as a Type IV review and may only be considered together with a corresponding amendment to the comprehensive plan. Text amendments which are not consistent with the comprehensive plan shall be subject to the annual processing limitation described in BMC 17.125.050. (Ord. 1857 § 2 (Exh. B), 2018).


Title 18 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM

Chapters:

18.03    Definitions

18.06    Purpose

18.07    Shorelines Environment Designations

18.09    Administrative Provisions

18.12    Master Program Policy Goals

18.14    General Provisions

18.16    Regulations

Appendix A    Shoreline Wetland, Fish and Wildlife Habitat, and General Critical Area Regulations

Appendix B    Shoreline Restoration Report


Chapter 18.03 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.03.005    Application of definitions.

18.03.010    “A.”

18.03.020    “B.”

18.03.030    “C.”

18.03.040    “D.”

18.03.045    “E.”

18.03.050    “F.”

18.03.060    “G.”

18.03.070    “H.”

18.03.080    “I.”

18.03.110    “L.”

18.03.120    “M.”

18.03.130    “N.”

18.03.140    “O.”

18.03.150    “P.”

18.03.160    “R.”

18.03.170    “S.”

18.03.180    “T.”

18.03.190    “U.”

18.03.200    “V.”

18.03.210    “W.”


18.03.005 Application of definitions.

These definitions are adapted and/or taken from the Shoreline Management Act (chapter 90.58 RCW), from the Washington Administrative Code regulations (chapters 173-22, 173-26, and 173-27 WAC), and from the Skagit County shoreline master program. In addition to these definitions, the definitions and concepts set forth in RCW 90.58.030, as amended, and implementing rules shall also apply as used herein. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.010 “A.”

“Accessory development or use” means any structure or use incidental and subordinate to a primary shoreline development or use.

“Act” means the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 (chapter 90.58 RCW), as amended.

“Adjacent lands” means lands adjacent to the shorelines of the state, located outside of shoreline jurisdiction.

“Administrator” means the city of Burlington planning director or his/her designated representative.

“Agricultural activities” means agricultural uses and practices including, but not limited to: producing, breeding, or increasing agricultural products; rotating and changing agricultural crops; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie fallow in which it is plowed and tilled but left unseeded; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant as a result of adverse agricultural market conditions; allowing land used for agricultural activities to lie dormant because the land is enrolled in a local, state, or federal conservation program, or the land is subject to a conservation easement; conducting agricultural operations; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural equipment; maintaining, repairing, and replacing agricultural facilities; provided, that the replacement facility is no closer to the shoreline than the original facility; and maintaining agricultural lands under production or cultivation.

“Agricultural equipment and agricultural facilities” includes, but is not limited to:

1. The following used in agricultural operations: equipment; machinery; constructed shelters, buildings and ponds; fences; upland finfish rearing facilities; water diversion, withdrawal, conveyance, and use equipment and facilities including, but not limited to, pumps, pipes, tapes, canals, ditches, and drains;

2. Corridors and facilities for transporting personnel, livestock, and equipment to, from, and within agricultural lands;

3. Farm residences and associated equipment, lands, and facilities; and

4. Roadside stands and on-farm markets for marketing fruit or vegetables.

“Agricultural land” means those specific land areas on which agricultural activities are conducted as of the date of adoption of a local master program pursuant to these guidelines as evidenced by aerial photography or other documentation. After the effective date of the master program, land converted to agricultural use is subject to compliance with the requirements of the master program.

“Agricultural products” includes, but is not limited to, horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, vegetable, fruit, berry, grain, hops, hay, straw, turf, sod, seed, and apiary products; feed or forage for livestock; Christmas trees; hybrid cottonwood and similar hardwood trees grown as crops and harvested within 20 years of planting; and livestock including both the animals themselves and animal products including, but not limited to, meat, upland finfish, poultry and poultry products, and dairy products.

“Aquaculture” means the culture or farming of fish, shellfish, or other aquatic plants and animals excluding upland finfish. Aquaculture does not include the harvest of wild geoduck associated with the state managed wildstock geoduck fishery.

“Aquatic” means pertaining to those areas waterward of the ordinary high water mark.

“Archaeological, historic, and cultural resources” means having to do with the scientific study of material remains of past human life and activities.

“Archaeological object” means an object that comprises the physical evidence of an indigenous and subsequent culture including material remains of past human life including monuments, symbols, tools, facilities, graves, skeletal remains and technological by-products.

“Archaeological resource/site” means a geographic locality in Washington, including, but not limited to, submerged and submersible lands and the bed of the sea within the state’s jurisdiction, that contains archaeological objects.

“Associated wetlands” means those wetlands which are in proximity to and either influence or are influenced by tidal waters or a lake or stream subject to the Shoreline Management Act.

“Average grade level” means the average of the natural or existing topography of the portion of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property which will be directly under the proposed building or structure: in the case of structures built over water, average grade level shall be the elevation of the ordinary high water mark. Calculation of the average grade level shall be made by averaging the ground elevation at the midpoint of all exterior walls of the proposed building or structure. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.020 “B.”

“Best available science” means that the policies and development regulations designed to protect the functions and values of critical areas are in conformance with RCW 36.70A.172 and 90.58.100(1) and the procedural criteria established in Part Nine, Best Available Science, WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925.

“Boating facilities,” for the purpose of this shoreline master program, means publicly accessible launch sites for hand-carried watercraft (kayak, canoe, etc.) or boats hauled by trailers; piers and docks suitable for temporary moorage of small watercraft; boat storage or rental facilities; vehicle and trailer parking areas; accessory structures such as maintenance buildings and public restrooms. Such facilities may include auxiliary, related functions such as swimming, fishing, and observation of wildlife. May also include commercially run facilities for larger vessels, such as tour boats, cruise ships, ferries, and special-interest watercraft.

“Breakwaters” are offshore structures generally built parallel to shore and may or may not be connected to land. They are built to protect harbors, moorages, navigation, and shorelines to retard or prevent wave action. Breakwaters may be fixed, i.e., made of quarry rock, floating, or submerged.

“Buffer area” means a parcel or strip of land that is designed and designated to permanently remain vegetated in an undisturbed and natural condition to protect an adjacent aquatic or wetland site from upland impacts, to provide habitat for wildlife and to afford limited public access.

“Building” means any structure designed for or used for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property, and which is used in a fixed location on land, shorelines, or tidelands.

“Bulkheads” are wall-like structures generally constructed parallel to shore and near the high water mark and are for protecting the shore and uplands from erosion by current and wave action; they may also be for retaining uplands and fills that are prone to sliding, mass movement, or erosion. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.030 “C.”

“Channel migration zone (CMZ)” means the area along a river within which the channel(s) can be reasonable predicted to migrate over time as a result of natural and normally occurring hydrological and related processes when considered with the characteristics of the river and its surroundings.

“Channelization” is the straightening, deepening or lining of stream channels, and/or prevention of natural meander progression of streamways, through artificial means such as relocation of channels, dredging, and/or placement of continuous levees or bank revetments along significant portions of the stream. Dredging of sediment or debris alone is excluded.

“Conditional use” means a use, development, or substantial development which is classified as a conditional use or is not classified within the master program (WAC 173-27-030).

“Current deflector” is an angled “stub-dike,” groin, or sheet-pile structure which projects into a stream channel to divert flood currents from specific areas, or to control downstream current alignment; can be used as an alternative to direct streambank riprap. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.040 “D.”

“Department” means the Burlington planning department, unless otherwise noted.

“Department of Ecology” is the Washington State Department of Ecology.

“Development” means a use consisting of the construction or exterior alteration of structures; dredging; drilling; dumping; filling; removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals; bulkheading; driving of piling; placing of obstructions; or any project of a permanent or temporary nature which interferes with the normal public use of the surface of the waters overlying lands subject to this title at any state of water level (RCW 90.58.030).

“Development regulations” means the controls placed on development or land uses by a county or city, including but not limited to zoning ordinances, critical areas ordinances, all portions of a shoreline master program other than goals and policies approved or adopted under chapter 90.58 RCW, planned unit development ordinances, subdivision ordinances, and binding site plan ordinances together with any amendments thereto.

“Director” means the planning director.

“Dock” means a structure which abuts the shoreline and is used as a landing or moorage place for craft. A dock may be built either on a fixed platform or float on the water. See also “development” and “substantial development.”

“Dredge spoil” is the material removed by dredging.

“Dredging” is the removal or displacement of earth such as gravel, sand, mud, or silt and/or other materials or debris from any stream, river, lake, or marine water body and associated shorelines and wetlands. Dredging is normally done for specific purposes or uses such as for constructing and maintaining canals, navigation channels, turning basins, harbors and marinas, submarine pipeline or cable crossings, for obtaining material for fill or construction, as part of an aquacultural operation, or dike repair and maintenance. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.045 “E.”

“Ecological functions or shoreline functions” means the work performed or role played by the physical, chemical, and biological processes that contribute to the proper maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem.

“Ecosystem-wide processes” means the suite of naturally occurring physical and geologic processes of erosion, transport, and deposition and specific chemical processes that contribute to the maintenance of the aquatic and terrestrial environments that constitute the shoreline’s natural ecosystem.

“Exempt developments” are those set forth in WAC 173-27-040 and RCW 90.58.030(3)(e), 90.58.147, 90.58.355 and 90.58.515 which are not required to obtain a substantial development permit but which must otherwise comply with applicable provisions of the Act and the master program. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.050 “F.”

“Feasible” means, for the purpose of this title, that an action, such as a development project, mitigation, or preservation requirement, meets all of the following conditions:

1. The action can be accomplished with technologies and methods that have been used in the past in similar circumstances, or studies or tests have demonstrated in similar circumstances that such approaches are currently available and likely to achieve the intended results;

2. The action provides a reasonable likelihood of achieving its intended purpose; and

3. The action does not physically preclude achieving the project’s primary intended legal use.

In cases where these guidelines require certain actions unless they are infeasible, the burden of proving infeasibility is placed on the applicant. In determining an action’s infeasibility, the reviewing agency may weigh the action’s relative public costs and public benefits, considered in the short- and long-term time frames.

“Fill” means the addition of soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, earth retaining structure, or other material to an area waterward of the OHWM, in wetlands, or on shorelands in a manner that raises the elevation or creates dry land.

“Float” is an anchored, buoyed object.

“Flood control works and flood protection” means all structures and works on streams designed to retard bank erosion, to reduce flooding of adjacent lands, to control or divert stream flow, or to create a reservoir, including but not limited to revetments, dikes, levees, channelization, dams, vegetative stabilization, weirs, flood and tidal gates. Excluded are water pump apparatus.

“Flood protection” includes the above structural devices but may also include various techniques of floodplain, river basin, and watershed management which may be applied in lieu of or complementary to structural measures.

“Flood hazard reduction” means the city of Burlington’s program to reduce flood damages to life and property and to minimize public expenses due to floods through a comprehensive system of planning, development regulations, building standards, structural works, and monitoring and warning systems.

“Floodplain” is synonymous with “100-year floodplain” and means that land area susceptible to inundation with a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The limit of this area shall be based upon the Burlington critical areas code, chapter 14.15 BMC, and FEMA flood regulations maps.

“Floodway” means the area, as identified in a master program, that either: (1) has been established in Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or floodway maps; or (2) consists of those portions of a river valley lying waterward from the outer limits of a watercourse upon which flood waters are carried during periods of flooding that occur with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually, said floodway being identified, under normal conditions, by changes in surface soil conditions or changes in types or quality of vegetative ground cover condition, topography, or other indicators of flooding that occurs with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually. Regardless of the method used to identify the floodway, the floodway shall not include those lands that can reasonably be expected to be protected from flood waters by flood risk reduction devices maintained by or maintained under license from the federal government, the state, or a political subdivision of the state. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.060 “G.”

“Gabions” are shore defense works made up of rock, rubble, masonry or other suitable material, such as vinyl, enclosed to form massive blocks to act as walls on shorelines to prevent wave erosion, as foundations for breakwaters or jetties, or as a form of bank stabilization.

“Geotechnical report” or “geotechnical analysis” means a scientific study or evaluation conducted by a qualified expert that includes a description of the ground and surface hydrology and geology, the affected land form and its susceptibility to mass wasting, erosion, and other geologic hazards or processes, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of the proposed development on geologic conditions, the adequacy of the site to be developed, the impacts of the proposed development, alternative approaches to the proposed development, and measures to mitigate potential site-specific and cumulative geological and hydrological impacts of the proposed development including the potential adverse impacts to adjacent and down-current properties. Geotechnical reports shall conform to accepted technical standards and must be prepared by professional engineers (or geologists) who have professional expertise about the regional and local shoreline geology and processes.

“Grading” means the movement or redistribution of the soil, sand, rock, gravel, sediment, or other material on a site in a manner that alters the natural contour of the land. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.070 “H.”

“Habitat” means the place or type of site where a plant or animal naturally or normally lives and grows.

“Hearings Board” means the State Shoreline Hearings Board established by the Act in RCW 90.58.170.

“Height” is measured from average grade level to the highest point of a structure; provided, that television antennas, chimneys, and similar appurtenances shall not be used in calculating height, except where such appurtenances obstruct the view of the shoreline of a substantial number of residences on areas adjoining such shorelines.

“Historic preservation professional” means those individuals who hold a graduate degree in architectural history, art history, historic preservation, or closely related field, with coursework in American architectural history, or a bachelor’s degree in architectural history, art history, historic preservation or closely related field plus one of the following:

1. At least two years of full-time experience in research, writing, or teaching in American architectural history or restoration architecture with an academic institution, historical organization or agency, museum, or other professional institution; or

2. Substantial contribution through research and publication to the body of scholarly knowledge in the field of American architectural history.

“Historic site” includes both archaeological and historic sites, structures, or development which provide knowledge about our cultural heritage, including but not limited to Indian and pioneer settlements, old buildings, forts, trails, landings, bridges, or the sites thereof together with interpretative facilities.

“Hydric soil” means soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.

“Hydrophytic vegetation” is the sum total of macrophytic plant life growing in water or on a substrate that is a least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. When hydrophytic vegetation comprises a community where indicators of hydric soils and wetland hydrology also occur, this area has wetland vegetation. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.080 “I.”

“In-stream structure” is placed by humans waterward of the ordinary high water mark and either causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction, or modification of water flow. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.110 “L.”

“Launch ramp” means an enclosed slab, set of pads, planks, or graded slope used for launching boats with trailers or occasionally by hand; extensive parking and turnaround areas are usually accessory to launch ramps.

“Levee” means a natural or man-made embankment on the bank of a stream for the purpose of keeping floodwaters from inundating adjacent land. Some levees have revetments on their sides. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.120 “M.”

“Master program” means the comprehensive use plan for the Skagit River and Gages Slough shorelines, and the use regulations together with maps, diagrams, charts, or other descriptive material and text, a statement of desired goals and standards developed in accordance with the policies enunciated in RCW 90.58.020 (RCW 90.58.030).

“May” means the action is acceptable, provided it conforms to the provisions of this title.

“Mitigation” or “mitigation sequencing” means the following sequence of steps listed in order of priority, with subsection (1) of this definition being top priority:

1. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

2. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

3. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

4. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;

5. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

6. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures (WAC 173-26-020).

“Must” means a mandate; the action is required. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.130 “N.”

“Natural or existing topography” means the topography of the lot, parcel, or tract of real property immediately prior to any site preparation or grading, including excavation or filling.

“Nonconforming development or use,” for the purpose of this program, means a development in lawful use at the effective date of adoption or amendment, as appropriate, of this program, and which no longer conforms to the applicable shoreline provisions.

“Nonpoint pollution” means pollution that enters any water of the state from any dispersed land-based or water-based activities, including, but not limited to, atmospheric deposition, surface water runoff from agricultural lands, urban areas, or forest lands, subsurface or underground sources or discharges from boats or marine vessels not otherwise regulated under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program.

“Non-water-oriented uses” mean those uses that are not water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.140 “O.”

“Open space” means public and private land and natural wetlands which retain their natural or semi-natural character because they have not been developed with structures and paving. It may include lands in agricultural use, outdoor recreation land, or other land that may be required to be reserved in open space as part of a development project under this master program.

“Ordinary high water mark” on all lakes, streams and tidal water means that mark that will be found by examining the bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the Department of Ecology. Where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found on a stream, it shall be the line of mean high water. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.150 “P.”

“Permit” means any substantial development, variance, conditional use permit, or revision authorized under chapter 90.58 RCW.

“Planning commission” means the Burlington planning commission.

“Planning department” means the city of Burlington department of planning and community development.

“Priority habitat” means a habitat type with unique or significant value to one or more species. An area classified and mapped as priority habitat must have one or more of the following attributes:

1. Comparatively high fish and wildlife density;

2. Comparatively high fish and wildlife species diversity;

3. Fish spawning habitat;

4. Important wildlife habitat;

5. Important fish and wildlife seasonal ranges;

6. Important fish and wildlife movement corridors;

7. Rearing and foraging habitat;

8. Important marine mammal haul-out;

9. Refugia habitat;

10. Limited availability;

11. High vulnerability to habitat alteration;

12. Unique or dependent species; or

13. Shellfish bed.

A priority habitat may be described by a unique vegetation type or by a dominant plant species that is of primary importance to fish and wildlife (such as oak woodlands or eelgrass meadows). A priority habitat may also be described by a successional stage (e.g., old growth and mature forests). Alternatively, a priority habitat may consist of a specific habitat element (e.g., consolidated marine/estuarine shorelines, talus slopes, caves, snags) of key value to fish and wildlife. A priority habitat may contain priority and/or nonpriority fish and wildlife.

“Priority species” means fish and wildlife species requiring protective measures and/or management guidelines to ensure their persistence at genetically viable population levels. Priority species are those that meet any of the criteria listed below:

1. Criterion 1. State-listed or state proposed species. State-listed species are those native fish and wildlife species legally designated as endangered (WAC 232-12-014), threatened (WAC 232-12-011), or sensitive (WAC 232-12-011). State proposed species are those fish and wildlife species that will be reviewed by the department of fish and wildlife (POL-M-6001) for possible listing as endangered, threatened, or sensitive according to the process and criteria defined in WAC 232-12-297.

2. Criterion 2. Vulnerable aggregations. Vulnerable aggregations include those species or groups of animals susceptible to significant population declines, within a specific area or statewide, by virtue of their inclination to congregate. Examples include heron colonies, seabird concentrations, and marine mammal congregations.

3. Criterion 3. Species of recreational, commercial, and/or tribal importance. Native and nonnative fish, shellfish, and wildlife species of recreational or commercial importance and recognized species used for tribal ceremonial and subsistence purposes that are vulnerable to habitat loss or degradation.

4. Criterion 4. Species listed under the Endangered Species Act as either threatened or endangered.

“Professional archaeologist” means a person with qualifications meeting the federal Secretary of the Interior’s standards for a professional archaeologist. Archaeologists not meeting this standard may be conditionally employed by working under the supervision of a professional archaeologist for a period of four years provided the employee is pursuing qualifications necessary to meet the federal Secretary of the Interior’s standards for a professional archaeologist. During this four-year period, the professional archaeologist is responsible for all findings. The four-year period is not subject to renewal.

“Provisions” means policies, regulations, standards, guideline criteria or environment designations. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.160 “R.”

“Recreation development” means the development of the natural or existing environment to accommodate commercial and public recreation facilities. This includes clearing land, earth modifications, structures and other facilities such as parks, camps, campgrounds, camping clubs, golf courses, and other outdoor recreation areas.

“Residential development” includes single-family residences, multifamily development, the creation of new lots through subdivision and floating homes and live-aboard vessels.

“Restore, restoration or ecological restoration” means the reestablishment or upgrading of ecological shoreline functions through measures such as revegetation, removal of intrusive shoreline structures and removal or treatment of toxic materials. Restoration does not necessarily imply returning the shoreline area to aboriginal or pre-European settlement conditions.

“Revetments” are sloped walls constructed of riprap or other substantial material, placed on stream banks to retard bank erosion from high velocity currents.

“Riprap” means hard, angular quarry rock used for stream bank stabilization or other flood control works.

“Riverine” means pertaining to a river or stream system, including associated lakes and wetlands.

“River delta” means those lands formed as an aggradational feature by stratified clay, silt, sand and gravel deposited at the mouths of streams where they enter a quieter body of water. The upstream extent of a river delta is that limit where it no longer forms distributary channels. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.170 “S.”

“Shorelands or shoreland areas” (RCW 90.58.030) means those lands extending landward for 200 feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters which are subject to the provisions of this title; the same to be designated as to location by the Department of Ecology. Any county or city may determine that portion of a 100-year-floodplain to be included in its master program as long as such portion includes, as a minimum, the floodway and the adjacent land extending landward 200 feet therefrom. In the city of Burlington, the shorelands include the Skagit River and an area extending 200 feet landward from the floodway, the floodway being the waterward top of levee until established on a case-by-case basis.

“Shoreline areas” and “shoreline jurisdiction” means all “shorelines of the state” and “shorelands” as defined in RCW 90.58.030.

Shoreline Management Zone (SMZ). In the city of Burlington, this includes the Skagit River and an area extending 200 feet landward from the floodway, the floodway being the waterward top of levee until established on a case-by-case basis. The SMZ also includes Gages Slough but not its buffer.

“Shoreline master program” or “master program” means the comprehensive land use plan for a described area, and the use regulations together with maps, diagrams, charts, or other descriptive material and text, a statement of desired goals, and standards developed in accordance with the policies enunciated in RCW 90.58.020.

As provided in RCW 36.70A.480, the goals and policies of a shoreline master program for a county or city approved under chapter 90.58 RCW shall be considered an element of the city’s comprehensive plan. All other portions of the shoreline master program for a city adopted under chapter 90.58 RCW, including use regulations, shall be considered a part of the county’s or city’s development regulations.

“Shoreline modifications” means those actions that modify the physical configuration or qualities of the shoreline area, usually through the construction of a physical element such as a dike, breakwater, pier, weir, dredged basin, fill, bulkhead, or other shoreline structures. They can include other actions, such as clearing, grading, or application of chemicals.

“Shoreline stabilization” means structural and nonstructural methods to address erosion impacts to property and dwellings, businesses, or structures caused by natural processes, such as current, flood, tides, wind, or wave action. The definition of “new stabilization measures” includes enlargement of existing structures.

“Shorelines” means all of the water areas of the state, including reservoirs, and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them; except (1) shorelines of statewide significance; (2) shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is 20 cubic feet per second or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and (3) shorelines on lakes less than 20 acres in size and wetlands associated with such small lakes (RCW 90.58.030).

“Shorelines of the state” are the total of all “shorelines” and “shorelines of statewide significance” within the state.

“Shorelines of statewide significance” includes any natural river or segment thereof west of the crest of the Cascade range downstream of a point where the annual flow is measured at 1,000 cubic feet per second or more. In the city of Burlington this means the Skagit River shoreline and an area extending landward 200 feet from the floodway and the Gages Slough wetlands.

“Should” means that the particular action is required unless there is a demonstrated, compelling reason, based on policy of the Shoreline Management Act and this title, against taking the action.

“Significant ecological impact” means an effect or consequence of a human caused action if any of the following apply:

1. The action degrades or changes an ecological function or ecosystem-wide process to such a degree that the ecosystem can no longer perform the function at levels within its natural range of variability or that the performance of the function falls outside the range needed to maintain the integrity of other ecological processes in shoreline areas. As used in this definition, the normal range of variability does not include alterations caused by catastrophic events.

2. Scientific evidence or objective analysis indicates that the action could cause degradation or change to those ecological functions or ecosystem-wide processes described in subsection (1) of this definition under foreseeable conditions.

3. Scientific evidence indicates that the action could contribute to degradation or change to ecological functions or ecosystem-wide processes described in subsection (1) of this definition as part of cumulative impacts, due to similar actions that are occurring or are likely to occur.

“Significant ecological impacts” do not include impacts that are inconsequential to attaining the objectives of the Act or to the protection and restoration of shoreline ecological functions or ecosystem-wide processes.

“Significant vegetation removal” means the removal of trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover by clearing, grading, cutting, burning, chemical means, or other activity that causes significant ecological impacts to functions provided by such vegetation. The removal of invasive or noxious weeds does not constitute significant vegetation removal. Tree pruning, not including tree topping, where it does not affect ecological functions, does not constitute significant vegetation removal.

“Stream” means a naturally occurring body of periodic or continuously flowing water where:

1. The mean annual flow is greater than 20 cubic feet per second; and

2. The water is contained within a channel. A channel is an open conduit either naturally or artificially created. This definition does not include artificially created irrigation, return flow, or stockwatering channels.

“Structure” means a permanent or temporary edifice or building, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of the ground or water, except for vessels.

“Substantial development” shall mean any development of which the total cost or fair market value exceeds $5,781, effective September 1, 2007, or any development which materially interferes with the normal public use of the water or shorelines of the state. (See RCW 90.58.030(3)(e) for details.) See BMC 18.09.020 for exemptions from substantial development permits.

“Substantially degrade” means to cause significant ecological impact.

“Surface or open-pit mining” involves either the removal of surface material (overburden) to enable the underlying mineral resources to be exposed and extracted (quarried) or the direct extraction of naturally occurring surface minerals and materials such as rock, sand, gravel, and aggregate. Removal of sand from river bars is considered a surface mining activity. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.180 “T.”

“Threatened and endangered species or T&E species” means those native species that are listed in rule WAC 232-12-297 by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife pursuant to RCW 77.12.020 as threatened (WAC 232-12-011) or endangered (WAC 232-12-014), or that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. 1533.

“Transportation facilities” are those structures and developments that aid in land and water surface movement of people, goods, and services, including roads, trails, bikeways, parking areas, bridges and rail transportation. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.190 “U.”

“Upland” means those shoreline areas landward of the ordinary high water mark except backshores, natural wetlands, and floodplains. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.200 “V.”

“Variance” is a means to grant relief from the specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the applicable master program and not a means to vary a use of a shoreline. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.03.210 “W.”

“Water-dependent use” means a use or portion of a use which cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water but is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. Examples of water-dependent uses include ship cargo terminal loading areas, fishing, ferry and passenger terminals, barge loading facilities, ship building and dry docking, marinas, aquaculture, float plane facilities, hydroelectric dams, surface water intake, and sewer outfalls.

“Water-enjoyment use” means a recreational use, or other use that facilitates public access to the shoreline as a primary characteristic of the use; or a use that provides for recreational use or aesthetic enjoyment of the shoreline for a substantial number of people as a general characteristic of the use and which through the location, design, and operation assures the public’s ability to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the shoreline. In order to qualify as a water-enjoyment use, the use must be open to the general public and the shoreline-oriented space within the project must be devoted to the specific aspects of the use that fosters shoreline enjoyment. Primary water-enjoyment uses are as defined in WAC 173-26-020(40).

“Water-oriented use” means a use that is a water-dependent, water-related, or water-enjoyment use, or a combination of such uses.

“Water quality” means the physical characteristics of water within shoreline jurisdiction, including water quantity, hydrological, physical, chemical, aesthetic, recreation-related, and biological characteristics. Where used in this title, the term “water quantity” refers only to development and uses regulated under this title and affecting water quantity, such as impermeable surfaces and storm water handling practices. Water quantity, for purposes of this title, does not mean the withdrawal of ground water or diversion of surface water pursuant to RCW 90.03.250 through 90.03.340.

“Water-related use” means a use or portion of a use which is not intrinsically dependent on a waterfront location but whose economic viability is dependent upon a waterfront location because:

1. The use has a functional requirement for a waterfront location such as the arrival or shipment of materials by water or the need for large quantities of water; or

2. The use provides a necessary service supportive of the water-dependent activities and the proximity of the use to its customers makes its services less expensive and/or more convenient.

Water-related uses include manufacturers of ship parts large enough that transportation becomes a significant factor in the product’s cost, professional services serving primarily water-dependent uses and storage of water-transported foods. Other examples of water-related uses include the warehousing of goods transported by water, seafood processing plants, hydroelectric generating plants, gravel storage when transported by barge, oil refineries where transport is by tanker, and upland log storage for waterborne transportation.

“Wetlands or wetland areas” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street or highway. Wetlands may include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.06 PURPOSE

Sections:

18.06.010    Authority.

18.06.020    Findings.

18.06.030    Purpose.

18.06.040    Title and short title.


18.06.010 Authority.

Authority for development, enactment and administration of this program is the Shoreline Management Act of 1971, chapter 90.58 RCW. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.06.020 Findings.

A. The city council concurs with the State Legislature in finding that the shorelines of the state are among the most valuable and fragile of our natural resources and that there is great concern throughout the state relating to their utilization, protection, restoration and preservation. In addition, ever increasing pressures of additional uses are being placed on the shorelines, necessitating increased coordination in their management and development. Furthermore, much of the shorelines and uplands adjacent thereto are in private ownership; that unrestricted construction on the privately owned or publicly owned shorelines is not in the best public interest; and, therefore, coordinated planning is necessary in order to protect the public interest associated with shorelines while, at the same time, recognizing and protecting private property rights consistent with the public interest. There is, therefore, a clear and urgent demand for a planned, rational and concerted effort, jointly performed by local, state, and federal governments, to prevent the inherent harm in uncoordinated and piecemeal development of shorelines.

B. The city council finds that there are two areas of shorelines within the city of Burlington and its urban growth area, consisting of the Skagit River floodway and contiguous floodplain areas landward 200 feet from such floodways; and the Gages Slough wetland associated with the Skagit River.

C. The city council finds that the Gages Slough wetland has been substantially altered and degraded as a result of the influence of urbanization, lack of best management practices in both urban and agricultural areas and that a restoration, monitoring and maintenance plan shall be included as part of this master program.

D. The city council deems the goals, shoreline area designations, policies, regulations, and procedures set forth in this shoreline management master program to be essential to the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city of Burlington and its urban growth area.

E. Adaptive management shall be applied to the shoreline conditions by means of on-going monitoring of water quality, water levels, review of restoration activities relative to the wetland functional assessment, analysis of data relative to total maximum daily load (TMDL) standards for the wastewater treatment plant, review of the practices of Dike District No. 12 relative to vegetation management, and review and analysis of watershed planning activities occurring in water resource inventory areas 3 and 4.

F. The city council finds that many of the environmental protection issues facing the city can only be addressed on a regional level and the city shall participate actively in those regional efforts. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.06.030 Purpose.

A. To promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing long-range, comprehensive policies and effective, reasonable regulations for development and use of the city of Burlington shorelines; and

B. To implement this program in a positive, effective and equitable manner; and

C. To further assume and carry out the responsibilities established by the Act for the city of Burlington, and to foster by adoption the policy contained in RCW 90.58.020 for shorelines of the state;

D. In implementing the policy of the Shoreline Management Act, this master program pursues the following objectives:

1. Plan for and foster reasonable and appropriate uses.

2. Promote and enhance the public interest.

3. Protect against adverse effects to public health, the land and its vegetation and wildlife, and the waters of the state and their aquatic life.

4. Protect the rights of navigation and public access.

5. Enhance the public’s opportunity to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of the natural shorelines of the state.

6. Protect and enhance shoreline resources, particularly those that cross jurisdictional boundaries within the state, those that are used by residents throughout the state and those that affect shoreline conditions outside a local jurisdiction’s boundaries. Ensure that the cumulative effects of individual actions do not irreparably damage or diminish shoreline resources.

7. Protect the rights of ownership, including those of the state and other public entities, consistent with the public interest.

8. Achieve planning and regulatory consistency between jurisdictions in the implementation of shoreline management objectives.

9. Provide for equal and fair treatment of all parties with respect to shoreline resources.

10. Ensure that the long-term interests of the state’s current and future citizens are favored over short-term interests. Maintain shoreline management options and resources for future generations.

11. Ensure consistency with other state laws and regulations and that the state is able to meet other laws and responsibilities, including the Federal Endangered Species Act;

E. The Legislature declares that the interest of all of the people shall be paramount in the management of shorelines of statewide significance (the Skagit River shoreline in the city of Burlington). The Department of Ecology, in adopting guidelines for shorelines of statewide significance, and local government, in developing master programs for shorelines of statewide significance, shall give preference to uses in the following order of preference which:

1. Recognize and protect the statewide interest over local interest;

2. Preserve the natural character of the shoreline;

3. Result in long-term over short-term benefit;

4. Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;

5. Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shorelines;

6. Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline;

7. Provide for any other element as defined in RCW 90.58.100 deemed appropriate or necessary.

In the implementation of this policy the public’s opportunity to enjoy the physical and aesthetic qualities of natural shorelines of the state shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible consistent with the overall best interest of the state and the people generally. To this end, uses shall be preferred which are consistent with control of pollution and prevention of damage to the natural environment or are unique to or dependent upon use of the state’s shoreline. Alterations of the natural condition of the shorelines of the state, in those limited instances when authorized, shall be given priority for single-family residences, ports, shoreline recreational uses including but not limited to parks, marinas, piers, and other improvements facilitating public access to shorelines of the state, industrial and commercial developments which are particularly dependent on their location or on use of the shorelines of the state and other development that will provide an opportunity to substantial numbers of the people to enjoy the shorelines of the state.

Permitted uses in the shorelines of the state shall be designed and conducted in a manner to minimize, insofar as practical, any resultant damage to the ecology and environment of the shoreline area and any interference with the public’s use of the water. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.06.040 Title and short title.

This document shall be known and may be cited as the master program for the Skagit River shorelines and Gages Slough in the city of Burlington. This document may refer to itself internally as “this master program” or “program.” (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.07 SHORELINES ENVIRONMENT DESIGNATIONS

Sections:

18.07.010    General.

18.07.040    Shorelines area designations.


18.07.010 General.

A. Shoreline Environment – Applicability.

1. Burlington’s shorelines under the shoreline master program are limited to those portions of the Skagit River, corresponding shorelands and the Gages Slough wetlands that occur within the city’s corporate limits, as detailed in BMC 18.09.060. For the purpose of this SMP the floodway is at the waterward top of the levee as depicted in Figure 1.
[IMAGE]


Figure 1. Shoreline Management Zone

(Note: This is a conceptual diagram only, and not a specific description of particular river locations. True floodway and jurisdictional extent will be determined at the time of permitting.)

B. Environmental Designations.

1. The Shoreline Management Act requires that each identified shoreline environment be given a designation, based on its physical condition and development pattern. The environmental designations provide a framework for implementing shoreline policies and regulations specific to each shoreline environment.

2. The Burlington shoreline master program has environmental designations based on the following:

a. Ecosystem characteristics and environmental functions;

b. Restoration potential;

c. Existing uses;

d. Development and redevelopment potential; and

e. Public and private plans.

3. Shorelines not found to be mapped or designated, such as through an annexation, will be assigned an urban conservancy environmental designation until such time that the SMP is updated to include analysis and appropriate designation of those shorelines.

C. Mapping.

1. An up-to-date and accurate map of the shoreline area, delineating the environmental designations, is maintained at the planning and community development department.

2. A list of shoreline properties, identified by Skagit County tax assessor parcel number, with their environmental designations, is maintained at the planning and community development department.

3. In the event of a mapping error, the designation criteria in conjunction with specific locational descriptions contained in this section shall prevail. The environmental designation boundaries, physical features, explicit criteria, or “common” boundary descriptions that define and distinguish the environments are included in BMC 18.07.040. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.07.040 Shorelines area designations.

A. Urban Conservancy Environment.

1. Purpose. The purpose of the urban conservancy environment is to protect and restore ecological functions of open space, floodplain, and other sensitive lands where they exist in developed shoreline settings, while allowing for compatible uses and public access.

2. Designation Criteria. The urban conservancy environmental designation has been assigned to the shorelines that meet the following criteria:

a. Existing open space within the floodplain including riverfront levees;

b. Existing and/or restored shoreline habitat including wetland sites;

c. Potential for ecological restoration;

d. Existing or potential for water-related recreation and public access.

3. Location of Environment.

a. Skagit River shoreline management zone upland from ordinary high water.

b. Gages Slough delineated wetland corridor extending from the east city limits to, and including, the Goldenrod Bridge corridor west of Interstate 5.

4. Management Guidelines.

a. Uses that preserve the natural character of the area or promote preservation of open space, floodplain, or sensitive lands either directly or over the long term should be the primary allowed uses.

b. Public utilities, including the city of Burlington wastewater treatment plant, are allowed in the urban conservancy environmental designation.

c. Where levees are located within the urban conservancy environmental designation, additional new flood risk reduction measures may be constructed.

d. New residential, commercial, or industrial uses should not be allowed in the urban conservancy environmental designation.

e. Public access and public recreation objectives should be implemented whenever feasible and where significant ecological impacts can be mitigated.

f. During development and redevelopment, all reasonable efforts should be taken to restore ecological functions.

B. Natural Environment.

1. Purpose. The purpose of the natural environment is to protect those shoreline areas that either currently provide intact ecological functions or represent opportunities where these functions can be largely restored.

2. Designation Criteria. The natural environment has been assigned to those shoreline areas that meet the following criteria:

a. The shoreline is relatively undeveloped with structures and roads;

b. The shoreline has not historically been in recreation or urban uses; and

c. There is existing or the potential for restoration of ecological functions and connectivity to the adjacent floodplain and associated wetlands.

3. Location of Environment. The natural environment applies to the following location: Gages Slough wetland area west of Goldenrod Bridge corridor, extending to the city limits.

4. Management Guidelines.

a. Residential, commercial, industrial, and active recreation (sport fields) uses should not be allowed.

b. Passive recreation uses such as trails and viewpoints and low-intensity water dependent recreational access may be allowed where feasible and ecological impacts can be mitigated.

c. Scientific, historical, cultural, educational, and research uses may be allowed; provided, that no significant ecological impact on the area would result.

d. Additional wetland areas may be reclassified to natural as restoration projects are implemented, monitored and maintained.

C. Aquatic Environment.

1. Purpose. The purpose of the aquatic environment is to protect, restore, and manage the unique characteristics and resources of the area waterward of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) in the Skagit River corridor.

2. Designation Criteria. The aquatic environment designation has been assigned to shoreline areas waterward of the OHWM.

3. Location of Environment. In Burlington, the aquatic environment is applicable only to the main stem of the Skagit River waterward of the OHWM. The city limit line is the midpoint of the river, and the shoreline management zone extends to that line.

4. Management Guidelines.

a. New over-water structures should be prohibited except for water-dependent uses, recreation, public access, critical infrastructure or ecological restoration.

b. The size of new over-water structures should be limited to the minimum necessary to support the structure’s intended use.

c. Provisions for the aquatic environment should be directed towards maintaining and restoring habitat for priority aquatic species.

d. Uses that cause significant ecological impacts to Skagit River habitats should be discouraged.

e. Shoreline uses and development should be designed and managed to prevent degradation of water quality and alteration of existing hydrographic conditions.

f. All developments and activities using navigable waters or their beds should be located and designed to minimize interference with surface navigation, to minimize adverse visual impacts, encourage multiple uses and to allow for the safe, unobstructed passage of fish whose life cycles are dependent on such migration. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.09 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.09.010    Applicability to development.

18.09.020    Applicability to substantial development.

18.09.030    Statement of exemption.

18.09.040    Nonconforming uses and structures.

18.09.050    Enforcement.

18.09.060    Geographical jurisdiction.

18.09.070    Applicability to persons.

18.09.080    Applicability to federal agencies (WAC 173-27-060).

18.09.090    Applicability to other local, state, and federal laws.

18.09.100    Applicability to and conflicts with other local and state policies and regulations.

18.09.120    Liberal construction.


18.09.010 Applicability to development.

A. A development or use shall not be undertaken on the shorelines in the city of Burlington unless it is consistent with the master program and the policies of the Act, whether or not a shoreline permit is required for such development or use. See definition of “development” in BMC 18.03.040.

B. Existing development is required to comply with the master program at the time of expansion or change of use or initiation of new forms of activity.

C. If use or development is nonconforming, change of ownership will not require compliance with the master program unless the new owner/operator significantly expands the operations or initiates new forms of activity.

D. The city will periodically review the cumulative effect of actions taken within the shoreline to ensure that the goal of no net loss of shoreline environmental functions is being met.

E. The city, for the purposes of making administrative decisions and processing permits as may be required by the SMP, means the department of planning and community development and its director.

F. The process of reviewing proposals shall be designed to assure that regulatory or administrative actions do not unconstitutionally infringe upon private property rights in accordance with WAC 173-26-186(5). (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.020 Applicability to substantial development.

A. Shoreline Substantial Development Permits.

1. A substantial development permit is not required for projects that are below the threshold levels established in WAC 173-27-040(2), Developments Exempt from Substantial Development Permit Requirement, as follows (see WAC citation for complete list):

a. Any development of which the total cost or fair market value, whichever is higher, does not exceed $5,718, if such development does not materially interfere with the normal public use of the water or shorelines of the state. (Note: The state of Washington requires that every five years the dollar threshold for this exemption be adjusted for inflation by the Washington Office of Financial Management (OFM). The adjustment is based upon changes in the Consumer Price Index during that time period (see chapter 18.03 BMC, Definitions). The OFM must calculate the new dollar threshold and transmit it to the Office of the Code Reviser for publication in the Washington State Register at least one month before the new dollar threshold is to take effect. WAC 173-27-040(2)(a).) For purposes of determining whether or not a permit is required, the total cost or fair market value shall be based on the value of development that is occurring on shorelines of the state as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(c). The total cost or fair market value of the development shall include the fair market value of any donated, contributed or found labor, equipment or materials;

b. Normal maintenance or repair of existing structures or developments, including damage by accident, fire, or elements;

c. Construction of the normal protective bulkhead common to single-family residences;

d. Emergency construction necessary to protect property from damage by the elements;

e. Construction and practices normal for farming, irrigation, and ranching activities, including agricultural service roads and utilities on shorelines, and the construction and maintenance of irrigation structures including but not limited to head gates, pumping facilities, and irrigation channels. A feedlot of any size, all processing plants, other activities of a commercial nature, alteration of the contour of the shorelines by leveling or filling other than that which results from normal cultivation, shall not be considered normal or necessary farming or ranching activities. A feedlot shall be an enclosure or facility used or capable of being used for feeding livestock hay, grain silage, or other livestock feed, but shall not include land for growing crops or vegetation for livestock feeding and/or grazing, nor shall it include normal livestock wintering operations;

f. Construction or modification of navigational aids such as channel markers and anchor buoys;

g. Construction on shorelines by an owner, lessee, or contract purchaser of a single-family residence for his own use or for the use of his family, which residence does not exceed a height of 35 feet above average grade level and which meets all the requirements of the state agency or local government having jurisdiction thereof, other than requirements imposed pursuant to this title;

h. Construction of a dock, including a community dock, designed for pleasure craft only, for the private noncommercial use of the owner, lessee, or contract purchaser of single- and multiple-family residences. This exception applies if the fair market value of the dock does not exceed $10,000, but if subsequent construction having a fair market value exceeding $2,500 occurs within five years of completion of the prior construction, the subsequent construction shall be considered a substantial development for the purpose of this title;

i. Operation, maintenance, or construction of canals, waterways, drains, reservoirs, or other facilities that now exist or are hereafter created or developed as a part of an irrigation system for the primary purpose of making use of system waters, including return flow and artificially stored ground water for the irrigation of lands;

j. The marking of property lines or corners on state owned lands, when such marking does not significantly interfere with normal public use of the surface of the water;

k. Operation and maintenance of any system of levees, ditches, drains, or other facilities existing on September 8, 1975, which were created, developed, or utilized primarily as a part of an agricultural drainage or diking system;

l. Site exploration and investigation activities that are prerequisite to preparation of an application for development authorization under this title, if:

i. The activity does not interfere with the normal public use of the surface waters;

ii. The activity will have no significant adverse impact on the environment including, but not limited to, fish, wildlife, fish or wildlife habitat, water quality, and aesthetic values;

iii. The activity does not involve the installation of a structure, and upon completion of the activity the vegetation and land configuration of the site are restored to conditions existing before the activity;

iv. A private entity seeking development authorization under this section first posts a performance bond or provides other evidence of financial responsibility to the city of Burlington to ensure that the site is restored to preexisting conditions; and

v. The activity is not subject to the permit requirements of RCW 90.58.550 (oil or gas exploration);

m. The process of removing or controlling an aquatic noxious weed, as defined in RCW 17.26.020, through the use of an herbicide or other treatment methods applicable to weed control that are recommended by a final environmental impact statement published by the Department of Agriculture or the Department jointly with other state agencies under chapter 43.21C RCW;

n. Watershed restoration projects as defined in RCW 89.08.460 are exempt from the requirement to obtain a substantial development permit. Gages Slough is part of the watershed project approved by the Department of Ecology and its restoration is exempt from the permit requirement;

o. A public or private project that is designed to improve fish or wildlife habitat or fish passage shall be exempt from the substantial development permit requirements of this chapter when all of the following apply:

i. The project has been approved by the Department of Fish and Wildlife;

ii. The project has received hydraulic project approval by the Department of Fish and Wildlife;

iii. The city has determined that the project is substantially consistent with the master program.

2. A shoreline substantial development permit application is a Type II permit, as per chapter 14A.05 BMC.

3. The “effective date of a substantial development permit” is the date of filing. The date of filing is the date Ecology receives the city’s final decision. The date of filing for a shoreline variance or conditional use permit is the date the decision of Ecology is transmitted by Ecology to the city. The date of filing starts the two-year clock for beginning of construction and establishes the appeal period of the permit to the Shoreline Hearings Board. The two-year time period does not include periods of pendency for other related permits or legal actions.

4. Time requirements for shoreline permits are as follows (see WAC 173-27-090 for complete language):

a. Construction activities shall commence, or where no construction activities are involved, the use or activity shall commence within two years of the effective date of a substantial development permit.

b. The period for commencement of construction or use may be extended once for a one-year period, if a request based on reasonable factors is filed before the expiration date and notice of the proposed extension is given to parties of record.

c. The authorization to conduct development activities shall terminate five years after the effective date of a substantial development permit.

d. The authorization period to conduct development activities may be extended once for a one-year period, if a request based on reasonable factors is filed before the expiration date and notice of the proposed extension is given to parties of record.

e. The time periods in subsections (A)(4)(a) and (c) of this section do not include the time during which a use or activity was not actually pursued due to the pendency of administrative appeals or legal actions or due to the need to obtain any other government permits and approvals for the development that authorize the development to proceed, including all reasonably related administrative or legal actions on any such permits or approvals.

f. It is the applicant’s responsibility to inform local government of any legal actions or permits that may affect time periods established herein. The city may terminate the shoreline permit if the applicant fails to demonstrate good faith in obtaining all other necessary permits or resolve any legal actions in a timely manner.

5. Permit review procedures shall be as follows:

a. The planning and community development department maintains records of project review actions resulting in issuance of permits, including shoreline substantial development permits.

b. Copies of Shoreline Management Act permit data sheet and transmittal letters forwarded to the Department of Ecology shall be utilized for evaluation of the potential cumulative effects of previous and proposed actions in shoreline areas.

6. Appeals to the Shorelines Hearings Board shall be consistent with RCW 90.58.140.

B. Conditional Use Permits.

1. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow greater flexibility in administering the use regulations of the master program in a manner consistent with the policies of the SMA. Conditional use permits may also be granted in circumstances where denial of the permit would result in a thwarting of the policy enumerated in the SMA.

2. A shoreline conditional use permit is a Type III permit, as per chapter 14A.05 BMC.

3. The planning commission shall, following an open record public hearing, make a recommendation to the city council, who has the authority to make the final local decision.

4. The application for a shoreline conditional use permit shall be processed pursuant to the legislative policies stated in the Shoreline Management Act, RCW 90.58.020 (Legislative Findings – State Policy Enunciated – Use Preference) and the shoreline master program of the city of Burlington.

5. The criteria for approving conditional uses shall be consistent with WAC 173-27-160 (Review Criteria for Conditional Use Permits) and include the following:

a. That the proposed use is consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020, the master program, and the BMC;

b. That the proposed use will not interfere with the normal public use of public shorelines;

c. That the proposed use of the site and design of the project is compatible with other authorized uses within the area and with uses planned for the area under the comprehensive plan and the SMP;

d. That the proposed use will cause no significant adverse effects to the shoreline environment in which it is to be located; and

e. That the public interest suffers no substantial detrimental effect.

6. Other uses that are not classified or set forth in the master program may be authorized as conditional uses; provided, that the applicant can demonstrate, in addition to the criteria set forth in subsection (B)(5)(a) of this section and RCW 90.58.020, that extraordinary circumstances preclude reasonable use of the property in a manner consistent with the permitted use regulations of the master program.

7. When reviewing conditional use permit applications, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of like actions in the area. For example, if conditional use permits were granted for other developments in the area where similar circumstances exist, the total of the conditional uses shall also remain consistent with the policies of RCW 90.58.020 and shall not produce substantial adverse effects to the shoreline environment.

8. Uses which are specifically prohibited or not allowed by the master program may not be authorized pursuant to either subsection (B)(5) or (6) of this section.

C. Variances.

1. The purpose of a variance permit is strictly limited to granting relief from specific bulk, dimensional or performance standards set forth in the applicable master program where there are extraordinary circumstances relating to the physical character or configuration of property. Shoreline variances should be granted in a circumstance where strict implementation of the master program would impose unnecessary hardships on the applicant or where denial of the permit would result in a thwarting of the policy enumerated in the SMA. In all instances, extraordinary circumstances should be shown, and the public interest shall suffer no substantial detrimental effect.

2. A shoreline variance permit is a Type II permit, as per chapter 14A.05 BMC. The board of adjustment shall, following an open record public hearing, make a final local decision on the permit application.

3. Variances for development that will be located landward of the ordinary high water mark may be authorized provided the applicant can demonstrate all of the following:

a. That the strict application of the bulk, dimensional, or performance standards as set forth in the master program precludes or significantly interferes with a reasonable permitted use of the property.

b. That the hardship is specifically related to the property and is the result of unique conditions, such as irregular lot shape, size, or natural features, in the application of the master program and not, for example, from deed restrictions or the applicant’s own actions.

c. That the design of the project will be compatible with other permitted activities in the area and will not cause adverse effects to adjacent properties or the shoreline environmental designation.

d. That the variance authorized does not constitute a grant of special privilege not enjoyed by other properties in the area, and will be the minimum necessary to afford relief.

e. That the public interest will suffer no substantial detrimental effect.

4. Variances for development that will be located waterward of the OHWM may be authorized, provided the applicant can satisfy all of the criteria specified in subsections (C)(3)(b) through (e) of this section. The applicant must also demonstrate that the public rights of navigation and that the strict application of the bulk, dimensional, or performance standards set forth in the master program precludes all reasonable use of the property.

5. In granting of all shoreline variances, consideration shall be given to the cumulative impact of additional requests or like actions in the area.

6. Variances from the use regulations of the master program are prohibited.

D. Revisions to Permits.

1. When an applicant seeks to revise a shoreline substantial development permit, conditional use permit, or variance, whether such permit or variance was granted under this SMP, or under the Skagit County SMP in effect prior to adoption of the Burlington SMP, the planning and community development department shall request from the applicant detailed plans and text describing the proposed changes to the project. If the staff determines that the proposed changes are within the general scope and intent of the original substantial development permit, conditional use permit or variance, as the case may be, the revision may be approved by the planning director, without the need for the applicant to file a new substantial development permit application, provided the development is consistent with the SMA, WAC 173-27-100 (Revisions to Permits), and the master program.

2. Within the scope and intent of the original permit means the following:

a. No additional over-water construction will be involved, except that pier, dock, or float construction may be increased by 500 square feet or 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit, whichever is less.

b. Lot coverage and height may be increased a maximum of 10 percent from the provisions of the original permit.

c. Additional or revised landscaping is consistent with the conditions attached to the original permit and with the shoreline master program.

d. The use authorized pursuant to the original permit is not changed.

e. No adverse environmental impact will be caused by the project revision.

f. The revised permit shall not authorize development to exceed height, lot coverage, setback, or any other requirements of the master program except as authorized under a variance granted as the original permit or a part thereof.

3. If the revision, or the sum of the revision and any previously approved revisions, will violate the criteria specified above, the planning and community development department shall require the applicant to apply for a new shoreline substantial development or conditional use permit or variance, as appropriate, in the manner provided for herein.

4. If proposed revisions to the original permit involve a conditional use or variance, the city shall submit the proposed revision to the DOE for review. The DOE shall respond with its final decision on the proposed revision request within 15 days of the date of receipt by the DOE (WAC 173-27-100(6)). The city shall notify parties of record of the DOE’s final decision.

5. Revisions to permits may be authorized after original permit authorization has expired under RCW 90.58.143. The purpose of such revisions shall be limited to authorization of changes which are consistent with this section and which would not require a permit for the development or change proposed under the terms of chapter 90.58 RCW, this regulation and the local master program. If the proposed change constitutes substantial development then a new permit is required; provided, this subsection shall not be used to extend the time requirements or to authorize substantial development beyond the time limits of the original permit.

6. The revision approval, including the revised site plans and text consistent with the provisions of WAC 173-27-180 as necessary to clearly indicate the authorized changes, and the final ruling on consistency with this section shall be filed with the DOE. In addition, the city shall notify parties of record of their action.

7. The revised permit is effective immediately upon final decision by the city or, when appropriate under subsection (D)(4) of this section, upon final action by the DOE.

8. Appeals shall be in accordance with RCW 90.58.180 and shall be filed within 21 days from the date of receipt of the city’s action by the DOE or, when appropriate under subsection (D)(4) of this section, the date the DOE’s final decision is transmitted to the city and the applicant. Appeals shall be based only upon contentions of noncompliance with the provision of subsection (D)(2) of this section. Construction undertaken pursuant to that portion of a revised permit not authorized under the original permit is at the applicant’s own risk until the expiration of the appeals deadline. If an appeal is successful in proving that a revision is not within the scope and intent of the original permit, the decision shall have no bearing on the original permit. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.030 Statement of exemption.

A. Whenever a development falls within the exemptions stated in BMC 18.09.020(A)(1) and the development is subject to a U.S. Corps of Engineers Section 10 permit under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1899, or a Section 404 permit under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, the city shall prepare a letter addressed to the applicant and the department, exempting the development from the substantial development permit requirements of chapter 90.58 RCW. This exemption shall be in the form prescribed by WAC 173-27-050.

B. A statement of exemption is also required for exempt work on levees.

C. Exemptions shall be construed narrowly. Only those developments that meet the precise terms of one or more of the listed exemptions may be granted exemption from the substantial development permit process.

D. An exemption from the substantial development permit process is not an exemption from compliance with the Act or the local master program, or from any other regulatory requirements. To be authorized, all uses and developments must be consistent with the policies and provisions of the applicable master program and the Shoreline Management Act. A development or use that is listed as a conditional use pursuant to the local master program or is an unlisted use must obtain a conditional use permit even though the development or use does not require a substantial development permit. When a development or use is proposed that does not comply with the bulk, dimensional and performance standards of the master program, such development or use can only be authorized by approval of a variance.

E. The burden of proof that a development or use is exempt from the permit process is on the applicant.

F. If any part of a proposed development is not eligible for exemption, then a substantial development permit is required for the entire proposed development project.

G. Local government may attach conditions to the approval of exempted developments and/or uses as necessary to assure consistency of the project with the Act and the local master program. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.040 Nonconforming uses and structures.

A. The following definitions and standards shall apply to nonconforming structures and uses regulated by this master program:

1. “Nonconforming use or development” means a shoreline use or development that was lawfully constructed or established prior to the effective date of the city of Burlington shoreline master program or amendments thereto, but does not conform to current regulations or standards of the program.

2. Structures that were legally established and are used for a conforming use but are nonconforming with regard to shoreline setback requirements may be maintained and repaired and may be enlarged or expanded; provided, that any such enlargement or expansion:

a. Will not extend the footprint of the structure any closer to the shoreline or wetland than the current design;

b. Will not interfere with or obstruct dedicated public access routes to the shoreline, per applicable requirements set out herein;

c. Will meet any construction standards enacted by the city to protect adjacent flood risk reduction structures;

d. Will be consistent with the current, or another authorized, conforming use; and

e. Will adhere to underlying municipal code and building regulations.

3. Uses and development that were legally established and are nonconforming with regard to the use regulations of the master program may continue as legal nonconforming uses. Such uses shall not be enlarged or expanded unless otherwise permitted by this SMP.

4. A use that is listed as a shoreline conditional use but existed prior to adoption of the master program or any relevant amendment and for which a conditional use permit has not been obtained shall be considered a nonconforming use.

5. A use that is listed as a shoreline conditional use but existed prior to the applicability of the master program to the site and for which a conditional use permit has not been obtained shall be considered a nonconforming use.

6. A structure for which a variance has been issued shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure and the requirements of this section shall apply as they apply to preexisting nonconformities.

7. A structure that is being used, or has been used, for a nonconforming use may be used for a different nonconforming use only upon the approval of a shoreline conditional use permit. A shoreline conditional use permit for any such new nonconforming use may be approved only upon a finding that:

a. No reasonable alternative conforming use is practical; and

b. The proposed use will be at least as consistent with the policies and provisions of the SMA and the master program and as compatible with the uses in the area as the preexisting use.

In addition, such conditions may be attached to the permit as are deemed necessary to assure compliance with the above findings, the requirements of the master program and the Shoreline Management Act, and to assure that the use will not become a nuisance or a hazard.

8. A nonconforming structure that is moved within the SMZ must be brought into conformance with the master program, unless such relocation is expressly authorized through previous agreement between the city and the property owner.

9. If a nonconforming structure is damaged or partially destroyed to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed valuation of such structure as established by the most current Skagit County assessor’s tax roll, it may be restored to its original condition, as authorized by the city’s building official, and its immediately preceding or existing use at the time of partial destruction may be continued or resumed. Such damaged or destroyed building may be reconstructed to a size not to exceed the existing footprint at the time of the damage or destruction and within the height at the time of the damage or destruction, and except for the shoreline setback provision in subsection (A)(2) of this section, must conform to those specifications required by the current building code and applicable zoning requirements for reconstruction of nonconforming structures; provided, that:

a. Application is made for the permits necessary to restore the development within six months of the date the damage occurred;

b. All permits are obtained; and

c. The restoration is started within one year and completed within two years of permit issuance.

10. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months or for 12 months during any two-year period, the rights to such use shall expire and any subsequent use of such structure shall be conforming. A use authorized pursuant to subsection (A)(7) of this section shall be considered a legal nonconforming use for purposes of this section.

11. An undeveloped lot, tract, parcel, site, or division of land located landward of the OHWM that was established in accordance with local and state subdivision requirements prior to the effective date of the city of Burlington shoreline master program, but does not conform to the present lot size standards or is not configured to allow for reasonable use that would meet current shoreline setback requirements, may be developed if permitted by other land use regulations of the BMC and so long as such development conforms to all other requirements of the master program and the SMA. In this case, a SMP variance shall be required. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.050 Enforcement.

A. In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the city or with any conditions imposed upon the shoreline development permit, the permit shall immediately become void and any continuation of the use activity shall be construed as being in violation of BMC Title 17.

B. Any person failing to conform to the terms of a permit issued in accordance with the SMP or who undertakes development on the shorelines of the state without first obtaining any permit required by the SMP shall be subject to a civil penalty as per RCW 90.58.210 and WAC 173-27-280. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.060 Geographical jurisdiction.

This master program shall apply to all lands and waters as defined by RCW 90.58.030 for the city of Burlington including the Skagit River Shoreline District and associated Gages Slough wetland corridor.

The shoreline management zone extends a minimum of 200 feet upland from the line of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM) of the Skagit River or 200 feet from the edge of the floodway within the floodplain, whichever is greater. The floodway may be the area established by FEMA maps or by identifying the contiguous land upon which flood waters may be carried during periods of flooding that can occur with reasonable regularity, although not necessarily annually. These areas prone to flooding have been identified, under normal conditions, by changes in surface soil conditions or changes in types or quality of vegetative ground cover condition, topography, or other indicators of flooding. As of the date of writing of this shoreline master program, the jurisdictional map shall utilize the waterward top of levee as the edge of the floodway. The actual extent of shoreline jurisdiction will be determined on a case by case basis as needed. The shoreline management zone includes associated wetlands, but not wetland buffers beyond 200 feet of the floodway. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.070 Applicability to persons.

This master program shall apply to every person, individual, firm, partnership, association, organization, corporation, local or state government agency, public or municipal corporation, or other entity which develops, owns, leases or administers lands, wetlands, and waters which fall under the jurisdiction of the Shoreline Management Act. Nothing in this management program shall be construed as allowing any abridgment of private property rights. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.080 Applicability to federal agencies (WAC 173-27-060).

A. Direct federal agency activities in or affecting Washington’s coastal zone shall be consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the enforceable policies of the most recent federally approved Washington State Coastal Zone Management Program pursuant to the Federal Coastal Zone Management Act, 16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq. (CZMA) and federal regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

Washington’s coastal zone, as established in the state’s approved Coastal Zone Management Program, includes the following coastal counties: Whatcom, Skagit, San Juan, Island, Snohomish, King, Pierce, Thurston, Mason, Kitsap, Jefferson, Clallam, Grays Harbor, Pacific and Wahkiakum.

The Shoreline Management Act is incorporated into the Washington State Coastal Zone Management Program and, thereby, those direct federal agency activities affecting the uses or resources subject to the Act must be consistent to the maximum extent practicable with the enforceable provisions of the Act, regulations adopted pursuant to the Act and the local master program.

When the Department of Ecology receives a consistency determination for an activity proposed by the federal government, it shall request that local government review the proposal and provide the Department of Ecology with its views regarding the consistency of the activity or development project with the enforceable policies of the local master program.

The CZMA federal consistency decision-making process for federal agency activities is prescribed in the Coastal Zone Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1456 (c)(1) and (2)), in federal regulations at 15 CFR Part 930, Subpart C, and in Washington’s most recent federally approved CZM program document.

B. Federal agency activities may be required by other federal laws to meet the permitting requirements of chapter 90.58 RCW.

C. The policies and provisions of chapter 90.58 RCW, including the permit system, shall apply statewide to all nonfederal developments and uses undertaken on federal lands and on lands subject to nonfederal ownership, lease or easement, even though such lands may fall within the external boundaries of a federal ownership. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.090 Applicability to other local, state, and federal laws.

Obtaining a shoreline permit or letter of exemption for a development or use does not excuse the applicant from complying with any other local, regional, state, or federal laws applicable to such development or use. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.100 Applicability to and conflicts with other local and state policies and regulations.

In the event that there are conflicts between the master program and other applicable state and local policies, regulations, and ordinances, the provisions of the master program shall prevail. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.09.120 Liberal construction.

This program is exempted from the rule of strict construction, and it shall be liberally construed to give full effect to the objectives and purposes for which it was enacted. (See also RCW 90.58.900, Liberal Construction.) (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.12 MASTER PROGRAM POLICY GOALS

Sections:

18.12.010    Adoption.

18.12.020    Master program policy goals.


18.12.010 Adoption.

The following policy goals are adopted to provide an overall, comprehensive foundation and sense of direction upon which the regulations, shoreline area designations, and administrative procedures are based. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.12.020 Master program policy goals.

A. Economic Development Element.

1. Land and shoreline use patterns shall provide for the location of existing and future transportation facilities, utilities, and recreation activities that are dependent on access to the water.

2. Because of the unique floodway and floodplain limitations on the use of the Skagit River shorelines, particularly the levee system, the majority of the shoreline shall be identified and reserved for recreational and open space uses.

3. Existing and projected water-oriented uses shall be accommodated through environment designation policies and regulations based on the inventory of existing shoreline resources and analysis of future demand for water-oriented uses.

4. Because navigation is restricted to small boats, primarily for sports fishing, preference shall be given to those uses that allow a significant number of people to enjoy the shoreline, public access (water-enjoyment) and/or uses that demonstrably pursue shoreline objectives.

5. Preference shall also be given to uses that enhance the ecological viability and enhancement of fisheries habitats along the Skagit River shoreline.

B. Public Access Element.

1. The public access system shall provide for both physical and visual access. The system shall include but not be limited to public lands and shall seek to increase the amount and diversity of public access to the state’s shorelines and adjacent areas consistent with the natural shoreline character, property rights, including the public’s rights under the public trust doctrine, and public safety.

2. The public’s right to use the surface waters of the state for navigation under the public trust doctrine shall be protected.

3. The public’s right to view the waters of the state shall be protected, including measures such as maximum height limits, setbacks, and view corridors to minimize the impacts to existing views from public property or substantial numbers of residences.

4. The primary public access area to the Skagit River shall consist of the land that is subject to the interlocal agreement with Dike District No. 12, with motorized public access at Gardner Road Bar and just west of the Railroad Bridge and with nonmotorized public access along the levee adjacent to the Skagit River.

5. Public access to Gages Slough shall include, where appropriate, viewing areas or interpretative trails and publicly owned park lands. Decisions on where to locate public access and the extent of access that is allowed will be based on best scientific information developed specifically for Gages Slough.

C. Recreation Element.

1. Ensure optimal recreational opportunities now and in the future in shoreline areas that can reasonably tolerate, during peak use periods, active, passive, competitive, or contemplative uses without destroying the integrity and character of the shoreline.

2. The Skagit River public recreation area specifically includes the shorelines extending from Gardner Road Bar to the Burlington-Mount Vernon Bridge for fishing, boating, passive and active recreation activities. As the setback levee is constructed through the bridge corridor, opportunities for public access will increase.

3. The Gages Slough recreation opportunities shall be limited based on the best available scientific information developed specifically for Gages Slough.

4. Recreation policies in the parks and recreation comprehensive plan are adopted here by reference and those policies are consistent with growth projections and level-of-service standards.

D. Circulation Element.

1. Existing and planned circulation systems are adequate to serve as access to shorelines.

2. Nonmotorized routes that connect the community with the shorelines and include environmental restoration and interpretative components shall be made whenever feasible.

E. Use Element.

1. It is the goal to protect and restore the Gages Slough wetlands to optimize water quality, habitat, best management practices and ensure that adjacent land use patterns are compatible with the protection and enhancement of the wetlands and take advantage of the unique attributes of the site, allowing no net loss of wetlands, and for Gages Slough, to also increase the size of culverts, remove obstructions, develop and implement specific plans to improve the functions relative to surface water management, and generally improve the flow characteristics to provide for efficient conveyance of water through the city during flood events.

2. It is the goal to allow limited use of the Skagit River and its shoreline compatible with the current edition of the Burlington floodplain management and natural hazard mitigation plan, consistent with the following priorities: recognizing and protecting the state-wide interest over local interests, preserving natural character, realizing long-term over short-term benefit, protecting resources and ecology, increasing public access to publicly owned areas, increasing recreational opportunities, providing for any other element that is appropriate or necessary.

F. Conservation and Restoration Element.

1. The Skagit River riparian corridor shall be managed in accordance with regional watershed planning standards and best management practices, including vegetation management of shoreline areas fronted by levees. Adaptive management techniques shall be employed as additional scientific information and regional mitigation plans are developed.

2. The floodplain shall be managed in accordance with applicable federal, state, regional and local regulations, best management practices and best available science practices, along with the city of Burlington floodplain management and natural hazard mitigation plan.

3. Reclaim and restore areas which are biologically and aesthetically degraded to the greatest extent feasible while maintaining appropriate use of the shoreline. Preserve and protect the natural resources of the shorelines in the public interest and for future generations.

4. Protect ground water aquifers from contamination.

5. Protect native vegetation and wildlife within the protected wetlands and riparian corridors and their buffers, and encourage planned buffer restoration and parks open space enhancement; provided, that, in the case of the shoreline fronted by levees along the Skagit River, vegetation management standards are established by the Corps of Engineers, as may be amended.

6. Encourage the cleanup and ecological restoration of degraded shorelines, including the Gages Slough corridor.

G. Historic and Cultural Element.

1. Identify, protect, preserve and restore important archaeological, historical and cultural sites located in shorelines for educational and scientific purposes, and enjoyment of the public.

2. Optimize educational opportunities by encouraging interpretative displays and facilities for educational purposes, as part of public access.

H. Flood Damage Reduction Element.

1. Continue to work closely with the Dike Districts, Skagit County, and business and property owners in flood risk reduction planning.

2. Implement the flood risk reduction planning objectives and projects in the city of Burlington as further defined in the Burlington floodplain management and natural hazard mitigation plan.

3. Participate in watershed-wide programs to reduce flood hazards and improve shoreline ecology. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

18.14.010    Introduction.

18.14.020    Policies and regulations.


18.14.010 Introduction.

General policies and regulations are applicable to all uses and activities (regardless of master program environment designation) that may occur along a jurisdiction’s shorelines. If used properly, they can also reduce redundancy in a master program by eliminating the need to repeat regulations over and over for each environment designation.

BMC 18.14.020 is broken up into 10 different topic headings and is arranged alphabetically. Each topic begins with a discussion of background master program issues and considerations, followed by general policy statements and regulations. The intent of these model provisions is to be inclusive, making them applicable over a wide range of environments as well as particular uses and activities. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.14.020 Policies and regulations.

A. Universally Applicable Policies and Regulations.

1. Applicability. The following regulations describe the requirements for all shoreline uses and development in all environment designations.

2. Policies.

a. The city will periodically review conditions on the shoreline and conduct appropriate analysis to determine whether or not other actions are necessary to protect and restore the ecology, protect human health and safety, upgrade the visual qualities, protect property rights and enhance residential and recreational uses on the city’s shorelines. Specific issues to address in such evaluations include, but are not limited to:

i. Water quality.

ii. Conservation of aquatic vegetation (control of noxious weeds and enhancement of vegetation that supports more desirable ecological and recreational conditions).

iii. Upland vegetation.

iv. Shoreline stabilization and modifications.

b. The city will keep records of all project review actions within shoreline jurisdiction, including shoreline permits, letters of exemption, and building permits.

c. Where appropriate, the city will pursue the policies of this master program in other land use, development permitting, public construction, and public health and safety activities that may not fall under the authority of the Shoreline Management Act. Specifically, such activities include, but are not limited to:

i. Water quality and storm water management activities, including those outside shoreline jurisdiction but affecting the shorelines of the state.

ii. Aquatic vegetation management.

iii. Health and safety activities, especially those related to sanitary sewage.

iv. Public works and utilities development.

v. Involve affected federal, state, and tribal governments in the review process of shoreline applications.

3. Regulations.

a. All proposed shoreline uses and development, including those that do not require a shoreline permit, must conform to the Shoreline Management Act, chapter 90.58 RCW, and to the policies and regulations of this master program.

b. All new shoreline development must be in support of an allowable shoreline use that conforms to the provisions of this master program. Except as otherwise noted, all shoreline developments not associated with a legally existing or an approved shoreline use are prohibited.

c. Shoreline uses, development, and conditions listed as “prohibited” shall not be eligible for consideration as a shoreline variance or shoreline conditional use permit.

d. The “policies” listed in this master program will provide broad guidance and direction and will be used by the city in applying the “regulations.” The policies, taken together, constitute the shoreline element of the Burlington comprehensive plan.

e. Where provisions of this master program conflict, the provisions most directly implementing the objectives of the Shoreline Management Act, as determined by the city, shall apply unless specifically stated otherwise.

f. All new shoreline use and development shall result in no net loss of shoreline ecological functions necessary to sustain shoreline natural resources by utilizing the mitigation sequencing as outlined in subsection (C)(3) of this section.

B. Archaeological, Historical, and Cultural Resources.

1. Applicability. The archaeological, historical, and cultural resources element provides for protection and restoration of buildings, structures, sites, districts, objects, and areas, hereinafter referred to as “sites,” having known or potential archaeological, historical, cultural, or scientific value or significance.

The following provisions apply to archaeological and historic resources that are either recorded at the Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation (DAHP) and/or by local jurisdictions or have been inadvertently uncovered.

2. Policies.

a. Due to the limited and irreplaceable nature of the resource, public or private uses, activities, and development should be prevented from destroying or damaging any site having historic, cultural, scientific or educational value as identified by the appropriate authorities and deemed worthy of protection and preservation.

b. Site development activity in shoreline areas shall be subject to the policies and regulations of this section and the Burlington comprehensive plan policies related to such resources. The archaeological, historical, and cultural resources element provides for protection and restoration of buildings, structures, sites, districts, objects, and areas, hereinafter referred to as “sites,” having known or potential archaeological, historical, cultural, or scientific value or significance.

c. Shoreline features should be protected to prevent the destruction of or damage to any site having archaeological, historic, cultural, or scientific value through coordination and consultation with the appropriate local, state, tribal, and federal authorities.

d. Sites should be protected in collaboration with appropriate tribal, state, federal, and local governments. Cooperation among public and private parties is to be encouraged in the identification, protection, and management of cultural resources.

e. When or where appropriate, access to such sites should be made available to parties of interest. Access to such sites must be designed and managed in a manner that gives maximum protection to the resource.

f. Opportunities for education related to archaeological, historical, and cultural features should be provided when or where appropriate and incorporated into public and private management efforts, programs, and development.

3. Regulations – General.

a. All applications for a shoreline development permit, a building permit, a clearing and grading permit, a demolition permit, or a statement of exemption for shoreline development within the jurisdiction of the Burlington SMP shall be reviewed for a determination of whether the site(s) in question:

i. Is on property within 500 feet of a site known to contain historic, cultural, or archaeological resource(s); or

ii. Is in an area mapped as having the potential for the presence of archaeological, historic, or cultural resources to be present.

b. All applications meeting these criteria shall require a cultural resource site survey or assessment, unless this requirement is waived or modified by the DAHP. Any required site assessment shall be conducted by a professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional, as applicable, to determine the presence of historic or significant archaeological resources. Buildings or structures over 40 years in age shall be inventoried in a DAHP historic property inventory database entry and archaeological sites shall be recorded on DAHP archaeological site inventory forms. The fee for the services of the professional archaeologist or historic preservationist shall be paid by the applicant.

c. If the cultural resource site assessment identifies the presence of archaeological, significant historic or cultural resources, appropriate recommendations shall be prepared by a professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional, as part of the survey or assessment. The fee for the services of the professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional shall be paid by the applicant. In the preparation of such plans, the professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional shall solicit comments from the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, and the affected tribe(s). Comments received from these reviewers shall be incorporated into the conclusions and recommended conditions of the survey or assessment to the maximum extent practicable.

d. A cultural resources survey or site assessment shall be prepared in accordance with guidance for such studies approved or promulgated by the DAHP. DAHP shall determine whether the research design or study is adequate.

e. The administrator shall consult with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation and affected tribe(s) prior to approval and acceptance of the survey or assessment.

f. Based upon consultation with DAHP and affected tribe(s), the administrator may reject or request revision of the conclusions reached in a survey or assessment when the administrator can demonstrate that the assessment is inaccurate or does not fully address the historic or archaeological resource management concerns involved.

g. In the event a cultural resources survey or site assessment is submitted directly to the city of Burlington, the professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional will be advised to submit the materials directly to DAHP.

h. In granting shoreline permits or statements of exemption for such development, the city of Burlington may attach conditions of approval to require consultation with the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, affected tribe(s), and any local historic preservation authority, to assure that historic or archaeological resources are properly protected, or for appropriate agencies to contact property owners regarding purchase or other long-term arrangements. Provisions for the protection and preservation of historic or archaeological sites, structures, buildings, districts, objects, or areas shall be incorporated to the maximum extent practicable.

4. Regulations – Inadvertent Discovery.

a. Whenever historic, cultural, or archaeological sites or artifacts are discovered in the process of development on shorelines, work on that portion of the development site shall be stopped immediately and the find reported as soon as possible to the administrator or DAHP.

b. The administrator shall then notify the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, affected tribe(s), any local historic preservation authority, and any other appropriate agencies and, upon consultation with DAHP, shall require that an immediate site assessment be conducted by a professional archaeologist or historic preservation professional, as applicable, pursuant to subsection (B)(3)(b) of this section to determine the extent of damage to the resource. The site assessment shall be distributed to the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation, the affected tribe(s), and local historic preservation authority for a 15-day review period. If the above listed agencies or governments have failed to respond within the applicable review period following receipt of the site assessment, such stopped work may resume.

c.  If human remains are encountered, all activity must cease and the area must be protected and the find reported to local law enforcement and the county coroner or medical examiner.

C. Critical Areas.

1. Applicability.

a. Wetlands and their buffers occurring in the city’s shoreline jurisdiction (note: the city is not opting for the expansion of the shoreline jurisdiction, as provided for in RCW 90.58.030(2)(d)(ii)).

b. The main stem of the Skagit River, which is designated an aquatic environment in BMC 18.07.040(C), and its buffer, which provide the critical ecological function of fish passage to upstream spawning and rearing habitats.

c. The language adopted as part of this SMP has been reviewed and determined to meet the standard of no net loss of ecological functions.

2. Policies.

a. In implementing this master program, the city will take necessary steps to ensure compliance with chapter 43.21 RCW, the Washington State Environmental Policy Act of 1971, and its implementing guidelines.

b. All significant adverse impacts to the shoreline should be avoided or, if that is not possible, minimized to the extent feasible.

c. Applicable sections of the critical area ordinance (CAO) pertaining to wetlands have been incorporated into the SMP and have been included as Appendix A, Shoreline Wetland, Fish and Wildlife Habitat, and General Critical Area Regulations.

3. Regulations.

a. All project proposals, including those for which a shoreline permit is not required, shall comply with chapter 43.21C RCW, the Washington State Environmental Policy Act.

b. Projects that cause significant ecological impacts are not allowed unless mitigated according to the sequence in subsection (C)(3)(d) of this section to avoid reduction or damage to ecosystem-wide processes and ecological functions.

c. Projects that cause significant adverse impacts, other than significant ecological impacts, shall be mitigated according to the sequence in subsection (C)(3)(d) of this section.

d. When applying mitigation to avoid or minimize significant adverse effects and significant ecological impacts, the city will apply the following sequence of steps in order of priority, with (i) being top priority:

i. Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

ii. Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

iii. Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment;

iv. Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations;

v. Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

vi. Monitoring the impact and the compensation projects and taking appropriate corrective measures.

e. The city will set mitigation requirements or permit conditions based on impacts identified. In determining appropriate mitigation measures, avoidance of impacts by means such as relocating or redesigning the proposed development will be applied first. Lower priority measures will be applied only after higher priority measures are demonstrated to be not feasible or not applicable.

f. All shoreline development shall be located and constructed to avoid significant adverse impacts to human health and safety.

g. All such activities shall be carried out in ways that cause the least impact to critical areas and their buffers. If any damage is caused to a critical area or buffer in connection with such activity, the critical area and its buffer must be restored to the extent feasible. To be exempt does not give permission to destroy a critical area or ignore risk. Proponents of such activities shall be responsible for notifying the director if any damage occurs and shall provide all necessary restoration or mitigation. For information on identifying, protecting or mitigating adverse impacts to critical areas, refer to sections in this title on wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, geologically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and flood hazard areas.

h. The critical areas buffer for the Skagit River shall be waterward of the waterward toe of the levee or 200 feet from the ordinary high water mark of the river where no levee exists.

D. Flood Hazard Reduction.

1. Applicability. The provisions in this section apply to those areas within the shoreline management zone lying along the Skagit River floodplain corridor, including the river, and associated wetlands in the floodplain.

The provisions in this section are intended to address two concerns especially relevant to river shorelines:

a. Protecting human safety and minimizing flood hazard to human activities and development.

b. Protecting and contributing to the restoration of ecosystem-wide processes and ecological functions found in the applicable watershed or sub-basin.

2. Policies.

a. Implement a comprehensive program to manage the city’s floodplain corridor that integrates the following city ordinances and activities:

i. Regulations of the master program as codified in the BMC.

ii. The floodplain management standards in BMC 14.15.390 through 14.15.430.

iii. The development standards of the underlying zoning district.

iv. The city storm water management plan and implementing regulations.

v. The city’s participation in flood hazard reduction programs, including the Federal Emergency Management Act and the Washington State Flood Control Assistance Account Program, and the 2008-2013 Floodplain Management and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan.

vi. City, county and dike district approved flood risk reduction measures.

vii. The construction or improvement of new public facilities, including roads, levees, utilities, bridges, and other structures.

viii. The ecological restoration of selected shoreline areas.

b. In regulating development on shorelines within SMA jurisdiction, endeavor to achieve the following:

i. Maintenance of human safety.

ii. Protection and, where appropriate, the restoration of the physical integrity of the ecological system processes, including wetland buffer restoration and storm water quality restoration.

iii. Protection of water quality and natural ground water movement.

iv. Protection of fish, vegetation, and other life forms and their habitat vital to the aquatic food chain.

v. Protection of recreation resources and aesthetic values.

c. Undertake flood hazard mitigation planning in a coordinated manner among affected property owners and public agencies and consider the entire Skagit River drainage system.

d. Manage the existing levee system along the Skagit River shoreline to optimize flood protection and manage levee vegetation as required under the Corps of Engineers PL 84-99 standards as may be amended.

e. Provide public pedestrian access to the shoreline for low-impact outdoor recreation.

3. Regulations.

a. New, structural, public flood hazard reduction projects that are continuous in nature, such as levees, shall provide public access to the shoreline unless such access is not feasible or desirable according to the criteria in the public access section of the SMP.

b. Designs for flood hazard reduction measures and shoreline stabilization measures in the river corridor must be prepared by qualified professional engineers, geologists, and/or hydrologists who have expertise in local riverine processes.

c. Existing hydrological connections to the floodplain and associated wetlands shall be maintained where feasible.

d. Use and development that do not meet the following standards are prohibited in the floodway:

i. Minor structures and additions for which a building permit is not required;

ii. Fills of less than 12 cubic yards or which will not raise the level of the land above that of the surrounding area;

iii. Normal maintenance, resurfacing and rebuilding, at comparable grade of streets, and accessways;

iv. Underground improvements and excavations;

v. Maintenance and minor repair of existing improvements;

vi. Improvements to structures listed on the National or State Register of Historic Places;

vii. Other minor developments which cause no significant impoundment or displacement of floodwaters, such as open fences, signs and small unenclosed structures;

viii. Utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers and levee construction to maintain the structural integrity of critical infrastructure.

e. New structural flood hazard reduction measures in shoreline jurisdiction are allowed only when it can be demonstrated by a scientific and engineering analysis that they are necessary to protect existing development, that nonstructural measures are not feasible, that impacts on ecological functions and priority species and habitats can be successfully mitigated so as to assure no net loss, and that appropriate vegetation conservation actions are undertaken consistent with WAC 173-26-221(5) or as required under the Corps of Engineers PL 84-99 standards as may be amended.

f. Structural flood hazard reduction measures shall be consistent with an adopted comprehensive flood hazard management plan approved by the department that evaluates cumulative impacts to the watershed system.

E. Public Access.

1. Applicability. Shoreline public access is the physical ability of the general public to reach and touch the water’s edge and/or the ability to have a view of the water and the shoreline from upland locations. Public access facilities may include picnic areas, pathways and trails, floats and docks, promenades, viewing towers, bridges, boat launches, and improved street ends. The city has adopted a plan for nonmotorized public access that extends along the Skagit River frontage on the levees, and connects to a trail system along Gages Slough and through the city to the east to Cascade Trail and to the west.

2. Policies.

a. Public access should be considered in the review of all private and public developments as appropriate.

b.  Developments, uses, and activities on or near the shoreline should not impair or detract from the public’s access to the water, or the rights of navigation, or space for water-dependent uses.

c. Promote and enhance the public interest with regard to rights to access waters held in public trust by the state while protecting private property rights and public safety.

3. Regulations.

a. Except as provided in subsections (E)(3)(b) and (c) of this section, shoreline substantial developments or conditional uses shall provide public access where any of the following conditions are present:

i. Where a development or use will create increased demand for public access to the shoreline, the development or use shall provide public access to mitigate this impact.

ii. Where a development or use will interfere with an existing public access way, the development or use shall provide public access to mitigate this impact. Impacts to public access may include blocking access or discouraging use of existing on-site or nearby accesses.

iii. Where a use which is not a priority shoreline use under the Shoreline Management Act locates on a shoreline of the state, the use or development shall provide public access to mitigate this impact.

iv. Where a use or development will interfere with a public use of lands or waters subject to the public trust doctrine, the development shall provide public access to mitigate this impact.

v. Where the development is proposed by a public entity or on public lands.

vi. Where called for under the city’s connected open space and nonmotorized public access plan, including completing public access along the levees on the Skagit River and the Gages Slough trail.

b. The shoreline permit file shall describe the impact, the required public access conditions, and how the conditions address the impact. Mitigation for public access impacts shall be in accordance with the definition of mitigation and mitigation sequence.

c. An applicant need not provide public access where the city determines that one or more of the following conditions apply:

i. The adopted city’s public access planning indicates that public access is not required;

ii. Unavoidable health or safety hazards to the public exist which cannot be prevented by any practical means;

iii. Significant ecological impacts will result from the public access which cannot be mitigated; or

iv. Significant undue and unavoidable conflict between any access provisions and the proposed use and/or adjacent uses would occur and cannot be mitigated.

d. In order to meet any of the conditions in subsections (E)(3)(c)(i) through (iv) of this section, the applicant must first demonstrate and the city determine in its findings that all reasonable alternatives have been exhausted, including but not limited to:

i. Regulating access by such means as maintaining a gate and/or limiting hours of use;

ii. Designing separation of uses and activities (e.g., fences, terracing, use of one-way glazings, hedges, landscaping, etc.); and

iii. Developing provisions for access at a site geographically separated from the proposal such as a street end, vista or trail system.

e. Public access provided by shoreline street ends, public utilities and rights-of-way shall not be diminished. (This is a requirement of RCW 35.79.035 and 36.87.130.)

f. Public access sites shall be connected directly to the nearest public street or public right-of-way and shall include provisions for physically impaired persons, where feasible.

g. Required public access sites shall be fully developed and available for public use at the time of occupancy of the use or activity unless not feasible.

h. Public access easements and permit conditions shall be recorded on the deed of title and/or on the face of a plat or short plat as a condition running contemporaneous with the authorized land use, at a minimum. Said recording with the county auditor’s office shall occur at the time of permit approval (RCW 58.17.110).

i. Minimum width of public access easements shall be 20 feet, unless the city determines that undue hardship would result. In such cases, easement width may be reduced only to the minimum extent necessary to relieve the hardship.

j. The standard state approved logo or other approved signs that indicate the public’s right of access and hours of access shall be constructed, installed and maintained by the applicant in conspicuous locations at public access sites. In accordance with subsection (E)(3)(a) of this section, signs may control or restrict public access as a condition of permit approval.

k. Future actions by the applicant successors in interest or other parties shall not diminish the usefulness or value of the public access provided.

l. Public access shall be provided as close as feasible to the water’s edge without causing significant ecological impacts and should be designed in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

m. Public access shall be designed to provide for public safety and comfort and to minimize potential impacts to private property and individual privacy. There shall be a physical separation or other means of clearly delineating public and private space in order to avoid unnecessary user conflict.

n. Public views from the shoreline upland areas shall be enhanced and preserved. Enhancement of views should not be construed to mean excessive removal of existing native vegetation that partially impairs views.

o. Public access and interpretive displays should be provided as part of publicly funded restoration projects where significant ecological impacts can be avoided.

p. The adopted connected open space plan and nonmotorized plan in the city’s parks and recreation plan shall be implemented to provide a continuous waterfront multi-purpose trail and Gages Slough trail that connects to the Blooming Tree Trail on SR 20 and will connect the community east/west/north/south.

F. Shorelines of Statewide Significance.

1. Applicability. The Shoreline Management Act specifically designates certain areas as shorelines of statewide significance. The interest of all of the people shall be paramount in the management of shorelines of statewide significance. Preference shall be given to uses and developments which are consistent with the principle of statewide over local interest.

Natural rivers or segments thereof lying west of the crest of the Cascade range downstream of a point where the mean annual flow is measured at 1,000 cubic feet per second or more and associated shorelands. The flow of the Skagit River is over 100,000 cubic feet per second and constitutes the shoreline of statewide significance for the city of Burlington.

2. Policies. The City, in adopting guidelines for shorelines of statewide significance, shall give preference to uses in the following order of preference which:

a. Recognize and protect the state-wide interest over local interest;

b. Preserve the natural character of the shoreline;

c. Result in long-term over short-term benefit;

d. Protect the resources and ecology of the shoreline;

e. Increase public access to publicly owned areas of the shorelines;

f. Increase recreational opportunities for the public in the shoreline;

g. Provide for any other element deemed appropriate or necessary within the context of the policies and use regulations of this program.

G. Signage.

1. Applicability. A sign is defined as a device of any material or medium, including structural component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising, identification or informative purposes. The following provisions apply to any commercial or advertising sign directing attention to a business, professional service, community, site, facility, or entertainment, conducted or sold either on or off premises.

2. Policies.

a. Signs should be designed and placed so that they are compatible with the aesthetic quality of the existing shoreline and adjacent land and water uses.

b. Signs should not block or otherwise interfere with visual access to the water or shorelines.

3. Regulations.

a. All signs shall be located and designed to avoid interference with vistas, viewpoints and visual access to the shoreline.

b. Over-water signs, signs on floats or pilings, and signs for goods, services, or businesses not located directly on the site proposed for a sign are prohibited.

c. Lighted signs shall be hooded, shaded, or aimed so that direct light will not result in glare when viewed from surrounding properties or watercourses.

d. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area. On-site freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height. When feasible, signs shall be flush-mounted against existing buildings.

e. Temporary or obsolete signs shall be removed within 10 days of elections, closures of business, or termination of any other function. Examples of temporary signs include: real estate signs, directions to events, political advertisements, event or holiday signs, construction signs, and signs advertising a sale or promotional event.

f. Signs that do not meet the policies and regulations of this program shall be removed or conform within two years of the adoption of this master program.

g. No signs shall be placed in a required view corridor.

h. Allowable Signs. The following types of signs may be allowed in all shoreline environments:

i. Water navigational signs, and highway and railroad signs necessary for operation, safety and direction.

ii. Public information signs directly relating to a shoreline use or activity.

iii. Off-premises, freestanding signs for community identification, information, or directional purposes.

iv. National, site and institutional flags or temporary decorations customary for special holidays and similar events of a public nature.

v. Temporary directional signs to public or quasi-public events if removed within 10 days following the event.

i. Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs are prohibited:

i. Off-premises detached outdoor advertising signs.

ii. Commercial signs for products, services, or facilities located off site.

iii. Spinners, streamers, pennants, flashing lights and other animated signs used for commercial purposes. Highway and railroad signs are exceptions.

iv. Signs placed on trees or other natural features.

H. Utilities (Accessory).

1. Applicability. Accessory utilities are those that affect small-scale distribution services connected directly to the uses along the shoreline. They are addressed in this section because they concern all types of development and have the potential to impact the quality of the shoreline and its waters.

2. Policies.

a. Accessory utilities should be properly installed so as to protect the shoreline and water from contamination and degradation.

b. Accessory utility facilities and rights-of-way should be located outside of the shoreline area to the maximum extent possible. When utility lines require a shoreline location, they should be placed underground.

c. Accessory utility facilities should be designed and located in a manner which preserves the natural landscape and shoreline ecological processes and functions and minimizes conflicts with present and planned land uses.

3. Regulations.

a. In shoreline areas, accessory utility transmission lines, pipelines and cables shall be placed underground unless demonstrated to be infeasible. Further, such lines shall utilize existing rights-of-way, corridors and/or bridge crossings whenever possible. Proposals for new corridors in shoreline areas involving water crossings must fully substantiate the infeasibility of existing routes.

b. Accessory utility development shall, through coordination with government agencies, provide for compatible multiple uses of sites and rights-of-way. Such uses include shoreline access points, trails and other forms of recreation and transportation systems, providing such uses will not unduly interfere with utility operations or endanger public health and safety.

c. Sites disturbed for utility installation shall be stabilized during and following construction to avoid adverse impacts from erosion and, where feasible, restored to pre-project configuration and replanted with native vegetation.

d. Utility discharges and outfalls should be located, designed, constructed, and operated in accordance with best management practices to ensure degradation to water quality is kept to a minimum.

I. Vegetation Conservation.

1. Applicability.

a. The following provisions apply to any activity that results in the removal of or impact to shoreline vegetation, whether or not that activity requires a shoreline permit, except as noted herein. Such activities include clearing, grading, grubbing, and trimming of vegetation. These provisions also apply to vegetation protection and enhancement activities.

b. Management of vegetation as a function of flood risk reduction structure maintenance shall comply with standards of the PL 84-99 Rehabilitation and Inspection Program for nonfederal levees conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other agencies with jurisdiction over such structures.

2. Policies.

a. Vegetation within the city shoreline areas, waterward of dikes and levees or where no such structures exist, should be enhanced over time to provide a greater level of ecological function.

b. The master program, in conjunction with other city of Burlington development regulations, should establish a coordinated and effective set of provisions and programs to protect and restore functions provided by shoreline vegetation.

c. Aquatic weed management should stress prevention first. Where active removal or destruction is necessary, it should be the minimum to allow water-dependent activities to continue, minimize negative impacts to native plant communities, and include appropriate handling or disposal of weeds.

3. Regulations.

a. Except for levees, all development, including clearing and grading, shall minimize vegetation removal in areas of shoreline jurisdiction to that necessary to accommodate the proposed development. In order to implement this regulation, applicants proposing development that includes significant vegetation removal, clearing, or grading within areas of shoreline jurisdiction, as a part of a substantial development permit application or a shoreline exemption certificate application, shall submit a site plan drawn to scale, indicating existing and proposed land contours, dimensions and locations of all existing and proposed structures and improvements. The site plan shall also include a general indication of the character of vegetation found on the site, and the extent of proposed clearing and/or grading (see WAC 173-27-180(9)). The city may require that the proposed development or extent of clearing and grading be modified to reduce the impacts to ecological functions. Note that this provision does not apply to the removal of noxious and invasive plant species.

b. Vegetation restoration of disturbed shorelines waterward of levees shall use diverse native plant material similar to that which originally occurred on site, unless the city finds that such material is not appropriate.

c. A condition of all development shall be that those shorelines on the site not occupied by structures, landscaping, accessory uses, or other areas dedicated to human activities shall be revegetated with native vegetation, to the extent feasible given the applicable shoreline conditions and the likelihood of long-term survival of such vegetation if it is reintroduced.

d. The enhancement of vegetation shall be a condition of all development in the shoreline environments, except where the city finds that:

i. Vegetation enhancement is not feasible on the project site or necessary.

ii. The restoration of ecological processes and functions can be better achieved through other measures.

iii. Sufficient native vegetation already exists.

e. Aquatic weed control shall only occur when native plant communities and associated habitats are threatened or where an existing water dependent use is restricted by the presence of weeds. Aquatic weed control shall occur in compliance with all other applicable laws and standards.

f. The control of aquatic weeds by hand pulling, mechanical harvesting, or placement of aqua screens shall be considered normal maintenance and repair and, therefore, exempt from the requirement to obtain a shoreline substantial development permit.

g. Use of herbicides to control aquatic weeds shall be prohibited, except where no reasonable alternative exists and weed control is demonstrated to be in the public interest. A conditional use permit shall be required in such case.

h. Selective pruning of trees for purposes of safety and protection of public views of the river is allowed, provided such pruning is the minimum necessary.

i. Management of vegetation as a function of flood risk reduction structure maintenance shall comply with standards of PL 84-99, Rehabilitation and Inspection Program, for nonfederal levees conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other agencies with jurisdiction over such structures.

J. Water Quality.

1. Applicability. The following section applies to all development and uses in shoreline jurisdiction that may affect water quality.

2. Policies.

a. All shoreline uses and activities should be located, designed, constructed, and maintained to avoid significant ecological impacts by altering water quality, quantity, or hydrology.

b. The city should require reasonable setbacks, buffers, and storm water storage basins and encourage low-impact development techniques and materials to achieve the objective of lessening negative impacts on water quality.

c. All measures for controlling erosion, stream flow rates, or flood waters through the use of stream control works should be located, designed, constructed, and maintained so that net off-site impacts related to water do not degrade the existing water quality.

d. As a general policy, the city will seek to improve water quality, quantity, and flow characteristics in order to protect and restore ecological functions and ecosystem-wide processes of shorelines within shoreline management zone.

3. Regulations.

a. All shoreline development, both during and after construction, shall avoid or minimize significant ecological impacts, including any increase in surface runoff, through control, treatment, and release of surface water runoff so that the receiving water quality and shore properties and features are not adversely affected. Control measures include, but are not limited to, dikes, catch basins or settling ponds, oil interceptor drains, grassy swales, planted buffers, and fugitive dust controls.

b. All development shall conform to local, state, and federal water quality regulations.

c. The city shall require reasonable setbacks, buffers, and encourage low-impact development techniques and materials to achieve the objective of lessening negative impacts on water quality.

d. The city has adopted the current edition of the Washington Department of Ecology Stormwater Manual as part of the surface water management regulations.

e. All measures for the treatment of runoff for the purpose of maintaining and/or enhancing water quality should be conducted on site before shoreline development impacts waters off site. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Chapter 18.16 REGULATIONS

Sections:

18.16.010    Shoreline use and development tables.

18.16.015    Shoreline modifications.

18.16.020    Agriculture.

18.16.030    Boating facilities.

18.16.040    Commercial and industrial development.

18.16.050    In-stream structures.

18.16.060    Mining.

18.16.070    Recreational development.

18.16.080    Residential.

18.16.090    Transportation and parking – Existing corridors.

18.16.100    Transportation and parking – New corridors.

18.16.110    Utilities including wastewater treatment plant and accessory utilities.

18.16.120    Wetlands and Skagit River shoreline buffer areas – Restoration and maintenance.


18.16.010 Shoreline use and development tables.

The following tables indicate the allowable uses and shoreline development and some of the standards applicable to those uses and development. Where there is a conflict between the chart and the written provisions in this master program, the written provisions shall apply. Please note that the severely limited list of uses is a result of the shoreline fronted by levees and the fact that the land has been and continues to be acquired in public ownership for flood hazard mitigation.

The charts are coded according to the following legend:

	P =	May be permitted although a shoreline permit may not be required

	C =	May be permitted as a conditional use only

	X =	Prohibited; the use is not permitted nor is it eligible for a variance or conditional use permit

	N/A =	Not applicable

See also notes to tables following Table 3.

Table 1: Shoreline Use  

	 	Shoreline Environment

	Shoreline Use	Aquatic	Natural	Urban Conservancy

	Agriculture	X	X	P – 1

	Boating facilities	P – 2,3	X	C – 2,3

	Commercial:	 	 	 

	Water-dependent	X – 9	X	X – 9

	Water-related, water-enjoyment	X	X	X

	Non-water-oriented	X	X	X

	Flood hazard reduction	P	X – 11	P – 2

	Industrial:	 	 	 

	Water-dependent	X	X	X

	Water-related, water-enjoyment	X	X	X

	Non-water-oriented	X	X	X

	Mining	C – 3	X	X

	Parking (primary)	X	X	X

	Parking (accessory)	X	X	P

	Recreation	P – 9	P – 9	P – 9

	Residential development	X	X	X

	Transportation – existing corridors	P – 2	P – 2	P – 2

	Transportation – new corridors	C – 4	C – 4	C – 4

	Utilities (accessory)	P	P	P

	Utilities including wastewater treatment plant	P – 10	P – 10	P – 10

	Wetland restoration and maintenance	P – 2	P – 2	P – 2

 

Table 2: Shoreline Modifications  

	 	Shoreline Environment

	Shoreline Modification	Aquatic	Natural	Urban Conservancy

	Shoreline Stabilization:	 	 	 

	Beach or buffer restoration/enhancement	P – 5	P	P

	Bioengineering	P – 5,6	X	P – 5,6

	Revetments	P – 5,6	X	P – 1,5,6

	Bulkheads	P – 5,6	X	P – 1,5,6

	Breakwaters/jetties/rock weirs/groins	P – 5,6	X	P – 1,5,6

	Levees	P	X	P – 1

	Dredging	C – 5	X	X

	Hazardous waste cleanup	P	P	P

	Fill	C – 5,6	X	P – 1,6

	Piers, docks, buoys, floats	P – 7	X	P

 

Table 3: Development Standards  

	 	Shoreline Environment

	Development Standard	Aquatic	Natural	Urban Conservancy

	Boating facilities

	Water-dependent setback	N/A	N/A	0

	Water-related building setback	N/A	N/A	50 – 8

	Recreational development

	Water-dependent setback	N/A	N/A	0

	Water-related, water-enjoyment setback	N/A	N/A	70 – 8

	Non-water-oriented setback	N/A	N/A	70 – 8

	Building height limit	N/A	N/A	45 – 8

	Parking (accessory)

	Setback	N/A	N/A	70 – 8

Notes to Tables 1, 2 and 3:

1.    The use or development is prohibited in Gages Slough urban conservancy, except as part of a transportation improvement, utility installation or water quality enhancement project with mitigation as prescribed in Appendices A and B.

2.    Public access, as approved by the city, is a condition of development and substantial development.

3.    The use may be allowed provided it does not cause significant ecological impacts that cannot be mitigated on site.

4.    The use may be allowed providing there is no other feasible route or location.

5.    The shoreline modification may be allowed only for environmental restoration/mitigation or if the city determines that there will be a net increase in desired shoreline ecological functions.

6.    Development for which a floodplain approval is required is prohibited in the floodway, other than utility outfall structures authorized by the Corps of Engineers and levee construction to maintain the structural integrity of critical infrastructure.

7.    Piers or docks may be allowed only for public access or hand-carried vessels and only if significant adverse ecological impacts are avoided.

8.    The setback is measured from the ordinary high water mark and shall include a 50-foot minimum strip of shoreline restoration measures and/or native vegetation plantings as approved by the city plus a 20-foot-wide public access easement running parallel with the shoreline.

9.    Commercial recreation facilities may be allowed as a water-dependent use or in support of recreational facilities such as concession stands.

10.    New utility production and processing facilities are prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that no other practical option is available. The existing wastewater treatment plant and future expansion is a permitted facility.

11.    Only flood control physical elements such as levees or fill are prohibited. Other forms of flood hazard reduction such as planning, monitoring and warning systems are allowed.

(Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.015 Shoreline modifications.

A. Implementation Policy. Shoreline modifications are generally related to construction of a physical element such as a dike, breakwater, dredged basin, or fill, but they can include other actions such as clearing, grading, application of chemicals, or significant vegetation removal. Shoreline modifications usually are undertaken in support of or in preparation for a shoreline use; for example, fill (shoreline modification) required for a cargo terminal (industrial use) or dredging (shoreline modification) to allow for a marina (boating facility use). Shoreline modifications in Burlington are limited.

B. Regulations.

1.  All new shoreline modifications must be in support or protection of an allowable shoreline use or development that is in danger of loss or substantial damage or is necessary for mitigation or enhancement and conforms to the provisions of this master program. Except as otherwise noted, all shoreline modifications not associated with a legally existing or an approved shoreline use are prohibited. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.020 Agriculture.

A. Implementation Policy. Agricultural activities on agricultural land are not regulated by this shoreline master program. Only new agricultural activities on land not meeting the definition of agricultural land, conversion of agricultural lands to other uses, and other development on agricultural land that does not meet the definition of agricultural activities is regulated by this shoreline master program.

Existing and ongoing agriculture shall be required to implement applicable standards and practices through an individual farm plan based on the Field Office Technical Guides (FOTG) administered by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of USDA. An accountability and monitoring program shall be included in each plan. The farm management plan shall be consistent with the Washington State Agricultural Strategy to ensure agricultural practices are not negatively affecting water quality, quantity or salmon habitat.

New development in support of agricultural activities shall be designed to minimize impacts to shoreline environments, specifically, to prevent livestock intrusion into the water; bank erosion; degradation of water quality from fertilizers, pesticides, and manure into the water; and loss of shoreline vegetation. Standards or best management practices, setbacks and vegetation management areas shall be addressed through individual farm plans as above.

B. Regulations by Environment for New Agricultural Activities on Land Currently Not Meeting the Definition of Agricultural Land.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Agriculture is prohibited in the Gages Slough urban conservancy. Agriculture is permitted in the Skagit River urban conservancy subject to the following requirements:

a. Fencing livestock out of Skagit River, associated wetlands and all buffers;

b. Prohibit the practice of spraying liquid manure, the use of pesticides, herbicides and organic fertilizers, and the cultivation of land within the buffers of the Skagit River, associated wetlands and their buffers.

2. Natural Environment. Agriculture is prohibited.

3. Aquatic Environment. Agriculture is prohibited. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.030 Boating facilities.

A. Implementation Policy. Provisions shall be included to address potential impacts while providing the public boating opportunities. Facilities shall be restricted to existing locations with suitable environmental conditions, shoreline configuration, access, and neighboring uses. Sewage pumpouts and wash-off stations shall be required where appropriate to meet health requirements. Mitigation of visual and ecological impacts shall be required. Parking impacts shall be mitigated. Live-aboards and covered moorage are prohibited.

At the time of adoption of the SMP, boating facilities in Burlington consist of one floating dock moored by pilings that abuts the shoreline and is used as a landing or moorage place for small water craft utilized for recreational purposes (e.g. private angling club facility), and one public boat launch ramp.

Pier and dock construction should be restricted to the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed use. Multiple-use and expansion of legally existing piers and docks should be encouraged over the addition of new facilities. Joint-use facilities are preferred over new single-use piers, docks, and floats. Piers and docks should be sited and designed to avoid or minimize potentially significant ecological impacts, including impacts on sediment movement, water circulation and quality, and fish and wildlife habitat. The proposed size of the structure and intensity of use or uses of any pier or dock should be compatible with the surrounding environment and land and water uses.

B. Regulations.

1. Marinas are prohibited.

2. Live-aboards and covered moorage is prohibited.

3. Sewage pumpouts, restrooms and wash-off stations shall be required where appropriate to meet health requirements.

4. Pier and dock construction shall be restricted to the minimum size necessary to meet the needs of the proposed use. Piers and docks shall be sited and designed to avoid or minimize potentially significant ecological impacts, including impacts on sediment movement, water circulation and quality, and fish and wildlife habitat.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Boating facilities are a shoreline conditional use permit along the Skagit River. Boating facilities are prohibited in Gages Slough.

2. Natural Environment. Boating facilities are prohibited.

3. Aquatic Environment. Boating facilities are permitted subject to compliance with applicable state and federal regulations and standards and the implementation policies and regulations of this section. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.040 Commercial and industrial development.

A. Implementation Policy. No significant development other than critical infrastructure is allowed along the Skagit River, and no development is allowed in the Gages Slough wetland. Levee maintenance and improvement and transportation upgrades such as replacing bridges are the only potential development activity and mitigation would be required.

As stated in the regulations by environment, there is existing guide service that may utilize the boat launch ramp, but there is no location available for commercial and industrial development along the riverfront.

B. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Commercial and industrial development is prohibited except for commercial services related to recreational facilities.

2. Natural Environment. Commercial and industrial development is prohibited.

3. Aquatic Environment. Water-dependent commercial and industrial development is prohibited except for water-taxi or guide service. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.050 In-stream structures.

A. Implementation Policies. The guidelines define an in-stream structure as a structure placed by humans within a stream or river waterward of the ordinary high water mark that either causes or has the potential to cause water impoundment or the diversion, obstruction, or modification of water flow. In-stream structures may include those for hydroelectric generation, irrigation, water supply, flood control, transportation, utility service transmission, fish habitat enhancement, or other purpose.

In-stream structures are defined to include structures in wetlands and shall provide for the protection and preservation of natural and cultural resources, including but not limited to fish, wildlife, and water resources; critical areas; geohydrological processes; and natural scenic vistas. The location and planning of in-stream structures shall give due consideration to the full range of public interests, watershed functions and processes, and environmental concerns, with special emphasis on protecting and restoring priority habitats and species.

The only likely installations in the Skagit River shoreline area would be associated with a transportation facility, data collection, flood control, or fish enhancement.

B. Regulations.

1. In-stream structures shall provide for the protection and preservation of safe surface navigation, ecosystem-wide processes, ecological functions and cultural resources, including but not limited to fish and fish passage, wildlife and water resources, shoreline critical areas, hydrogeologic processes, and natural scenic vistas.

2. The location and planning of in-stream structures shall give due consideration to the full range of public interests, watershed functions and processes, and environmental concerns, with special emphasis on protecting and restoring priority habitats and species.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. In-stream structures including culverts and similar structures are permitted to be located in Gages Slough.

2. Natural Environment. In-stream structures are permitted as a shoreline conditional use.

3. Aquatic Environment. In-stream structures are permitted. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.060 Mining.

A. Implementation Policies. Mining shall not be allowed in unique and fragile areas and excavation of sand, gravel and other minerals shall be done as required by the Washington State Surface Mining Reclamation Act, chapter 78.44 RCW.

B. Regulations.

1. Mining is prohibited in unique and fragile areas. When allowed it shall be in compliance with the Washington State Surface Mining Reclamation Act, chapter 78.44 RCW.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Mining is prohibited.

2. Natural Environment. Mining is prohibited.

3. Aquatic Environment. Mining is prohibited except for gravel extraction as a shoreline conditional use for specific quantities and specified locations. The removal of gravel from the Skagit River shall be done only after a biological and geohydrological study shows that sustainable extraction can take place without altering the natural processes of gravel transport and there is no net loss of ecological functions. Fish and wildlife resources shall be protected consistent with the Endangered Species Act and all disturbed areas shall be reclaimed. Removal of gravel for flood management purposes shall be consistent with the flood hazard mitigation plan. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.070 Recreational development.

A. Implementation Policies. The public shall be allowed to enjoy the waters of the state through water-oriented recreation. Shoreline recreational facilities should be linked to other recreational attractions by pedestrian and bicycle trails. In order to provide for a spectrum of recreational needs and opportunities, recreational development must be consistent with the parks and recreation comprehensive plan.

Location and design shall minimize environmental damage, and shall be designed to improve natural habitat, whether on the shoreline or upland, to maximize the diversity of habitat opportunities.

B. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Recreational development is permitted. All non-water-oriented recreational developments shall make provision for public access to the shoreline.

2. Natural Environment. Only low-intensity, water-oriented recreational development such as public access trails is permitted.

3. Aquatic Environment. Recreational development is permitted. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.080 Residential.

A. Implementation Policies. Existing residential development shall be allowed, subject to BMC 18.09.040, Nonconforming uses and structures.

Floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard vessels are not permitted.

B. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard vessels are prohibited.

2. Natural Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard vessels are prohibited.

3. Aquatic Environment. Residences, floating homes, houseboats and live-aboard vessels are prohibited. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.090 Transportation and parking – Existing corridors.

A. Implementation Policies. Existing transportation corridors shall be upgraded as feasible, to comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology’s Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to improve public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.

Transportation and parking plans and projects should support circulation system planning for pedestrians, bicycles, and public transportation that in turn supports existing and proposed shoreline uses.

B. Regulations.

1. Existing transportation corridors shall be upgraded as feasible to comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology’s Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to improve public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related improvements are permitted.

2. Natural Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related improvements are permitted.

3. Aquatic Environment. Existing transportation corridors and related improvements are permitted. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.100 Transportation and parking – New corridors.

A. Implementation Policies. New transportation corridors shall only be established when a clear regional need is demonstrated.

Proposed transportation and parking plans and projects need to be planned, located and designed where they will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile shoreline features, and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

They shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology’s Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to provide public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.

Parking is the temporary storage of automobiles or other motorized vehicles. Except as noted the following provisions apply only to parking that is “accessory” to a permitted shoreline use. Parking as a “primary” use and parking which serves a use not permitted in the shoreline jurisdiction is prohibited. Parking should be planned to achieve optimum use. Where possible, parking should serve more than one use (e.g., serving recreational use on weekends, commercial uses on weekdays). Where feasible, parking for shoreline uses should be provided in areas outside shoreline jurisdiction. Low-impact parking facilities, such as permeable pavements, are encouraged.

Parking as a primary use or that serves a use not permitted in the applicable shoreline environment designation shall be prohibited over water and within shoreline jurisdiction. Parking in shoreline jurisdiction must directly serve a permitted shoreline use.

Parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon the adjacent shoreline and abutting properties. Landscaping shall consist of native vegetation and/or plant materials approved by the city and planted before completion of the parking area in such a manner that plantings provide effective screening within three years of project completion.

Parking facilities serving individual buildings on the shoreline shall be located landward from the principal building being served, except when the parking facility is within or beneath the structure and adequately screened, or in cases when an alternate location would have less environmental impact on the shoreline.

Parking facilities for shoreline activities shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian circulation within the parking area and to the shorelines.

Parking facilities shall provide adequate facilities to prevent surface water runoff from contaminating water bodies, using best available technologies, and include a maintenance program that will assure proper functioning of such facilities over time.

B. Regulations, General.

1. New transportation corridors and related improvements are permitted when there is no feasible route or location outside shoreline jurisdiction, when a clear regional need is demonstrated and as a shoreline conditional use permit.

2. Proposed transportation and parking plans and projects shall be planned, located and designed where they will have the least possible adverse effect on unique or fragile shoreline features, and will not result in a net loss of shoreline ecological functions.

3. Transportation and parking shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology’s Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to provide public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.

4. Transportation and parking shall comply with the latest edition of the Department of Ecology’s Surface Water Manual, for both quantity and quality, and shall further be required to provide public nonmotorized access opportunities when improvements are constructed.

5. Parking as a primary use or that serves a use not permitted in the applicable shoreline environment designation shall be prohibited within shoreline jurisdiction.

6. Parking facilities shall be designed and landscaped to minimize adverse impacts upon the adjacent shoreline and abutting properties. Landscaping shall consist of native vegetation and/or plant materials approved by the city and be planted before completion of the parking area in such a manner that plantings provide effective screening within three years of project completion.

7. Parking facilities serving individual buildings on the shoreline shall be located landward from the principal building being served, except when the parking facility is within or beneath the structure and adequately screened, or in cases when an alternate location would have less environmental impact on the shoreline.

8. Parking facilities for shoreline activities shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian circulation within the parking area and to the shorelines.

9. Parking facilities shall provide adequate facilities to prevent surface water runoff from contaminating water bodies, using best available technologies and include a maintenance program that will assure proper functioning of such facilities over time.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Parking areas shall be designed to minimize the environmental and visual impacts.

2. Natural Environment. Parking areas are prohibited in the natural environment.

3. Aquatic Environment. Parking areas are prohibited in the aquatic environment. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.110 Utilities including wastewater treatment plant and accessory utilities.

A. Implementation Policies. These facilities include utility production and processing as well as large transmission facilities. It does not include accessory utilities found in BMC 18.14.020(H). Design and location of utilities shall minimize harm to the shoreline, preserve the natural landscape, and minimize conflicts with present and planned land and shoreline uses.

B. Regulations.

1. The existing wastewater treatment plant and future expansion is a permitted facility; new utility production and processing facilities are prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that no other practical option is available.

2. Transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible, and shall be consistent with the master program environment designation. Locate utilities in existing rights-of-way and corridors wherever possible.

C. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible.

2. Natural Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible.

3. Aquatic Environment. Utilities are permitted. Transmission facilities for the conveyance of services, such as pipelines and power wires, shall be located to assure no net loss of shoreline ecological functions, cause minimum harm to the shoreline and be located outside the shoreline area where feasible. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


18.16.120 Wetlands and Skagit River shoreline buffer areas – Restoration and maintenance.

A. Implementation Policies. The plans and implementation of restoration and maintenance of wetlands and shoreline buffers shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained in accordance with best available science practices.

B. Regulations by Environment.

1. Urban Conservancy Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer restoration and maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained in accordance with best available science practices.

2. Natural Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer restoration and maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained in accordance with best available science practices.

3. Aquatic Environment. Wetland and Skagit River shoreline buffer restoration and maintenance is permitted and shall be designed, installed, monitored and maintained in accordance with best available science practices. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Appendix A SHORELINE WETLAND, FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT, AND GENERAL CRITICAL AREA REGULATIONS

I. Introduction and Overview

The city of Burlington is somewhat unique in that the entire Skagit River shoreline is fronted by a levee. There are few identified or delineated wetlands located on the waterward side of the levee system. Limited development such as recreation and restoration are allowed waterward of the levees which establish the floodway.

Gages Slough is a series of connected wetlands that cross the city and the wetland area itself is subject to the shoreline master program. As allowed by RCW 90.58.030(2)(d)(ii), the city has chosen not to place the wetland buffer into shoreline jurisdiction. The Gages Slough wetland buffer area is established through the city’s critical area ordinance and is gradually being restored through implementation of a series of buffer restoration, maintenance and monitoring projects that do not extend into the wetland itself. There may be the need to obtain a shoreline permit for upgrades to the wetlands themselves in the future if it is determined that sediment buildup has an effect on flood hazard mitigation.

For these reasons, standards for wetland buffers and widths are handled by direct reference to the appropriate literature, rather than providing details that are unlikely to be utilized. If, at a future date, decisions are made to remove riverine levees, because of installation of planned setback levees to increase the channel migration zone, there may be the potential for wetlands to form, and the appropriate best available science standards will already be addressed in the shoreline master program. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

II. Purpose

The purpose of these regulations is to ensure no net loss of ecological functions in wetlands and riparian corridors, including Gages Slough and wetlands along the Skagit River. Wetlands serve many important ecological and environmental functions and help to protect public health, safety and welfare by providing flood storage and conveyance, erosion control, fish and shellfish production, fish and wildlife habitat, recreation, water quality protection, water storage, education, scientific research and other public benefits. It is the purpose of this shoreline master program to protect these functions to prevent the continual loss of wetlands, and where practical to enhance or restore wetlands functions and values.

It is also the purpose of these regulations to protect, restore where practical, and enhance fish and wildlife populations and their associated habitats. In addition to their intrinsic value, certain species of fish and wildlife represent important historic, cultural, recreational and economic resources. Many species serve as indicators of the condition of the environment and the quality of life that local residents have invested in, enjoy and respect. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

III. Definitions

“Habitats of local importance” include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a given species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. These might include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These might also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alteration, such as cliffs, talus, and wetlands.

“Priority habitats” are habitat types or elements with unique or significant value to a diverse assemblage of species based on the current and updated definitions by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type (e.g., shrub-steppe) or dominant plant species (e.g., juniper savannah), a described successional stage (e.g., old-growth forest), or a specific habitat feature (e.g., cliffs). In the case of the Skagit River, priority habitats include areas for migration, nesting, and rearing of juveniles.

“Priority species” require protective measures for their survival due to their population status, sensitivity to habitat alteration, and/or recreational, commercial, or tribal importance. Priority species include state endangered, threatened, sensitive, and candidate species; animal aggregations (e.g., heron colonies, bat colonies) considered vulnerable; and species of recreational, commercial, or tribal importance that are vulnerable. In the case of the Skagit River, these include Chinook salmon, native cutthroat, and native steelhead fish.

“Wetland” or “wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands may include these artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland areas created to mitigate conversion of wetlands (EHB 1653.PL). (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

IV. Wetlands

A. Wetlands Designations.

1. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this shoreline master program shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplement, as specified in WAC 173-22-035. All areas within the city meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this shoreline master program. Wetland delineations shall be valid for a period of five years and should be field-verified by agency staff prior to beginning site work.

2. Wetlands shall be classified as Category I, II, III or IV using the Washington State Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Publication No. 04-06-025, or as amended hereafter.

B. Wetlands Initial Project Review.

1. A site visit shall be conducted to confirm the presence of wetland indicators listed in the critical areas checklist or identified on critical areas map references as being within 200 feet of a proposed project or activity. A positive confirmation by the director that site indicators are present or that the proposed project may impact the wetland area will then require a professional site assessment, including a wetland delineation and classification.

2. The director shall use current federal, state and local maps, and current wetland delineations to assist in making a determination.

C. Wetlands Site Assessment Requirements. If a wetlands site assessment is required, it shall meet the following requirements:

1. A wetland reconnaissance shall be performed by a qualified wetlands professional. The reconnaissance shall identify the presence of wetlands within 200 feet of the project or activity area. If this wetland reconnaissance demonstrates no wetlands within 200 feet of the activity area, then no further study is required.

2. A wetland delineation shall be performed as part of a site assessment where a wetland reconnaissance confirms the presence of a wetland or the applicant chooses to perform a delineation instead of a wetland reconnaissance. The delineation shall be performed by a qualified wetland professional trained in conducting delineations in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplement.

3. Wetlands Site Assessment. The site assessment shall be prepared by a qualified expert wetland professional consistent with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplement. The site assessment shall include the following:

a. Site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this shoreline master program indicating the presence of wetlands within 200 feet of the project or activity area. This site plan information may be prepared by the applicant with review by the qualified wetlands professional. If the applicant together with assistance from the director cannot obtain permission for access to properties within 200 feet of the activity area then an approximation of the extent of off-site wetlands within 200 feet of the area may be completed based on aerial interpretation and/or visual observation from nearby vantage points;

b. Wetland community description including Cowardian classification and wetland rating based upon Washington State Department of Ecology’s Wetland Rating System for Western Washington, Publication No. 04-06-025 or subsequent revisions;

c. Delineation report including a site map indicating wetland boundaries, applicable buffers and the locations of all data points;

d. Values and functions assessments shall include but not be limited to discussion of water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, flood and stream flow attenuation, recreation and aesthetics;

e. Project description and impact assessment shall include a detailed narrative describing the project, its relationship to the wetland and its potential impact to the wetland; and

f. Any proposed mitigation plan shall include a discussion on how the project has been designed to avoid and minimize adverse impacts to wetlands and their buffers. Mitigation for unavoidable impacts shall follow the standards specified in Wetland Mitigation in Washington State – Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance (Version 1) (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a) or subsequent revisions and shall be consistent with the Gages Slough management plan adopted as part of the comprehensive plan.

D. Alteration of Wetlands.

1. A regulated wetland or its required buffer can only be altered if the applicant can demonstrate that all feasible measures have been taken to avoid and minimize impacts and the wetlands site assessment shows that the proposed alteration does not degrade the quantitative and qualitative functioning of the wetland, or any degradation can be adequately mitigated to protect the wetland function. Any alteration approved pursuant to this section shall include mitigation necessary to mitigate the impacts of the proposed alteration on the wetland as described in wetland mitigation standards.

2. Storm water discharges to wetlands shall be controlled and treated to provide all known and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment as mandated in the State Water Quality Standards, chapter 173-201A WAC, as required by state law and implemented in BMC Title 14, Surface Water Management.

E. Wetland Mitigation Standards.

1. Mitigation Plan Requirements. Along with the other provisions of the other subsections below, the mitigation plan shall include a description of the project or activity and the impact assessment shall include a detailed narrative describing the project or activity, its relationship to the wetland and its potential impact to the wetland. Best available science shall be utilized as laid out in Wetlands in Washington State, Volume I: A Synthesis of the Science (Ecology Publication No. 05-06-006).

2. Any proposed mitigation plan shall include a discussion on how the project or activity has been designed to avoid and minimize adverse impacts to wetlands and shall follow the standards specified in Wetlands and CAO Updates: Guidance for Small Cities, Western Washington Version (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-002) (hereafter, Small Cities Guidance), or subsequent revisions.

3. Standard Wetland Buffers and Increased Buffer Requirements. Buffers are necessary in order to avoid potential project generated impacts. Buffers help maintain water quality and habitat diversity while stabilizing hydrology and minimizing direct human disturbance to wetlands. Buffer widths are based on the wetland rating, the functions that the buffer is expected to perform, and the intensity of the proposed land use. The required buffers shall be established based on the standards set in Wetlands in Washington State, Volume 2: Managing and Protecting Wetlands (Publication No. 05-06-008). If an applicant does not propose to alter the required buffer, then no additional wetland impact mitigation shall be required.

4. If an applicant proposes to alter a required buffer or alter a wetland, the applicant shall demonstrate why such buffer and/or wetland modification, together with measures to avoid and minimize impacts and mitigation proposed in the wetland area assessment, is sufficient to adequately protect the wetland functions and values.

5. Allowed Uses in Buffers. Low impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved; provided, that such activity shall not result in a decrease in wetland functional values and shall not prevent or inhibit the buffer’s recovery to at least pre-altered condition or function. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the activity does not retard the overall recovery of the buffer, include removal of noxious vegetation, and passive recreation facilities designed and in accordance with an approved critical area report, including walkways, trails, interpretative signs and wildlife-viewing structures.

6. Establishment of Limits of Clearing. The location of the outer extent of the wetland buffer and the limits of the areas to be disturbed shall be marked in the field and be included as a condition of a permit or approval. Such field markings may be field-approved by the director prior to the commencement of permitted activities. Markings shall be maintained throughout the duration of any construction activities.

7. Exceptions to Mitigation Requirements. Requirements for mitigation do not apply when a wetland alteration is intended exclusively for the enhancement or restoration of an existing regulated wetland and the proposal will not result in a loss of wetland function and value, subject to the following conditions:

a. The enhancement or restoration project is not compensatory wetland mitigation.

b. An enhancement or restoration plan shall be submitted for site plan review. The restoration or enhancement plan must include the information required for wetlands site assessments.

c. The applicant has obtained all required state and federal approvals for work within wetlands or in water.

8. Compensatory Mitigation. Except under subsection (E)(7) of this section, any person who alters or proposes to alter regulated wetlands shall restore or create areas of wetland in order to compensate for wetland losses, following the standards specified in Wetlands and CAO Updates: Guidance for Small Cities, Western Washington Version (Ecology Publication No. 10-06-002) (hereafter, Small Cities Guidance) or subsequent revisions.

F. Resource Information and Maps.

1. Wetland critical areas defined and identified in this shoreline master program shall be mapped whenever possible. These maps shall be advisory and used by the director to provide guidance in determining applicability of the standards to a property. Sites which include wetlands or other critical areas which are not mapped shall be subject to the provisions of this shoreline master program.

2. Recognizing the necessity for accurate geographic information, a comprehensive inventory identifying the location, size, and other characteristics of wetland critical areas shall be compiled as new data is available.

3. The results of the inventory shall be transferred to maps and published. These maps shall be available at the permit center for public inspection.

4. When completed, wetland critical area maps shall serve as guides to the location and extent of such critical areas.

5. Wetland critical area maps are provided only as a general guide to alert the user to the possible distribution, location and extent of critical areas. Map identification of critical areas provides only approximate boundaries and locations. The actual locations and boundaries of critical areas, as well as their quality and quantity, shall be based upon the presence of the features applicable to each critical area element in this shoreline master program. Maps shall not be considered a regulatory standard or substitute for site-specific assessments. The application of definitions, methodologies and performance standards pursuant to the site-specific assessment requirements provided in this shoreline master program is the controlling factor in determining the actual presence and extent of critical areas.

6. The wetland critical area maps utilize the best information currently available and will be updated on a continual basis.

7. On a regular basis, formal requests shall be made for updated information to the resource agencies responsible for updating their respective map information. Incorporation of such updated information into the critical areas maps shall be made.

8. Wetland critical areas mapped under the site assessment requirements of this shoreline master program shall be compiled in a database and incorporated into critical area maps. This map information shall be utilized to facilitate tracking of compliance with the requirements of this shoreline master program to ensure long-term protection of wetland critical areas. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

V. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas

A. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Designations.

1. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas (HCAs) shall be designated and classified. The Skagit River is the primary focus because of the actual presence of listed and priority species and habitat.

2. Species and habitats of local importance may be designated by the director based on declining populations, sensitivity to habitat manipulation or special value including but not limited to commercial, game or public appeal.

3. In order to nominate an area or a species to the category of habitats and species of local importance, an individual or organization must:

a. Demonstrate a need for special consideration based on:

i. Declining population;

ii. Sensitivity to habitat manipulation; or

iii. Commercial or game value or other special value, such as public appeal;

b. Propose relevant management strategies considered effective and within the scope of this shoreline master program;

c. Provide species habitat location(s) on a map (scale 1:24,000). Submitted proposals will be reviewed by the director and forwarded to the Departments of Fish and Wildlife, Natural Resources, and/or other county and state agencies or experts for comments and recommendations regarding accuracy of data and effectiveness of proposed management strategies. A public hearing will be held for proposals found to be complete, accurate, potentially effective and within the scope of this shoreline master program. Approved nominations will become designated “habitats/species of local importance” and will be subject to the provisions of this shoreline master program.

4. The following species and habitats have been designated on a site-specific basis according to the official species and habitats of local significance map:

•    Great blue heron nest sites;

•    Vaux’s swifts communal roosts;

•    Pileated woodpecker nest sites;

•    Osprey nest sites;

•    Townsend big-eared bat communal roosts;

•    Cavity nesting ducks breeding areas;

•    Trumpeter swan concentrations;

•    Harlequin duck breeding areas;

•    Waterfowl concentrations.

B. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas Initial Project Review.

1. A site visit shall be conducted by the director to determine whether HCAs identified on a critical area checklist or on available map resources or whether HCAs not previously identified are present within 200 feet of the project or activity site.

2. Habitat conservation areas are referenced as follows:

a. An area with which anadromous fish, endangered, threatened or sensitive species have a primary association and/or their habitat, such as those designated and mapped by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, Priority Habitats and Species Program;

b. A water of the state as defined under WAC 222-16-030;

c. A critical biological area as designated and mapped by the Department of Ecology Coastal Zone Atlas dated June 1978 and/or the maps;

d. Designated species and habitats of local importance pursuant to habitat conservation area designations;

e. Naturally occurring ponds under 20 acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat;

f. Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a government or tribal entity;

g. Areas with which anadromous fish species have a primary association;

h. State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas; and

i. Areas critical for habitat connectivity.

3. If the director determines through the site visit that a HCA may be present within 200 feet of the proposed project or activity area, then a site assessment/habitat management plan as described in site assessment requirements shall be required as part of the complete application.

C. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Site Assessment Requirements. Site assessment/habitat management plans shall be prepared by a qualified fish and wildlife biologist with experience assessing the relevant species and habitats and include, at a minimum, the following requirements:

1. Site plan prepared in accordance with the permit requirements indicating all fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas falling within 200 feet of the subject property. This site plan may be prepared by the applicant subject to review by the qualified fish and wildlife biologist;

2. Project narrative describing the proposal including, but not limited to, associated grading and filling, structures, utilities, adjacent land uses, description of vegetation both within and adjacent to the habitat conservation area, and when deemed necessary by the administrative officer, surface and subsurface hydrologic analysis;

3. Impact analysis identifying and documenting the presence of all habitat conservation areas and discussing the project’s effects on the fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

4. Regulatory analysis including a discussion of any federal, state, tribal, and/or local requirements or special management recommendations which have been developed for species and/or habitats located on the site;

5. Mitigation report including a discussion of proposed measures of mitigating adverse impacts of the project and an evaluation of their potential effectiveness. Measures may include but are not limited to: establishment of buffer zones, preservation of critically important plants and trees, limitation of access to habitat areas, seasonal restrictions of construction activities, establishment of a timetable for periodic review of the plan and/or establishment of performance or maintenance bonds;

6. Management and maintenance practices including a discussion of ongoing maintenance practices that will assure protection of all fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas on site after the project has been completed. This section should include a discussion of proposed monitoring criteria, methods and schedule;

7. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in the protected critical area requirements.

D. Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Area Mitigation Standards. Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall be protected in accordance with local determination of appropriate conditions considering the site-specific recommendations from agencies with jurisdictions over the specific area, which may include but not be limited to the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, Department of Ecology, federally recognized Indian tribes located within Skagit County, WDFW Management Recommendations for Washington Priority Habitats and Species, and site-specific information supplied by the applicant.

Development proposals shall be reviewed for potential impacts to fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. The determination of potential impacts shall be dictated by site conditions and made by the director in consultation with the Washington State Departments of Ecology, Fish and Wildlife and Natural Resources and federally recognized Indian tribes located in Skagit County. If it is determined that a proposed project may have an adverse effect on a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, the applicant shall implement a habitat management plan including mitigation measures in conformity with the performance standards outlined below.

1. Riparian Performance Standards. Riparian buffer areas shall be established from the ordinary high water mark as determined by a site investigation. The intent of riparian buffers is to protect five basic riparian forest functions that influence in-stream and near-stream habitat quality. These are:

a. Recruitment of Large Woody Debris (LWD) to the Stream. LWD recruitment creates habitat structures necessary to maintain salmon/trout productive capacity and species diversity.

b. Shade. Shading by the forest canopy maintains cooler water temperatures and influences the availability of oxygen for salmon/trout.

c. Bank Integrity (Root Reinforcement). Bank integrity helps maintain habitat quality and water quality by reducing bank erosion and creating habitat structure and in-stream hiding cover for salmon and trout.

d. Runoff Filtration. Filtration of nutrients and sediments in runoff (surface and shallow subsurface flows) helps maintain water quality.

e. Wildlife Habitat. Functional wildlife habitat for riparian-dependent species is based on sufficient amounts of riparian vegetation to provide protection for nesting and feeding and provide nutrient input to the aquatic system through litterfall, etc.

2. Standard Riparian Buffers. Riparian areas have the following standard buffer requirements (note: riparian areas do not extend beyond the toe of the slope on the landward side of existing dikes or levees unless specifically exempt from federal vegetation management requirements. See also subsection (VI)(E), Application of Standards, for list of activities allowed within critical areas, including riparian areas):

	Water Type Riparian Buffer

	Type “S”	200 feet

	Type “F”	150 feet

	Type “Np” and “Ns”	50 feet

Once buffers are established, they shall not be altered except as allowed below. Riparian buffers not currently meeting the minimum standards shall be restored; provided, that such restoration does not conflict with other provisions of this shoreline master program. In implementing buffer widths other than the standard riparian buffers identified above, the director shall provide opportunity for review and comment from appropriate federal, state or tribal natural resource agencies to ensure the use of best available science. These comments shall be included in the public record along with the basis and rationale for requirement or approval of any such nonstandard buffers.

3. Increasing Buffer Widths. The director has the authority to increase the standard buffer widths on a case-by-case basis, or to establish nonriparian buffer widths, when such buffers are necessary to protect priority fish or wildlife (e.g., great blue heron nesting colonies, osprey or cavity nesting ducks) using the HCA. This determination shall be supported by appropriate documentation from the Departments of Ecology and Fish and Wildlife, showing that the increased buffer width is reasonably related to the protection of the fish and/or wildlife using the HCA.

4. Decreasing Buffer Widths. Decreasing standard buffers will be allowed only if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following criteria are met:

a. A decrease is necessary to accomplish the purposes of the proposal and no reasonable alternative is available; and

b. Decreasing width will not adversely affect the fish and wildlife habitat functions and values; and

c. If a portion of a buffer is to be reduced, the remaining buffer area will be expanded so that the total area of the buffer after averaging is equal to the area required without averaging; and

d. The area of buffer width shall not be reduced by more than 25 percent of the standard buffer width without a variance.

5. Allowed Uses in HCAs or Buffers.

a. Docks. Docks designed to facilitate low-impact uses, such as education and/or private, noncommercial recreation may be permitted within fish and wildlife HCAs under the following conditions:

i. The activity will have minimum adverse impact to the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area;

ii. The activity will not significantly degrade surface water or ground water;

iii. The intrusion into the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and its buffers is fully mitigated;

iv. The director shall provide opportunity for review and comment by federal, state and tribal natural resource agencies; and

v. The applicant obtains all required state and federal authorizations.

b. Limited park or recreational access to a fish and wildlife habitat area or its required buffer; provided, that all of the following are satisfied:

i. The access is part of a public park or a recreational resort development that is dependent on the access for its location and recreational function;

ii. The access is limited to the minimum necessary to accomplish the recreational function;

iii. The access and the balance of the development are consistent with other requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code and the Skagit County shoreline management master program;

iv. The proponent obtains a written approval from the city council for the limited access and associated mitigation; and

v. The applicant obtains all required state and federal authorizations.

c. Low-impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the habitat buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the habitat involved; provided, that such activity shall not result in a decrease in buffer area and riparian functional values and shall not prevent or inhibit the buffer’s recovery to at least pre-altered condition or function. Examples of uses and activities which may be permitted in appropriate cases, as long as the activity does not retard the overall recovery of the buffer, include removal of noxious vegetation, pedestrian trails, viewing platforms, and storm water dispersion outfalls and bioswales.

d. In the riparian buffer, removal of hazardous trees that pose a threat to existing structures, as determined by a certified arborist, may be permitted with prior written approval. Any removed tree or vegetation shall be replaced with appropriate species. Replacement shall be performed consistent with accepted restoration standards for riparian areas within one calendar year. The director may approve alternative native tree species to promote fish and wildlife habitat. Prior to commencement of tree or vegetation removal and/or replacement, the landowner must obtain written approval from the director.

6. Bald eagle habitats shall be protected pursuant to the Washington State Bald Eagle Protection Rules (WAC 232-12-292); a cooperative habitat management plan shall be developed in coordination with the Department of Fish and Wildlife whenever activities that alter habitat are proposed near a verified nest territory or communal roost.

7. All other fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, including habitats/species of local significance, shall be protected on a case-by-case basis by means of a habitat management plan based on the PHS program, as set forth in the initial project review and site assessment/habitat management plan.

8. Approval of any activity that can adversely affect fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall conform to the requirements set forth in the protected critical area (PCA) requirements. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

VI. Critical Area Standards

A. General Requirements and Authorizations Required.

1. All proposals located in critical areas or associated buffers that are in the jurisdiction of this shoreline master program shall meet the following general requirements:

a. Site. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site which are disturbed or impacted by the proposed development, including all development coverage and construction activity areas, shall be required. Complete stabilization of all portions of a site refers to the process and actions necessary to ensure that existing and proposed site improvements are stabilized, and that all on-site areas and adjacent properties which are disturbed or impacted are stabilized. The proposed development shall be limited and controlled to avoid adverse impacts and potential harm and ensure safe, stable and compatible development appropriate to site conditions. Other reasonable and appropriate solutions to solve site stability problems may be required by the director.

b. Adjacent Site, Surrounding Area, and Drainage Basin. The proposed development shall ensure safe, stable and compatible development which avoids adverse environmental impacts and potential harm to adjacent sites, the surrounding neighborhood, and the drainage basin. Detailed analysis of impacts of the development upon wetlands, riparian corridors, native vegetation and wildlife habitats, water quality, natural water temperature, slope and soil conditions, and surface water drainage may be required at the request of the director when site and area conditions indicate the need for this analysis. Supplemental technical reports may be required by the director to specify measures to preserve, protect, and maintain adjacent sites and the drainage basin and ensure safe, stable and compatible development.

c. With the exception of activities identified as exempt, any land use activity that can impair the functions and values of critical areas or their buffers through a development activity or by disturbance of the soil or water, and/or by removal of, or damage to, existing vegetation shall require critical areas review and written authorization pursuant to this shoreline master program. Vegetation destruction or removal, other than the normal maintenance of existing landscaping identified as exempt, shall be prohibited within a critical area or its required buffer, unless there is an approved buffer management plan pursuant to the requirements of the particular critical area that demonstrates there will be no adverse impact to the critical area with the proposed vegetation removal and disturbance of the soil or water and includes any mitigation or buffer enhancement necessary to address critical areas impacts. Authorizations required under this shoreline master program overlay other permit and approval requirements of the Burlington Municipal Code. Regardless of whether a permit or approval is required, any proposed alteration that can adversely affect a critical area or its standard buffers’ functions must comply with the substantive and procedural requirements of this shoreline master program. Critical areas review pursuant to this shoreline master program shall be conducted as part of the underlying permit or approval, where applicable. It is the responsibility of the landowner, or designee, who conducts or proposes to undertake land use activities that can adversely impact critical areas or their buffers to obtain authorization prior to commencing such activities. In some cases, the typical thresholds that trigger review and permits have been reduced to zero for any development activity located within a critical area or its required buffer.

d. Procedures. No land use development permit, land division, shoreline permit, or other authorization required shall be granted until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the applicable provisions of this shoreline master program.

i. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposal submitted conforms to the purposes and standards of this shoreline master program, assesses impacts on the critical area from activities and uses proposed, and identifies protective mechanisms adequate to meet the requirements of this shoreline master program.

ii. The director or designee shall review each proposal and determine if the proposal is consistent with applicable regulations of this shoreline master program and if the protective mechanisms proposed are sufficient to protect the critical area, public health, safety and welfare, and if so, shall condition approval accordingly. If not, the director shall specify conditions of approval. If the director determines that there are no conditions under which the proposal could be approved, then the director shall deny the proposal.

Any proposed development or land division shall be conditioned as necessary to mitigate impacts to critical areas as required by this shoreline master program and any project that cannot adequately mitigate its impacts to critical areas shall be denied.

If any provision of this shoreline master program conflicts with any other applicable code provision, the more restrictive shall apply unless specifically excepted in this shoreline master program.

iii. Satisfaction of the requirements of this shoreline master program shall also be sufficient to satisfy the requirement for critical areas analysis and mitigation pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW, State Environmental Policy Act, and chapter 15.12 BMC, Environmental Policy.

iv. SEPA Compliance. The goals, policies and purposes set forth in this shoreline master program shall be considered policies of the State Environmental Policy Act. When applicable the applicant must meet SEPA requirements.

v. Other Permits Required. It is recognized that many local, state, and/or federal permit conditions may apply to the proposed action, and that compliance with the provisions of the shoreline master program may not necessarily constitute compliance with other such requirements.

B. Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to the application submittal requirements specified in other codes, all development proposals subject to this shoreline master program shall include the following additional information:

1. Surveyed Site Plan. A surveyed site plan shall be prepared by a state of Washington licensed surveyor and shall include the following, when required by the director:

a. Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals on site within 25 feet of the site’s abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

b. Terrain and drainage flow characteristics within the site, within 25 feet of the site’s abutting boundaries, and within the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

c. Proposed location and boundaries of all required undisturbed fenced areas and buffers on site and on adjacent lands;

d. Location of all vegetation, including location and description of all trees over six inches in diameter measured five feet above the base of the trunk, shrubs over eight feet tall or six feet wide, and noting their species;

e. Location and boundaries of all existing and proposed site improvements on the site and within 25 feet of the site’s property boundaries, and the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements. This shall include the limits of development coverage, impervious surfaces and construction activity areas (noting total square footage and percentage of site occupied);

f. Location of all grading activities in progress or proposed, and all drainage control facilities or systems in existence, in progress or proposed within 25 feet of the site’s property boundaries, and the full width of abutting public and private rights-of-way and easements;

g. Location of all existing and proposed utilities (water, sewer, gas, electric, phone, cable, etc.), both above and below ground, on site, on adjacent lands within 25 feet of the site’s property lines, and in the full width of abutting public rights-of-way, and proposed methods and locations for the proposed development to hook up to these services;

h. Such other additional site plan information as necessary to complete review of a project or waive specific submittal requirements when not necessary for project review.

2. Technical Reports. Technical reports shall be prepared as required by the director detailing geological, hydrological, drainage, and other site conditions, to comply with the critical area standards and pursuant to BMC Title 14, Surface Water Management. The reports shall be used to condition development to prevent potential harm and to protect the critical nature of the site, adjacent properties, and the drainage basin.

C. Administration.

1. The planning director, in consultation with the city engineer and the building official, shall be responsible for the administration of this shoreline master program, including:

a. Reviewing applications for development in the city limits to verify compliance with this shoreline master program;

b. Reviewing applications for development in the city limits to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local government agencies from which prior approval is required;

c. Issuance of required permits, before construction or development begins within the city limits;

d. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this code.

e. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. Based on the critical areas site assessment report and other available critical areas information, the director shall make a determination on the proposed activity. A determination to approve a proposed activity shall include designation of protected critical areas (PCAs) and stipulation of binding conditions and required mitigation, monitoring, maintenance or other conditions of approval pursuant to this shoreline master program. If the director determines that there are no conditions under which the proposed activity could be approved, then the director shall deny the proposal.

D. Critical Areas Checklist, Site Assessment and Conditions of Approval.

1. Critical Areas Checklist. Every application for an activity that might alter or adversely affect a critical area or associated buffer shall include a critical area checklist on a form provided by the director. The checklist shall identify all critical area indicators and/or all known critical areas within 200 feet of the proposed activity or within a distance otherwise specified in this shoreline master program. The checklist shall be signed by the applicant and shall inform the applicant that if the information on the checklist is later determined incorrect, then any permit or approval issued based on misinformation could be rescinded and the site required to be restored to its original condition prior to disturbance.

2. Site Assessment Required. If, after the site visit, the director determines that the proposed activity area is within 200 feet, or within a distance otherwise specified in this shoreline master program, of an area that may contain critical area indicators, or if the director determines that the proposed activity will adversely impact a critical area or its associated buffer, then a complete critical areas site assessment shall be required. Critical areas site assessments, as described in more detail in the various sections for each type of critical area, shall be submitted as part of a complete application for a development permit or other approval of land use activities having the potential to impact critical areas or their buffers, by a qualified expert.

3. Site Assessment Preparation. The critical area site assessment shall be prepared by a qualified expert for the type of critical area or areas involved and shall contain the information specified for each type of critical area. In general, the site assessment shall include critical area inventory, assessment of impacts and, where applicable, proposed mitigation, land use restrictions and landowner management, maintenance and monitoring responsibilities. The qualified expert may consult with the director prior to or during preparation of the site assessment to obtain approval of modifications to the contents of the site assessment where, in the judgment of the qualified expert, more or less information is required to adequately address the critical area impacts and required mitigation. The director shall allow for peer review and receipt of recommendations from qualified resource agency personnel as part of the process for approval of qualified experts.

4. Any site plans required by this shoreline master program may be combined into a single site plan wherever possible.

5. Critical Areas Determination and Conditions of Approval. Upon receipt of a properly completed site assessment report, the director shall make a formal determination on the proposed activity as to whether it meets the requirements of this shoreline master program and under what conditions. In making this determination, the director shall utilize the information provided in the site assessment report and all other resource information available. If the director determines that additional technical information or input is necessary or warranted, the director shall contact appropriate federal, state or tribal agencies to provide review and comment on the proposed activity. Formal determinations made by the director shall include the basis and rationale for the determination, as well as detailed specification of related conditions of approval, land use prohibitions, and required landowner mitigation, management, monitoring and/or maintenance. All such requirements shall be clearly shown on plans filed with the director.

6. Complete Record. A complete record of all formal determinations by the director, along with related critical areas checklists, site assessments, binding agreements, conditions of approval, land use prohibitions, required mitigation and a full record of comments received from federal, state or tribal agencies, shall be maintained and made available to the public upon request.

E. Application of Standards. The standards of this shoreline master program shall apply to all public and private proposals for new structures, proposed additions to structures, short subdivisions and subdivisions, and grading and drainage activity located on either public or private property. Projects may be exempted from the detailed critical area review requirements of this shoreline master program when the following situations and/or conditions apply:

1. Emergencies that threaten the public health, safety and welfare. An emergency is an unanticipated and imminent threat to the public health or safety or to the environment which requires immediate action within a period of time too short to allow full compliance with this shoreline master program. Emergency actions that create an impact to a critical area or its buffer shall use reasonable methods that can address the emergency but also that have the least possible impact to the critical area or its buffer. The responsible party shall restore the critical area and buffer after the emergency to the extent feasible and fully mitigate for unavoidable impacts. The person or agency undertaking such action shall notify the director within one working day or as soon as practical following commencement of the emergency activity. Following such notification, the director shall determine if the action taken was within the scope of the emergency actions allowed in this subsection. If the director determines that the action taken or any part of the action taken was beyond the scope of allowed emergency actions, then the enforcement provision shall apply.

2. Normal and routine maintenance or repair of existing structures, utilities, sewage disposal systems, potable water systems, drainage facilities, ponds, or public and private roads and driveways associated with pre-existing residential or commercial development, provided any maintenance or repair activities shall not expand the existing footprint and shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the critical areas and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.

3. Normal maintenance, repair, or operation of existing structures, facilities, and improved areas accessory to a single-family residential use, provided any maintenance or repair activities shall not expand the existing footprint and shall use reasonable methods with the least amount of potential impact to the critical area and any impact to a critical area or its buffer shall be restored after the maintenance to the extent feasible.

4. Modification of an existing single-family residence that does not change the use from residential, does not expand the building footprint or increase septic effluent, and does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

5. Modification of other than a single-family use which does not expand the building footprint, alter the use or increase septic effluent, pursuant to the requirements of the nonconforming use and structure provisions, and does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

6. Outdoor recreational activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

7. The harvesting of wild crops in a manner that is not injurious to natural reproduction of such crops and provided the harvesting does not require tilling soil, planting crops, or changing existing topography, water conditions or water sources; and provided further, that the activity does not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

8. The operation, maintenance, and normal repair of diking and drainage systems which protect life and property along the Skagit River.

9. Education and scientific research activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers.

10. Construction or modification of navigational aids and channel markers.

11. Site investigation work necessary for land use applications such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests and other related activities which do not adversely impact critical areas or their buffers. In every case, critical area impacts shall be minimized and disturbed areas shall be immediately restored.

12. Maintenance activities such as mowing and normal pruning; provided, that such maintenance activities are limited to existing landscaping improvements and do not expand into critical areas or associated buffers, do not expose soils, do not alter topography, do not destroy or clear native vegetation, and do not diminish water quality or quantity.

13. Fish, wildlife, wetland and/or riparian enhancement activities not required as mitigation; provided, that the project is approved by the U. S. Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife or the Washington State Department of Ecology.

All such activities shall be carried out in ways that avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas and their buffers to the greatest extent feasible. If any damage is caused to a critical area or buffer in connection with such activity, that damage must be mitigated. To be exempt does not give permission to destroy a critical area or ignore risk. Proponents of such activities shall be responsible for notifying the director if any damage occurs and shall provide all necessary restoration or mitigation. For information on identifying, protecting or mitigating adverse impacts to critical areas, refer to sections in this shoreline master program on wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, geologically hazardous areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, and flood hazard areas.

F. General Construction and Maintenance Standards. All proposals located in critical areas shall meet the following general construction and maintenance standards:

1. All buffer areas and other designated protected areas shall be fenced with a highly visible and durable protective barrier during construction to prevent access and protect critical areas.

2. All disturbed areas on the site, including development coverage and construction activity areas, shall be controlled in a manner sufficient to control drainage and prevent erosion during construction, and revegetated to promote drainage control and prevent erosion after construction. In cases where erosion potential is severe, the director may require a vegetation and revegetation report to be prepared by a qualified professional with landscaping, plant ecology and botany education and experience. All revegetation shall consist of native trees, shrubs, and groundcover that is suitable for the location and does not require permanent irrigation systems for long-term survival.

3. When development is proposed in critical areas, grading activities shall be strictly limited to areas located on the most environmentally suitable portion of the site, as determined by the director in consultation with qualified experts.

4. All drainage associated with the development shall be connected to approved drainage control systems with approved discharge points in compliance with standards set by the city engineer, as specified in BMC Title 14.

5. When calculating detention requirements, all disturbed area on the site shall be calculated as development coverage, including revegetated areas.

6. A development proposal’s design shall account for a one-in-100-year seismic and flood event, unless a design for a greater event is required by other applicable codes. The International Building Code’s construction standards for seismic design shall constitute compliance with this section.

7. All grading in critical areas shall not occur between November 1st and March 31st and shall be stabilized by October 31st unless demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director based on approved technical analysis that no environmental harm or safety issues would result from grading between November 1st and March 31st.

8. Construction activity shall adhere to a prepared schedule to be approved by the director prior to issuance of a building permit. This schedule shall include, but not be limited to, a schedule for compliance with project conditions, limits of construction and work activities, equipment to be used, start and duration of each phase, and work sequencing.

9. The director may require additional construction practices and methods and requirements, including, but not limited to, best management practices and limitations on construction equipment permitted on the site, to protect critical areas on site, on adjacent sites, and within the drainage basin.

10. Dumping or filling is prohibited in wetlands and special flood risk areas. Dumping includes deposit of yard waste, trash, litter, refuse, dirt, concrete, asphalt, rocks or similar materials, but shall not include work authorized by approved plans and permits.

G. Critical Area and Buffer Mitigation Requirements – General Provisions.

1. Buffers.

a. As described in more detail in each relevant section, buffers have in some cases been determined necessary and appropriate to protect critical areas and their functions or to prevent risk from a critical area hazard. In those sections of this shoreline master program where specific buffers are identified, those buffers are deemed “required” or “standard” buffers. If a project or activity does not propose any alteration of those buffers or of the associated critical area and the director determines that these buffers are adequate to protect the critical area or to prevent risk of a hazard from the critical area, no additional mitigation will be required. Once the critical area and its buffer have properly been delineated through a critical areas assessment and any conditions of approval have been established to ensure protection of the critical area function, no further critical areas mitigation assessment is required, except as necessary to ensure that long-term protection of critical areas and buffers is met in practice through compliance with this code. The applicant shall ensure the protection of critical area by performing a site assessment on the entire parcel.

b. If, however, based on a site assessment by a qualified expert, unique features of the particular critical area or its buffer or of the proposed development, the qualified expert determines that additional buffers and/or mitigation measures beyond these buffers are necessary to adequately protect the function of the critical area, the director may impose such additional mitigation requirements, provided the qualified expert can demonstrate, based on best available science, why that additional mitigation or buffering is required to adequately protect the critical area function.

c. Further, if the applicant proposes to reduce these buffers or to alter the critical area or its required buffer, then the applicant shall demonstrate, based on best available science, why such buffer and/or critical area modification, together with such mitigation proposed in the critical areas assessment, is sufficient to provide equal or better protection of the critical area function. For wetland and HCA buffers, buffer averaging and not outright buffer reduction shall be required.

d. The critical areas assessment and the conditions of approval shall make adequate provision for long-term protection related to critical areas and buffers.

However, critical areas and/or buffers identified as protected critical areas (PCAs) as defined in this shoreline master program do not require any provisions for public access, and appropriate restrictions may be included in the easement or title documents. Critical areas and/or buffers identified as PCAs are however subject to periodic inspection by the director, upon prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.

e. Protected Critical Areas (PCAs).

i. For proposed land divisions, critical areas and their associated buffers identified through the site assessment and city review process shall be designated as PCAs and placed in separate tracts or easements and protected through protective covenants shown on the face of the recorded plat.

ii. For development projects or land use activities not involving a new land division, the critical area and its associated buffer identified through the site assessment process shall instead be identified as a PCA by either easement, open space designation or permit conditions, all including restrictive covenants and recorded with the auditor on a site plan to ensure long-term protection. Critical areas and/or buffers identified as PCAs are subject to periodic inspection, upon prior notification to the landowner, to ensure long-term protection.

f. Open Space – Protected Area. If a portion of a parcel contains a proposed development project that triggers a development permit, and has not had its critical areas and associated buffers delineated because it was outside the project or area affected by the project, then further critical areas assessment may be required in the future prior to any change of use, or new development permit for that portion of the site.

2. Mitigation. All proposed alterations to critical areas or associated buffers shall require mitigation sufficient to provide for and maintain the functional values of the critical area. Mitigation of one critical area impact should not result in unmitigated impacts to another critical area. Mitigation may include, but is not limited to: buffers, setbacks, limits on clearing and grading, best management practices for erosion control and maintenance of water quality, compensatory mitigation to offset critical area impacts, or other conditions appropriate to avoid or mitigate identified adverse impacts.

3. Preferred Mitigation Sequence. Mitigation includes avoiding, minimizing or compensating for adverse impacts to regulated critical areas or their buffers. The preferred sequence of mitigation is defined below:

a. Avoid the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

b. Minimize the impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts;

c. Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project or activity;

d. Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

e. Compensate for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments;

f. Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.

4. The director shall make the final determination regarding required mitigation. All proposed mitigation shall be included in the critical areas assessment. Required mitigation shall be included in an approved mitigation plan. The critical areas mitigation shall include the following:

a. Description of proposed mitigations (critical areas lost/critical areas gained);

b. Analysis of avoidance, minimization, reduction, and compensation;

c. Functional analysis of mitigation/analysis of prevention of risk hazard;

d. Proposed applicant or landowner monitoring or inspection measures and schedule, including specification of method and timing of report submittal:

i. For wetland and HCA mitigation, monitoring reports shall include measurable performance standards on plant survival/cover and hydrology and establish permanent monitoring points;

ii. The applicant shall submit the first monitoring report (Year 0) no later than 12 months after completing the mitigation site construction and planting;

iii. Monitoring shall be conducted for a minimum of five years (Year 0, 1, 2, 3 and 5) for mitigation of emergent communities and 10 years (Year 0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 10) for scrub-shrub and forested communities;

e. Contingency plan.

5. Financial Assurance. The director or his/her designee shall require the complete mitigation proposed in the site assessment to be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. For all projects with an estimated mitigation cost of $4,000 or over, the director shall require financial assurance that will assure compliance with the mitigation plan if the complete mitigation proposed in the site assessment cannot be completed prior to final approval of the development permit. Financial assurance shall be in the form of either a surety bond, performance bond, assignment of savings account or an irrevocable letter of credit guaranteed by an acceptable financial institution with terms and conditions acceptable to the city attorney, shall be in the amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of the uncompleted actions or construction, and shall be assigned in favor of the city of Burlington. The term of the financial assurance shall remain in place until the required mitigation is complete.

6. Monitoring of Critical Areas Mitigation. On a regular basis, but no longer than once every two years, the director shall make a significant sampling of projects and activities for which critical area site assessments were required, including mitigation plans, potentially impacting fish-bearing streams and/or Category I, II or III wetlands. The sample shall be taken from permits or approvals issued more than 10 months prior to the sampling date. The selected sites shall be inspected for critical area and buffer size and condition and for compliance with any required mitigation or other conditions of approval. Results of such sampling shall be included in the permanent record for the project or activity, shall be reported to the city council, and shall also be utilized for enforcement purposes.

H. Protected Critical Area (PCA) Requirements.

1. PCA Identification and Recording.

a. PCA Identification. Approval of development projects which trigger a development permit and other land use activities that can cause adverse impacts to critical areas and/or their buffers shall require the identification and designation of PCAs by the director. This section is intended to apply to critical area and required buffers or unique features such as wellhead protection areas that can cause adverse impacts; location in the floodplain unless adjacent to a wetland or riparian corridor does not require recording of a PCA. PCAs shall include all critical areas and associated buffers on the proposed project site which have been identified through the site assessment process.

b. PCA Recording. All PCAs shall be recorded with the county auditor in accordance with the procedures established under this section. The applicant shall be responsible for all fees and other costs associated with recording of PCAs.

c. Binding Agreements. For each project or activity that requires recording of PCAs, the following information shall be recorded with the auditor as part of a binding agreement between the landowner and the city which shall run with the land and be readily available to the public upon request:

i. Binding agreement signed by the landowner and the director or designee which stipulates any special conditions of approval, protective covenants, binding conditions, or other requirements such as use restrictions, required mitigation, and/or landowner maintenance or monitoring requirements established at the time of approval;

ii. Required final plat map or site plan clearly showing the locations of PCAs, existing vegetation and permanent buffer edge markers;

iii. Additional information necessary to document the critical areas inventory at the time of approval, including descriptions of identified critical areas, their locations, functions and values, and existing critical areas or buffer vegetation;

iv. Identification of any local responsibilities beyond those required by this shoreline master program;

v. Reference to the file containing the complete record of information pertaining to approval of the project or activity.

d. Permanent Buffer Edge Markers. Except as provided under subsection (H)(1)(d)(i) of this section, the outer edges of all PCAs, with the exception of aquifer recharge areas, shall be clearly marked on site by the applicant or landowner with permanent rebar stakes and critical area markers. Critical area markers may be either approved critical area signs or inexpensive steel posts painted a standard color approved by the director that is clearly identifiable as a critical area marker. Installation of permanent markers shall be the responsibility of the landowner.

i. The director may waive or modify the requirement for permanent buffer edge markers; provided, that any such decision shall be based on a site-specific determination that future verification of PCA locations will not be substantially more difficult without the placement of permanent markers and that such waiver or modification will not result in reduced long-term protection of critical areas. The determination shall be included in the permanent record and made available to the public upon request.

ii. Where such permanent markers are required, the director shall specify their frequency of placement and general location. Permanent markers shall be placed to locate the edge of the PCA to an approximate accuracy of within five percent of the specified buffer width or within five feet, whichever is larger. The spacing intervals of the markers shall be such as to provide comparable accuracy of line-of-sight determination of buffer edges. The locations of all required stakes/markers shall be shown on the plat map or site map recorded with the auditor.

2. Protected Critical Area (PCA) Designations for New Land Divisions.

a. For land divisions where site assessments have occurred, all PCAs shall be placed into separate tracts or easements, whose uses shall be regulated by the provisions of this shoreline master program and any conditions of approval, including protective covenants and binding agreements as provided for under subsection (H)(1) of this section. Area within a PCA can be included in total acreage for development purposes and may be used in lot area or density calculations. PCAs may be owned and maintained by the owner of the lot of which they are a part or transferred to the homeowners association or land trust. Wetlands and buffers in the Gages Slough corridor may be donated to the city in exchange for park impact fee credit.

b. Recording. PCA designations shall be recorded with the auditor as part of the plat approval process.

The auditor file number referencing the agreement shall be on the face of the plat and its provisions shall run with the land.

c. PCA Descriptions. The location of PCAs shall be clearly identified on site plans and on preliminary and final plat maps. PCAs shall be labeled using the letters A through Z, or another labeling system approved by the director. Where more than one lot is involved, each lot shall carry independent labeling.

d. Ingress, Egress and Use. Owners of PCAs shall grant ingress and egress by the director or his or her agent for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation. As part of an approved land division, the use limitations required of a designated and regulated critical area according to the provisions of this shoreline master program, including the conclusions of the critical areas site assessment report and any conditions of approval, protective covenants and other binding conditions, shall be clearly stated on the face of the recorded plat.

3. PCAs on Pre-Existing Lots.

a. For development proposals and other land use activities that can adversely impact critical areas on pre-existing lots, not part of a proposed land division or other form of multiple lot development, PCAs shall be identified on a scaled site plan showing the location of the PCA, structures (existing and proposed) and their distances from the PCA and lot lines to show relative location within the subject parcel(s). The project or activity shall be conditioned for critical area protection and the resulting information recorded with the auditor. The site plan may be prepared by the applicant and all distances and locations of structures may be measured from the established PCA boundary to within plus or minus five feet.

b. Ingress and Egress. Owners of PCAs shall grant ingress and egress by the director or designee for monitoring and evaluation of compliance with established conditions of approval, binding conditions or any required mitigation.

4. PCA Mapping, Labeling, and Area Calculations.

a. All PCAs shall be mapped. The area shall be delineated on the final plat map or on a site plan to an accuracy of plus or minus five feet horizontal and monumented in the field by a qualified expert. If a survey was not used to map the critical area, a note on the final plat map shall be recorded stating that a legal survey was not performed to delineate the critical area and that the surveyor is not incurring liability for the exact boundaries of the critical area on the plat map.

b. During construction phases of development, clear temporary marking using flagging and staking shall be maintained along the outer limits of the delineated PCA or the limits of the proposed site disturbance outside of the PCA. Prior to the start of construction activity, and as necessary during construction, temporary markings shall be inspected and approved by the director or designee. The person responsible for inspecting the temporary flagging shall provide written confirmation to be included in the record as to whether or not the flagging has been installed consistent with the permit requirements prior to commencement of the permitted activity.

c. All PCAs shall include the necessary labeling to show calculated area (in square feet or acreage), and type and/or class of critical area within each lot. This information shall be noted on the face of the approved plat or site plan.

d. Signs or fencing required as part of critical area mitigation. The director shall require permanent signs or fencing where the director determines that it is a necessary component of a mitigation plan. Examples include situations where variances to the dimensional requirement of this shoreline master program have been granted and the development will occur within a PCA; or where the sensitivity of the PCA will be impacted unless access to the PCA is limited (such as changes of use to farming where livestock is involved).

The intent is to provide clear and sufficient notice, identification and protection of critical areas on site where damage to a critical area or buffer by humans or livestock is probable due to the proximity of the adjacent activity.

5. Sign, Marker and Fence Maintenance. It is the responsibility of the landowner, or any subsequent landowner, to maintain the required PCA markers, signs or fences in working order throughout the duration of the development project or land use activity. Maintenance includes any necessary replacement. Removal of required signs, markers or fences without prior written approval of the director shall be considered a violation of this shoreline master program.

I. Incentives. The following incentives are intended to minimize the burden to individual property owners from application of the provisions of this shoreline master program and assist the city in achieving the goals of this shoreline master program:

1. Open Space. Any property owner on whose property a critical area or its associated buffer is located and who proposes to put the critical area and buffer in a separate open space tract may apply for current use property tax assessment on that separate tract pursuant to chapter 84.34 RCW.

2. Conservation Easement. Any person who owns an identified critical area or its associated buffer may place a conservation easement over that portion of the property by naming a qualified designee under RCW 64.04.130 as beneficiary of the conservation easement. This conservation easement can be used in lieu of the creation of a separate critical areas tract to qualify for open space tax assessment.

The purpose of the easement shall be to preserve, protect, maintain, restore and limit future use of the property affected in perpetuity. The terms of the conservation easement may include prohibitions or restrictions on access and shall be approved by the property owner and the qualified designee. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).


Appendix B SHORELINE RESTORATION REPORT

I. Shoreline Management Act Restoration Principles

The Shoreline Management Act makes protection of shoreline environments an essential statewide goal, with an emphasis on maintenance, protection, restoration, and preservation.1 Local shoreline master programs include goals and policies for restoration of impaired shoreline ecological functions that are consistent with the principles embodied in WAC 173-26-186(8)(c) and (d).2 These principles include the following:

•    For cities containing any shorelines with impaired ecological functions, master programs shall include goals and policies that provide for restoration of such impaired ecological functions.

•    These master program provisions shall identify existing policies and programs that contribute to planned restoration goals and identify any additional policies and programs that local government will implement to achieve its goals.

•    These master program elements regarding restoration should make real and meaningful use of established or funded nonregulatory policies and programs that contribute to restoration of ecological functions.

•    These components should appropriately consider the direct or indirect effects of other regulatory or nonregulatory programs under other local, state, and federal laws, as well as any restoration effects that may flow indirectly from shoreline development regulations and mitigation standards.

•    Local master programs shall evaluate and consider cumulative impacts of reasonably foreseeable future development on shoreline ecological functions and other shoreline functions fostered by the policy goals of the Act.

The Act also recognizes that restoration planning will vary dramatically between jurisdictions based on the jurisdiction’s size, extent and condition of its shorelines, availability of funding and restoration tools, and the nature of the ecological functions to be restored.

A. Opportunities for Protection and Restoration. In Burlington, potential areas of meaningful restoration are organized as follows:

1. Shorelines fronted by an extensive levee system along the Skagit River.

•    Locations where there is significant open space between the levee and the river’s edge on land owned by the city or Dike District No. 12, including land outside the city limits. Johnson Bar is the major site as identified in the Skagit River Big Bend Reach Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study.3

•    Future locations where the Dike District plans to build setback levees farther from the shoreline.

2. Gages Slough wetland corridor.

•    Wetland buffer restoration sites identified through scientific study; 15 sites identified, three restored and in maintenance and monitoring phase, as spelled out in the Gages Slough management plan and related technical studies.4

•    Opportunities for public access.

•    Locations for water quality enhancement projects to achieve the result of clean water coming out of Gages Slough into the Skagit River to protect priority habitats and species.

•    Listing ID 7124 (Bacteria – Category 4A) for Gages Slough was moved off the 303(d) List on September 1, 2000, when EPA approved the cleanup plan known as a TMDL.5 Category 4A indicates that EPA has approved a cleanup plan that is thought to be capable of returning the waters to Category 1 (meets tested standard). The water is still considered “impaired” until effectiveness monitoring shows the conditions have been resolved. The TMDL is very broad and does not include any specific program for Gages Slough management and cleanup. The adopted Gages Slough management plan will be evaluated and work program components prioritized to enhance efforts to meet standards.

•    The Gages Slough management plan calls for getting the Slough into public ownership from Anacortes Street to the Skagit River. The Gages Slough Survey 2012 reinforces the need to make this happen as property owners are for the most part not interested in granting easements. Condemnation action is likely necessary.

B. Shoreline Management Program Restoration and Enhancement Goals.

1. Reestablish, rehabilitate, and/or otherwise improve impaired shoreline ecological functions and/or processes through actions that are consistent with this master program and guidelines provided in other local and regional restoration plans.

2. Encourage and facilitate cooperative restoration and enhancement programs between the city and state and federal public agencies, tribes, nonprofit organizations, developers, and landowners to address shorelines with impaired ecological functions and/or processes.

3. Restore and enhance shoreline ecological functions and processes as well as shoreline features through voluntary and incentive-based public and private programs.

4. Target restoration and enhancement with the goal of improving habitat requirements of priority and/or locally important wildlife species.

5. Ensure restoration and enhancement is consistent with and, where practicable, prioritized based on the biological recovery goals for salmon populations and other species and/or populations for which a recovery plan is available.

6. Integrate restoration and enhancement with parallel natural resource management efforts such as the 2005 Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan6 and Department of Ecology Water Resource Inventory Area (WRIA) No. 3 watershed planning activities.

C. Biological Goals and Objectives. These are the goals for the habitat conservation plan of the city so that any proposed activity does not appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival and recovery of the listed species under the Endangered Species Act7, and that the plan minimizes and mitigates the impact of the taking of any listed species or habitat to the maximum extent practical.

1. Preservation means acquiring a site, using conservation easements, donations, etc., to protect its current values. Land acquisition is in process for both the Skagit River and Gages Slough corridors.

2. Enhancement of a habitat means improving an existing site in some way that will encourage and retain fish and wildlife, such as increasing pond size or improving buffer. Following land acquisition, habitat enhancement is feasible. Public education is in process for encouraging land owners to use best management practices on their own property and to enhance habitat areas and values in their own backyards. Along the Skagit River, enhancement areas are Johnson Bar with potential for a major project, and the forested buffer at Whitmarsh fields, where evergreen trees and maples are being planted to improve the buffer.

3. Restoration means a damaged or degraded site will in some manner be improved.

a. The Gages Slough corridor is the prime target for restoration projects. There are a total of 15 sites in the Gages Slough corridor that have been identified and a reconnaissance level plan has been prepared for each one, including locations for installation of bioswales adjacent to the wetlands for water quality enhancement. The wetland restoration demonstration project in the Jack Doyle Memorial Neighborhood Park is the first example. The Goldenrod Bridge restoration project is in the fifth year of maintenance and monitoring, located west of Interstate 5 in a very visible location. The Unit 10 former city dump restoration site is in year two of monitoring and maintenance. Public/private partnerships are strongly encouraged.

b. Along the Skagit River, the three-bridge corridor levee setback area is a long-term future restoration project opportunity.

4. Long-term management of priority habitat sites includes strategies to protect the habitat values of the sites. Every site in the urban wildlife habitat designation has a monitoring and management plan that is tailored to the specific requirements of the location. This work includes removal of invasive species and replanting as necessary in a timeline based on the season.

5. To not appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival and recovery is the statutory goal for permit issuance under the Endangered Species Act. In Burlington, this includes a strategy that will keep floodwaters out of the developed urban area so that pollution from the city does not enter the Skagit River, and prevent fish stranding in polluted areas with no potential for survival. The city and Dike District No. 12 are working together to develop a plan for levee certification and accreditation by FEMA, to prevent or at least severely restrict urban flooding in flood events up to the 100-year base flood. This project is the topic of an environmental impact statement.8

D. Restoration and Enhancement Policies.

1. The city of Burlington has determined priority restoration sites.

2. This master program recognizes the importance of restoration of shoreline ecological functions and processes and encourages cooperative restoration efforts and programs between the city, county, state, and federal public agencies, tribes, nonprofit organizations, and landowners to address shorelines with impaired ecological functions and/or processes.

3. Additional opportunities for restoration may be created when Dike District No. 12 completes plans to construct a setback levee along the Skagit River through the three-bridge corridor.

4. Restoration actions should restore shoreline ecological functions and processes as well as shoreline features and should be targeted towards meeting the needs of sensitive and/or locally important plant, fish, and wildlife species as well as the biological recovery goals for early Chinook, bull trout populations, and other salmonid species and populations.

5. Restoration should be integrated with other natural resource management efforts such as the 2005 Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan and the Skagit River Big Bend Reach Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study 2004.

6. Priority should be given to restoration actions that:

a. Create dynamic and sustainable ecosystems.

b. Restore connectivity between river channels, floodplains, and hyporheic zones.

c. Restore historic back-channels to create refugia for migrating fish.

d. Mitigate peak flows and associated impacts caused by high storm water runoff volume.

e. Reduce sediment input to the Skagit River and associated impacts.

f. Improve Skagit River water quality through storm water facility upgrades.

g. Restore native vegetation and natural hydrologic functions of degraded and former wetlands to the extent practical.

h. Replant native vegetation in shoreline areas to restore functions where such actions are meaningful and consistent with this SMP and dike district guidelines.

i. Where practical, restore riverine ecosystem processes, such as sediment transport and creation of sandbars and accumulation of large woody debris that create and sustain fish habitat.

The Skagit is the only river system in Washington that supports all five species of salmon, containing some of the largest and healthiest wild Chinook salmon runs in Puget Sound and the largest pink salmon stock in the state. In all, there are 10 species of salmonids within the Skagit River basin. These include six Chinook stocks (spring, summer, and fall), pink salmon, chum salmon, sockeye salmon, summer and winter run steelhead, sea run cutthroat trout, Dolly Varden, and bull trout. Three of these, Puget Sound Chinook salmon, Puget Sound steelhead, and Coastal Puget Sound bull trout, are Endangered Species Act (ESA) listed.9

As a result, restoration planning in the Skagit River watershed has had a focus on policies and actions intended to aid in the recovery of migratory fish populations, in particular ESA listed species.

E. Adaptive Management Plan. An adaptive management strategy is used to address significant uncertainty associated with a particular habitat conservation plan, but it is not practicable (or possible) to require that all adaptive management strategies impose an elaborate experimental design, but rather to overcome data gaps. As foreseeable circumstances change, a contingency plan must be in place to address the issues. An example here might be changes in the Corps of Engineers levee vegetation maintenance standards, or a flood event that changes a planned restoration project.

F. Monitoring Program. Monitoring types include compliance monitoring, effect monitoring, and effectiveness monitoring. Today, water quality monitoring is a TMDL and NPDES II requirement and there is ongoing monitoring at the sewer plant and at storm water outfall locations, as well as in the Gages Slough corridor. Restoration planting projects have an initial five-year intense maintenance and monitoring program, with less frequent visits as the sites mature. Mitigation projects will each have a specific monitoring plan. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

II. Watershed Planning

In 1998, the State Legislature passed chapter 90.82 RCW, which sets forth a framework for developing local solutions to water resource issues on a watershed basis. Chapter 90.82 RCW states:

The legislature finds that the local development of watershed plans for managing water resources and for protecting existing water rights is vital to both state and local interests. ... The development of such plans serves the state’s vital interests by ensuring that the state’s water resources are used wisely, by protecting existing water rights, by protecting in-stream flows for fish and by providing for the economic well-being of the state’s citizenry and communities.

Chapter 90.82 RCW recognizes that watersheds are the logical planning unit for addressing water resource issues and the protection and restoration of fish and wildlife habitats. The RCW establishes general criteria and guidelines for state agencies and local jurisdictions to follow in developing and implementing watershed plans. The primary purpose of these plans is to equitably manage water resources between the competing demands of human use, protection of existing water rights, and the maintenance of in-stream flows for resident fish. Habitat restoration is an optional element in the development of local watershed plans under the RCW. However, given the requirements of the GMA relative to the SMA for shorelines, restoration would be an expected component for those watersheds that have experienced significant development and historically supported significant fish populations and riparian habitats.

Watershed planning is necessarily hierarchical in nature. Each major watershed is composed of smaller sub-basins that may differ substantially in the intensity of development, level of water resource use, types and extent of habitats, and functional characteristics. Federal and state agencies, tribes, and local governments have varying degrees of authority over watershed issues, resulting in a hierarchy of plans and regulations. Major watershed boundaries and tributaries also cross jurisdictional boundaries, requiring coordination between local communities, tribes, and private parties engaged in planning and restoration activities.

A. Watershed Resource Inventory Area No. 3. The state’s major watersheds have been mapped into 62 Water Resource Inventory Areas (WRIA), with each further divided into sub-basins based on the physical extent of primary tributaries. Burlington is located within WRIA No. 3 – Lower Skagit River. As a planning unit, the boundaries of WRIA No. 3 represent the upper tier of the watershed hierarchy for the Lower Skagit.

The Department of Ecology (DOE) is the agency responsible for coordinating and overseeing the development of watershed plans under chapter 90.82 RCW. The DOE further supports these efforts by conducting research and preparing studies on specific watershed issues, reporting on watershed planning activities, and maintaining a database of information specific to each WRIA.

B. Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan 2005. The Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan (plan) was completed in 2005 as a joint effort between the Skagit River System Cooperative (SRSC) and the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW). The process began in 1994, in response to the listing of Puget Sound Chinook salmon as threatened under the Endangered Species Act and during its development included the involvement of a variety of interested and affected parties. The plan document is intended to provide the basis for the Skagit Basin chapter of the Greater Puget Sound Chinook recovery effort.

The purposes of the plan are to:

•    Define biologically based recovery goals.

•    Identify what is known or assumed about factors that limit production of Skagit River Chinook.

•    Propose scientifically based actions that will restore Skagit River Chinook to optimum levels, including fisheries management, artificial production, habitat protection, habitat restoration, effectiveness monitoring, and applied research.

The plan is built around the identification of four different juvenile Chinook salmon life history strategies in the Skagit: yearlings, parr migrants, tidal delta rearing migrants, and fry migrants. Due to the differences in habitat use, yearlings and parr migrants depend more on freshwater habitat, while tidal delta rearing migrants and fry migrants depend more on estuarine habitats.

This difference in habitat utilization by individual life history strategies shapes the habitat recovery actions proposed in the plan. Habitat recovery actions are recommended that benefit each life history strategy in an effort to maintain and strengthen Chinook population diversity and ensure spatial connectivity and abundance. The restoration strategy for the plan is based on an understanding of the limiting factors for each of the Skagit Chinook salmon stocks and the specific location of existing or potentially restorable habitat.

Relevant to Burlington are the plan’s recommended restoration actions for freshwater rearing habitat in large river floodplains, tributaries, and nontidal deltas. Large river floodplain restoration actions in the plan seek to improve freshwater conditions for all Chinook salmon fry, but in particular for those life history strategies that depend on freshwater habitat for extended rearing. Intact floodplain areas are especially important for freshwater rearing because the availability of complex main-stem edge habitat, backwaters, and off-channel habitat is essential for the foraging and refugia of all phases of freshwater life history. For example, stream type Chinook salmon spend over one year in freshwater habitat before migrating further downstream.

C. Burlington Wetland Restoration Program. Part of the flood hazard mitigation plan includes improving Gages Slough so that water can flow more readily during and after a flood event, specifically considering sediment removal and culvert installations. This planning effort will be more focused over the next few years and will comply with the shoreline master program.

Technical studies have been completed for Gages Slough with important information about the existing conditions. These include water quality monitoring as part of the Lower Skagit River Water Quality Study completed in 1993, the comprehensive surface water management plan adopted in 1992, and the Surface Water Management Plan Update and Facilities Pre-Design Report completed in 1996. Out of these initial studies, three major actions took shape. A coastal zone management grant provided funding for in-depth technical studies of Gages Slough in 1998, to set up a long-range management plan to facilitate removal of Gages Slough from its current listing as a 303(d) site, in violation of the Clean Water Act. Gages Slough was moved off the 303(d) List on September 1, 2000, when EPA approved the cleanup plan known as a TMDL. Category 4A indicates that EPA has approved a cleanup plan that is thought to be capable of returning the waters to Category 1 (meets tested standard). Concurrently, a new pump station was designed and constructed to provide for storm water management as the city grows and to facilitate management of the hydroperiod of Gages Slough, in response to the clear need for wetland restoration activities and the forecast demands of the comprehensive surface water plan. A citizen’s advisory committee was formed to develop the shoreline master program for Gages Slough and the Skagit River shorelines.

The problems associated with the degraded series of connected wetlands, Gages Slough, that crosses the community, and concerns about the need for very costly storm water management facilities in the floodplain, became the focus of every neighborhood meeting in the 1990s. Gages Slough had become a combination sewer and garbage dump. City staff was not aware of the history of Gages Slough and made the assumption that the upriver end of Gages Slough had some sort of direct connection via culvert into Hart Slough, and reported that as a fact to the technical consultants. However, the culvert connects only to Brickyard Creek, which is the ditched stream connected to the culvert/fish passage. There are no piped connections to Gages Slough. The recent history of the area began with the construction of the Sterling Dam blocking any above-grade connections to Gages Slough in 1899 because there were numerous floods that were affecting the railroad tracks. The Sterling Dam is owned and maintained by Dike District No. 12. It is located north of SR 20 adjacent to Holtcamp Road.

In 1998, a wetlands ecological study was completed for Gages Slough including delineation, a functional assessment using the Department of Ecology hydrogeomorphic modeling approach, along with a water level and water quality analysis, and a management and restoration plan has been designed and integrated into this master program. Existing uses along Gages Slough include single-family residential, commercial, agriculture and industrial use.

The first survey of all the property owners along Gages Slough (both in and outside the city limits) was taken in the winter of 1995-96, and the results were mailed to all property owners in March of 1996. Grave concerns about the future of the wetlands were expressed, particularly in light of the fact that there was a significant flood event on the Skagit River in the winter of 1995 and there was a lot of discussion about turning Gages Slough into a backup flood control channel. These activities and issues led to creation of the citizen’s advisory committee and to the request for the grant funding to get the essential elements of the long-range management plan established.

A second survey of Gages Slough property owners was conducted in the spring of 2012. Preliminary results have been tallied, but results will still be coming in following publication of this report.

Today, the Gages Slough management plan has been adopted as part of the overall comprehensive plan, the parks and recreation comprehensive plan and the comprehensive surface water management plan.10 The plan was completed in the spring of 1999, updated September 1999, August 2006, February 2007, and followed by a 2009 Gages Slough reconnaissance report identifying a series of restoration project sites. There are two wetland buffer restoration projects that are five years or older and there is one wetland buffer restoration project that was planted in 2011, at the site of an old city burn dump.

As a participant in the NPDES II municipal permit system, the public works department is actively increasing the focus on improvements to the Gages Slough corridor that enhance its ability to process storm water and return clean water to the Skagit River system. New improved water level monitoring instruments have been installed in Gages Slough. Bi-monthly water quality monitoring is completed by the public works department. In addition, the Skagit Conservation District Stream Team has a committed team of volunteers that also does regular water quality monitoring in Gages Slough for temperature, turbidity, and fecal coliform, the TMDL standards. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

III. Restoration Opportunities and Actions

A. Big Bend Reach Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study, 2004. The primary goal of the Skagit River Big Bend Reach Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study, prepared for the city of Mount Vernon in 2004, was to identify opportunities for improving the quality and quantity of rearing habitat available to juvenile salmon at various opportunity sites located in the Big Bend Reach of the Skagit River. There are remnant pockets of habitat to be found between the river and the existing levees. Some of these are actively engaged with the river. Most are currently isolated from river actions, except during high water events.

Thirteen opportunity sites were identified and analyzed for their existing habitat values and their ability to provide additional habitat benefits, extending from Johnson Bar downstream to Britt Slough. Johnson Bar is mostly owned by the city of Burlington, and this is the only significant restoration site along the Skagit River that the city has the potential to restore.

B. Gages Slough Restoration Plans, 2009 Update. This report provides an update on the identified restoration sites and sets a priority ranking for each site. Most of the sites have lots of invasive species including Himalayan blackberry and reed canary grass, and the need for shade and water quality improvement. The drainage utility is committed to funding the five-year and ongoing monitoring and maintenance program since 80 to 90 percent of the city’s storm water enters Gages Slough. The sites are available as mitigation sites to compensate for decreased wetland buffers and for off-site mitigation under the critical areas standards.

C. Implementation Timelines, Benchmarks and Strategies.

Identify timelines and benchmarks for implementing restoration projects and programs and achieving local restoration goals:

1. The NPDES II storm water cleanup program is focused on public education, water quality monitoring, and source control through annual maintenance. This program is partially funded by the drainage utility and through state-administered grant funds, along with a dedicated team of volunteers from the conservation district. The overall water quality is monitored by the Department of Ecology as part of the TMDL that includes Gages Slough. The program is a permanent component; whether or not the water quality meets standards at some point, the need for education and source control is critical. As part of the FEMA community rating system program, every drainage facility has annual inspection and maintenance requirements. The city is committed to deliver clean water to Puget Sound; the benchmarks are set, timelines are ongoing.

2. Construction of water quality treatment bioswales in Gages Slough corridor for increased capacity to treat storm water. This program is a top priority for storm water grant applications. Grant match funds are from the drainage utility. The restoration sites have been prioritized based on water pollution and the first key location has a pending grant application. All projects include five to 10 years of monitoring and maintenance; once mature, maintenance needs decrease, but there is ongoing maintenance and removal of invasive species.

3. Wetland Buffer Restoration Projects. Fifteen sites identified; three have been constructed and the remaining sites are available for public and private restoration opportunities. This includes land development that requires wetland mitigation anywhere in this area. Two sites were constructed using donations to the Burlington Parks Foundation. The drainage utility has committed funds for the five-to-10-year maintenance and monitoring program. To date, restoration activity has occurred at the rate of approximately one site every five years. The commitment to permanent maintenance and monitoring is funded by the drainage utility.

4. Skagit River – Johnson Bar Restoration Project. This is a regional project located adjacent to the city limits on the waterward side of the levee. It is a high priority by police, fire and parks to get rid of a place that is an ongoing problem site used to dump trash, stolen cars, junk, and allowing on- and off-road vehicles to speed around and tear up the dirt road. The plan of action is to coordinate the project with levee upgrade work in process by Dike District No. 12. Additional land acquisition is in process by the Dike District; schedule to be set in the next year.

5. Skagit River – Levee Upgrades and Maintenance. Burlington levees are in the Corps of Engineers PL 84-99 maintenance program and levee vegetation standards have been set through an ESA Section 7 consultation. This program is ongoing with annual inspection by the Corps of Engineers.11

Provide for mechanisms or strategies to ensure that restoration projects and programs will be implemented according to plans and to appropriately review the effectiveness of the projects and programs in meeting the overall restoration goals:

1. Uniquely situated in the floodplain adjacent to the Skagit River on the south and east, with long-term agricultural resource lands to the north and west, Burlington has a comprehensive plan in place that is monitored not only by the city, but by the FEMA Community Rating System program where everyone in the city now receives a 25 percent reduction in flood insurance rates through the continued monitoring, maintenance and protection of environmentally sensitive sites and critical areas. This program has intensive federal monitoring.

2. Burlington is required to participate in NPDES II, a national pollution discharge elimination system program that applies citywide, focused on clean water.

3. As a result of concerns over how the National Flood Insurance Program is managed, every project in Burlington is reviewed for compliance with the Endangered Species Act biological opinion that is focused on habitat restoration.12

4. Burlington is also a participant in the Skagit County natural hazards mitigation plan that is updated every five years countywide.13 (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2013).

 1

Washington State Shoreline Management Act, chapter 90.58 RCW. 2

Washington Administrative Code regulations; chapter 173-26 WAC, Shoreline Master Program Guidelines. 3

Skagit River Big Bend Reach Habitat Restoration Feasibility Study, prepared by Miller Consulting, Skagit River System Cooperative, Pentec Environmental, and Wildlands of Washington, Inc., December 20, 2004. 4

City of Burlington, Shoreline Analysis Report and Shoreline Inventory 2012 – Appendix D. Gages Slough management plan including history of Sterling Dam, history of the Gages Slough management plan, technical studies, restoration sites, Puget Sound Partnership Watershed Characterization, and water quality monitoring data. 5

Lower Skagit River Fecal Coliform Total Maximum Daily Load Submittal Report Water Cleanup Plan, Publication No. 00-10-010, June 2000. 6

Skagit Chinook Recovery Plan, 2005, prepared by Skagit River System Cooperative and Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife; and Appendix C, Linking Freshwater Rearing Habitat to Skagit Chinook Salmon Recovery, November 4, 2005, prepared by Eric M. Beamer, Bob Hayman, and Devin Smith. 7

Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, as amended. 8

City of Burlington Draft EIS February 2009, and Final EIS July 16, 2010, to Adopt a Strategic Program for Comprehensive Flood Hazard Mitigation in the Burlington Urban Area and Adjacent Land with a Range of Structural and Non-Structural Components.  9

Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 50 CFR Part  226, Designated Critical Habitat: Critical Habitat for 19 Evolutionarily Significant Units of Salmon and Steelhead in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and California, Federal Register February 16, 2000, and Federal Register September 2, 2005. 10

City of Burlington 2005 comprehensive plan, 2009 parks and recreation comprehensive plan with urban wildlife habitat plan, 2005 comprehensive surface water management plan and related planning documents.  11

Biological Opinion, Consultation for Skagit River Levee Repair Projects, Skagit County, Washington: Flood Damage Repairs to Numerous Levees in Diking Districts 1, 3, 12, 17, and 22, prepared by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Reference No. 13410-2010-F-0254, Agency U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Seattle District, May 27, 2011; and

Endangered Species Act (ESA) Section 7(a)(2) Biological Opinion and Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) Consultation, Skagit River – Diking Districts 1, 3, 12, 17 and 22, Levees Rehabilitation of Flood Control Works Project in Skagit County, Washington; NMFS Consultation Number: 2011/0033, October 24, 2011. 12

Endangered Species Act – Section 7, Consultation Final Biological Opinion and Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act Essential Fish Habitat Consultation, September 22, 2008, regarding National Flood Insurance Program and FEMA. 13

Skagit County Natural Hazards Mitigation Plan, September 2008. 



-----------------------------

The Burlington Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 1870, passed January 24, 2019.

Disclaimer: The city clerk’s office has the official version of the Burlington Municipal Code. Users should contact the city clerk’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://burlingtonwa.gov/ City Telephone: (360) 755-0531

Code Publishing Company