


CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BREMERTON

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I.   Name, Boundaries, Powers, Definitions 

Section 1 Name

Section 2 Boundaries

Section 3 Definitions

Section 4 Rights and Powers

Section 5 Powers - How Exercised

ARTICLE II.   Elective Officers 

Section 6 Officers - Election - Term - Qualifications

Section 7 Change in Districts

Section 8 Compensation - Reimbursement

Section 9 Vacancies - Events Creating

Section 10 Vacancies - Filling

Section 11 Pro Tempore Appointment

ARTICLE III.   Legislation 

Section 12 Powers Vested in Council

Section 13 Council Meetings - Public Notice of Meeting Agendas

Section 14 Open Meetings - Requisites

Section 15 Ordinances - Styles - Requisites - Veto

Section 16 Ordinances - Authentication and Recording

Section 17 Publication of Ordinances or Summary of Ordinances

Section 18 City Auditor

ARTICLE IV.   Administration 

Section 19 Duties and Authority of the Mayor

Section 20 Appointive Officers - Duties - Compensation

Section 21 Appointment and Removal of Appointive Officers and Employees - Terms

Section 22 Oath of Appointive Officers and Employees

Section 23 City Attorney

ARTICLE V.   Finance 

Section 24 Organization

Section 25 Receipt, Custody, and Disbursement of Funds

Section 26 Fiscal Year

Section 27 Public Utilities

ARTICLE VI.   Civil Service 

Section 28 Commission, Creation of

Section 29 Commission, Rules and Powers

Section 30 Civil Service Officer

Section 31 Employees Included in Civil Service

ARTICLE VII.   Boards, Commissions and Committees

Section 32 Member Residency Requirement

ARTICLE VIII.   Recall, Initiative and Referendum

Section 33 Recall

Section 34 Initiative and Referendum

ARTICLE IX.   Franchises 

Section 35 Franchises - Term - Renewal

Section 36 Franchise - Compensation - Publication

Section 37 Franchise - Council Rights

Section 38 Franchise - Transfers

ARTICLE X.   Miscellaneous

Section 39 Legal Continuity

Section 40 Employment Continuity

Section 41 Report - Requisites of Claim - Time Limitations

ARTICLE XI.   Amendments

Section 42 Conform to State Law


ARTICLE I. Name, Boundaries, Powers, Definitions


Section 1 Name:

The corporate name of this City is BREMERTON. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 2 Boundaries:

The existing boundaries may be changed in the manner provided by law. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 3 Definitions:

As used in this Charter, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1)    RCW - Means the Revised Code of Washington, and refers to any subsequent amendments to statutes referenced in this Charter.

(2)    Residence - Residence within any territory included in, annexed to, or consolidated with the City is construed to have been residence within the City.

(3)    Shall - Means mandatory.

(4)    May - Means optional.

(5)    Appointive Officer - Means those employees appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Council as established by Charter and by ordinance. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 4 Rights and Powers:

By and in the corporate name, the City shall have perpetual succession and all powers of a First Class city; may sue and be sued in all courts and proceedings; use a corporate seal approved by its legislative body; and, by and through its legislative body, may contract and be contracted with; may purchase, lease, receive, or otherwise acquire real and personal property of every kind, and use, enjoy, hold, lease, control, convey or otherwise dispose of it for the common benefit. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 5 Powers - How Exercised:

All powers of this City, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be exercised by, through and under the direction of a mayor, who shall be the chief executive and administrative officer, and seven council members who shall constitute the City Council (hereafter referred to as Council). The Council shall serve as the legislative body of the City. The Mayor and Council shall be subject to the control and direction of the people at all times by means of the initiative, referendum and recall provided for in this Charter. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE II. Elective Officers


Section 6 Officers - Election - Term - Qualifications:

(1)    Effective until the first day of January 2014, the elective officers of this City shall be eleven in number: The Mayor and Municipal Judge, who shall be elected by majority vote from the City at large, and nine part-time members of Council, who shall be elected by majority vote from each of their respective districts. Effective the first day of January 2014 as set forth in Section 6(2) below, the elective officers of this City shall be reduced from eleven to nine in number: The Mayor and Municipal Judge, who shall be elected by majority vote from the City at large, and seven part-time members of Council, who shall be elected by majority vote from each of their respective districts. No person shall be eligible for election to any City office, unless he or she is a citizen of the United States and has resided in Bremerton for at least one year preceding election, except the Municipal Judge, who need only be a citizen and reside in Kitsap County and licensed to practice law in the State of Washington. No person shall be eligible for the position of council member while holding any other elective public office or otherwise employed by the city. Candidates for Council must also be residents of their respective districts at the time of filing. The Mayor shall continuously reside within the City and Council members shall reside continuously within their district during their elective terms, except as provided in Section 7 of this Charter. Except as set forth in Section 6(2) below, the terms of all elective officers shall commence on the first day in January following their election and shall be for a period of four years until their successors are elected and have qualified.

(2)    Effective the first day of January 2014, the Council members and the Council districts of this City shall be reduced from nine to seven in number. Elections for all Council districts, as redistricted, shall be held in 2013. Council members elected in 2013 to represent districts 1, 3, 5 and 7 as redistricted each shall serve a four year term. Council members elected in 2013 to represent districts 2, 4, and 6 as redistricted each shall serve a two year term. Thereafter municipal elections shall be held biennially and the requisite Council members shall be elected for four year terms. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 7 Change in Districts:

Council may change the boundaries of existing districts by ordinance to make each as equal in population as practicable, so long as redistricting is approved forty-five days before the fourth Monday in July. Except as set forth in Section 6(2) above, no change in the boundaries of districts shall affect the terms of any council members; they shall serve out their terms representing the district for which they were elected even though such change of district boundaries may result in more than one council member residing in the same district. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 8 Compensation - Reimbursement:

(1)    The Mayor’s and Judge’s compensation may be increased during a term of office by ordinance.

(2)    There is hereby created the Bremerton Citizen’s Commission on Council Salaries pursuant to RCW 35.21.015 appointed as provided herein to set the salary of the Council members.

(a)    The Commission shall consist of three (3) members who shall be registered voters and residents of the City of Bremerton. No City officer, official, or employee or immediate family member of any City officer, official or employee shall be eligible for membership on the Commission. As used in this section, "immediate family member" means parents, spouse, siblings, children or dependent relative of the officer, official or employee whether or not living in the household of the officer, official or employee.

(b)    Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of Council.

(c)    Commission members shall be appointed for three year staggered terms of office. Commission members may not be appointed to more than two terms.

(d)    No member shall be removed during his or her term of office unless for cause of incapacity, incompetence, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office or for a disqualifying change of residence.

(e)    Upon a vacancy in any position on the Commission a successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term. The appointment shall be made in the same manner as for original appointments.

(f)    The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their services but shall receive reasonable reimbursement for their expenses in accordance with state law and city ordinance. Staff shall be assigned to the Commission to provide support for its work.

(3)    The Commission authority and responsibility shall be as follows:

(a)    The Commission shall study the relationship of salaries to the duties of the City Council members and shall fix a salary for each such position by an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the commission.

(b)    Except as approved in this section, the Commission shall be solely responsible for its own organization, operation and action and shall enjoy the fullest cooperation of all City officers, officials, departments and employees. The Commission shall have access to all City books, papers, documents and accounts applying or in any way concerning the subject matter of this section.

(c)    The members of the Commission shall elect a chairperson from among their number every two years.

(d)    The Commission shall file any change in its schedule of salaries for the positions of City Council members with the City Clerk by July 1st of the applicable year so as to coincide with the City budget cycle.

(e)    Each schedule shall become effective thirty days after filing with the City Clerk. Salary decreases established by the Commission shall become effective as to incumbent City Council members at the commencement of their next subsequent terms of office. Such schedule shall be subject to referendum in the same manner as provided by Section 34 of this Charter.

(f)    Prior to the filing of any salary schedule the Commission shall hold no fewer than two public hearings thereon within the four months immediately preceding the filing.

(g)    Signature of the chairperson of the Commission shall be affixed on each schedule submitted to the City Clerk.

(4)     The Mayor, Municipal Judge and Council members shall receive reimbursement for their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of their office as provided to City management and professional employees. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 9 Vacancies - Events Creating:

The position of an elected officer shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any of the following events:

(1)    Death.

(2)    Resignation.

(3)    Judicially declared incompetency.

(4)    Failure to maintain residency as required by Charter.

(5)    Failure to qualify within two days after the beginning of term.

(6)    Continuous absence from the City for more than thirty days during a term of office without consent of Council, unless on business of the City.

(7)    Conviction of or plea of guilty to a felony or to a crime involving moral turpitude, or an offense involving the oath of office. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 10 Vacancies - Filling:

(1)    A vacancy in the office of the Mayor or Council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, at the next municipal general election.

Council or the remaining members thereof by majority vote shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the person elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term takes office.

(2)    If, after thirty days have passed since the occurrence of a vacancy, Council is unable to agree upon a person to be appointed to fill a vacancy on Council, the Mayor, shall make the appointment from among the persons nominated by members of Council.

(3)    If at any time the membership of Council is reduced below a quorum, the remaining members, if any, shall appoint the requisite number of qualified persons to create a quorum who will appoint qualified persons to fill the remaining vacancies. The appointees shall serve until persons are elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired terms at the next available special election for partisan offices unless there is an earlier available general election.

(4)    If no council members remain, the Mayor shall appoint qualified persons to temporarily fill the vacancies. The appointees shall serve until persons are elected to fill the remainder of the unexpired terms at the next available special election for partisan offices unless there is an earlier available general election.

(5)    In the event all Council positions and the Mayor’s position become vacant, the Municipal Judge, or the Governor of the State of Washington if the position of Judge is vacant, shall appoint a qualified person as Acting Mayor. The Acting Mayor shall perform, and appointees shall serve, pursuant to subsection four above.

(6)    A vacancy in the office of Municipal Judge shall be filled by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, subject to Council confirmation. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 11 Pro Tempore Appointment:

(1)    Annually at the first meeting of Council, or when needed to fill a vacancy, the members thereof, by majority vote, shall designate one of their number as Council President to serve as Mayor Pro Tempore, to serve at the request of the Mayor, or to fill an unanticipated need in the absence or temporary disability of the Mayor.

(2)    The Mayor Pro Tempore shall perform all duties of the Mayor in the absence or temporary disability of the Mayor, except he or she may only remove appointive officers subject to Council confirmation after the Mayor has been absent for thirty consecutive days, at which time the Mayor Pro Tempore may remove such persons subject to any applicable law, rule, or regulation relating to civil service, with the approval of Council majority plus one.

(3)    The Mayor may appoint qualified persons to serve as Municipal Judge pro tempore pursuant to RCW 3.50.090. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE III. Legislation


Section 12 Powers Vested in Council:

Council shall have power to organize and regulate its internal affairs, to define the functions, power, and duties of the City’s officers and employees; to fix the compensation and working conditions of such officers and employees and establish and maintain civil service or merit systems, retirement and pension systems not in conflict with state law or this Charter. Council may adopt and enforce ordinances relating to and regulating its local or municipal affairs and appropriate to the good of the government of the City, and, pursuant to state law, may impose penalties of fine, or imprisonment, or both, for the violation of such ordinances constituting a misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor as provided therein. Council may provide that violation of such shall constitute a civil violation subject to a monetary penalty. Council shall have all legislative powers possible for a city or town to have under the Constitution of this State. By way of illustration and not in limitation, such powers may be exercised in regard to acquisition, sale, ownership, improvement, maintenance, protection, restoration, regulation, use, leasing, disposition, vacation, abandonment or beautification of public ways, real property of all kinds, waterways, structures, or any other improvement or use of real or personal property. Such powers may be exercised in regard to all aspects of collective bargaining, in the rendering of social, cultural, recreational, educational, governmental, or corporate services, including operating and supplying of utilities and municipal services commonly or conveniently rendered by cities or towns. In addition and not in limitation, Council shall have any authority given to any class of municipality or all municipalities of this state, such authority to be executed in the manner provided, if any, by the granting statute. Within constitutional limitations, Council shall have within the City corporate limits all powers of taxation for local purposes allowed by state law. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 13 Council Meetings - Public Notice of Meeting Agendas:

(1)    Council shall meet regularly, at least once a month, at such times and locations as designated by the Council.

(2)    Council shall meet at a place within the corporate limits of the City, at such times as may be fixed by ordinance or resolution.

(3)    A majority of Council constitutes a quorum.

(4)    Meetings of Council shall be presided over by the member selected as Council President. Appointment of a Council President shall not in any way abridge the President’s right to vote on matters coming before Council at such meetings.

(5)    In the absence of the City Clerk or Deputy Clerk or other qualified person appointed by the Clerk, a council member may perform the duties of Clerk at such meeting while retaining rights to participate and vote during the meeting. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 14 Open Meetings - Requisites:

(1)    All meetings of Council and City boards, commissions and committees shall be open to the public except as excluded by 42.30 RCW or this Charter.

(2)    Conditions for attendance; time and place; procedures for interruption, adjournments, continuances; executive sessions; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations; and prohibition of secret ballots shall be as prescribed within Chapter 42.30 RCW.

(3)    Council, by ordinance, shall establish a procedure for notifying the public of upcoming open meetings and agendas. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 15 Ordinances - Styles - Requisites - Veto:

(1)    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be as follows: "The City of Bremerton does ordain." No ordinance shall contain more than one subject and that must be clearly expressed in its title.

(2)    No ordinance, or any section or subsection thereof, or any municipal code section or subsection, shall be revised or amended, unless the new ordinance sets forth the revised ordinance or the amended section or subsection at full length.

(3)    All legislation and appropriation of money shall be by ordinance, save where there is a special fund created for a particular purpose; payments from such funds shall be made on order of the Council.

(4)    Hearings of ordinances shall be as provided by state law or as designated by Council. Every ordinance shall have one reading except that, upon a request of a Council Member, an ordinance shall have two or more readings unless otherwise directed by the Council. No ordinance shall take effect until at least ten (10) days after publication stated in the ordinance, except as provided below:

(a)    Upon the happening of any non-debatable emergency as enumerated in RCW 35.33.081, Council may adopt an ordinance addressing the emergency or appropriating funds not available in the annual budget to meet it by a vote of one more than the majority of all members of Council, stating the facts constituting the emergency. Such ordinance shall become effective at passage without notice or hearing, but requires subsequent publication in the official newspaper.

(b)    Ordinances addressing public emergencies not specifically enumerated in RCW 35.33.081 or appropriating funds to meet such emergencies which could not have been anticipated in the annual budget, may be appropriated by ordinance declaring an emergency and stating the facts constituting the emergency. Such ordinance shall not be voted on until five days have elapsed after its introduction, and shall require the vote of one more than the majority of all members of Council for passage. Any taxpayer of the City may appear at the meeting at which the emergency ordinance is to be voted on and be heard for or against the adoption of it. The ordinance shall become effective upon passage and publication.

(c)    Initiative ordinances adopted by the voters of the City shall take effect at the time fixed therein or, if no such time is designated within ten (10) days after the official canvass of the ballots pursuant to state law.

(5)    Every ordinance that passes Council in order to become valid must be presented to the Mayor. If approved, it shall be signed, but if not, it shall be returned with written objections to Council who shall cause the objections to be entered on the record and proceed to reconsideration thereof within thirty (30) days of return of the vetoed ordinance. If upon reconsideration, a majority plus one of the whole membership favor its passage, the ordinance shall become valid notwithstanding the Mayor’s veto. The Mayor’s veto with respect to budget measures shall extend to specific items only, and not to the whole budget. If the Mayor fails for ten days to either approve or veto an ordinance, it shall become valid without approval. Ordinances shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 16 Ordinances - Authentication and Recording:

The City Clerk shall authenticate and record in full in a properly indexed book or file kept for the purpose of retaining all ordinances and resolutions adopted by Council. Copies of such shall be available for inspection by the public. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 17 Publication of Ordinances or Summary of Ordinances:

Promptly after adoption, the text of each ordinance or a summary of the content of each ordinance shall be published at least once in the City’s official newspaper except bond ordinances which may be published by title alone. For the purpose of this section, a summary shall mean a brief description which succinctly describes the main points of the ordinance. Publication of a summary shall include notice that the full text is available from the City Clerk. An inadvertent mistake or omission in publishing the text or a summary of the content of an ordinance shall not render the ordinance invalid. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 18 City Auditor:

There shall be an Auditing Committee consisting of two Council members and an independent Certified Public Accountant to be designated by Council, and two Bremerton residents selected by the designated members of the Auditing Committee. The Auditing Committee shall appoint a City Auditor who shall serve at the pleasure of the Committee. The City Auditor shall only be removed by the majority vote of the entire membership of the Committee sitting as a whole. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE IV. Administration


Section 19 Duties and Authority of the Mayor:

The Mayor:

(1)    Shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City in charge of all departments and employees.

(2)    Shall see that all laws and ordinances are faithfully enforced and that law and order are maintained in the City.

(3)    Shall have general supervision of the administration of city government and all city interests.

(4)    Shall see that all contracts and agreements made with the City or for its use and benefit are faithfully kept and performed, and to this end, may cause any legal procedures to be instituted and prosecuted in the name of the City, subject to approval by majority vote of all members of Council.

(5)    Shall report to Council, in a public meeting, concerning the affairs of the City and its financial and other needs, and shall make recommendations for Council consideration and action.

(6)    Shall prepare and submit to Council a proposed budget.

(7)    Shall be the official and ceremonial head of the City and shall represent the City, except that when illness or other duties prevent the Mayor’s attendance at an official function and the Mayor Pro Tempore is unavailable, a member of Council or some other suitable person may be designated by the Mayor to represent the City on such occasion.

(8)    Shall devote full-time, during business hours, to the service of the City and shall not hold any other public office except notary public. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 20 Appointive Officers - Duties - Compensation:

Appointive officers shall be those provided for by City Charter or ordinance and shall include a City Attorney and City Clerk. The office of City Clerk may be merged with any other compatible appointive office. The authority, duties and qualifications of all appointive officers shall be as prescribed by charter, ordinances, or applicable job description. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 21 Appointment and Removal of Appointive Officers and Employees - Terms:

The Mayor shall have the power of appointment and removal of all appointive officers and employees, except the City Auditor, City Attorney, Court employees and Council employees, subject to any applicable law, rule or regulation relating to civil service. Council employees who serve at the pleasure of the Council may only be removed by a majority vote of Council sitting as a whole. The head of a department may be authorized by the Mayor to appoint and remove subordinates in such departments or office, subject to applicable union agreements and any applicable civil service provisions. All appointments of appointive officers and employees shall be made on the basis of ability and training or experience in the duties of the position, and in compliance with provisions of any merit system applicable to the City. Confirmation by Council of appointments of appointive officers shall be required. Appointive officers shall be without a definite term unless a term is established for such office by law or ordinance. The Mayor shall have the sole authority to accept the resignation of any appointive officer. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 22 Oath of Appointive Officers and Employees:

Any appointive officer or employee, before entering upon the performance of his or her duties, may be required to take an oath or affirmation as may be prescribed by ordinance for the faithful performance of his or her duties as a condition of employment. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 23 City Attorney:

(1)    Appointment. The Legal Department of the City shall consist of a City Attorney, and such assistant city attorneys as authorized in the budget. All must be duly licensed attorneys of the State of Washington in accordance with state statute or court rule. The City Attorney shall be a full-time in-house City Attorney appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Council. The City Attorney may be removed by the Mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of Council sitting as a whole, or by Council alone, provided that removal by Council alone shall require a 2/3 vote of the entire Council. The City Attorney may remove assistant city attorneys at his or her pleasure.

(2)    Duties. The City Attorney shall be legal advisor of all officers, commissions, boards and committees of the City and shall bring and prosecute all actions which may be directed by the Mayor or Council, and defend the City in all actions against it and any action in which the City, any past or present employee, officer, board, committee, or commission is a party as a result of acts or omissions in the good faith performance of the city’s business.

(3)    Special Counsel. Council may at any time retain or appoint special counsel for specific assignments. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE V. Finance


Section 24 Organization:

The Mayor shall have charge of finance and shall be responsible for the custody and management of the City assets. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 25 Receipt, Custody, and Disbursement of Funds:

All payments authorized by Council shall be signed by the Mayor and City Clerk. The City Treasurer shall receive and keep all monies due and belonging to the City, and all trust funds held by the City, and shall keep an accurate detailed account of the same in such manner as to show the exact financial condition of the City. The City Treasurer shall, at the close of each month, report to Council all the monies received and disbursed during the month. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 26 Fiscal Year:

The City’s fiscal year shall be the calendar year. The Council may, by ordinance, establish a biennial budget. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 27 Public Utilities:

(1)    The City shall have power to own and operate any public utility and may purchase, construct, condemn or acquire any public utility provided by law, and may make any additions or betterments or extensions of any existing utility, and the provision therefor shall be by ordinance which shall specify and adopt the plan or system proposed and declare the estimated cost thereof. Any ordinance providing for a newly owned and operated utility shall be submitted for ratification or rejection to the qualified voters of the City at a general or special election called for that purpose. Provided, however, that an ordinance providing for the extension, enlargement or improvement of an existing utility shall conform to RCW 35.92.070 and need only be submitted to the voters as required thereby.

(2)    Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to permit the city of Bremerton to sell all or any portion of any of the real property now owned or hereafter acquired for water supply purposes generally known as watersheds, whether or not currently used for water supply purposes, unless a question of such proposed sale shall be approved by a majority plus one of the council membership or shall have been first submitted to the qualified electors of the city by a majority plus one of the council membership at a municipal general or special election and assented to by sixty percent of said electors voting on such question.

(3)    The City shall not sell, lease or dispose of any utility lands, systems or parts thereof essential to continued effective utility service, unless and until such disposal is approved by a majority plus one vote of Council. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE VI. Civil Service


Section 28 Commission, Creation of:

There is hereby established a Civil Service Commission of three members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by Council, and who shall be citizens of the United States, residents of the City for at least one year preceding such appointment. The currently seated members may serve their current terms. The term of office of such commissioners shall be for three years on staggered terms. Any vacancies in the commission shall be filled by the Mayor and approved by Council for the unexpired term. Any member of said commission may be removed from office for incompetency, incompatibility or dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, or other good cause after charges in writing have been preferred, due notice given and a full hearing had in Superior Court unless such hearing is waived in writing. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 29 Commission, Rules and Powers:

(1)    The Commission shall make such rules and regulations for the conduct of its business and to enforce the purposes of this article as shall be necessary and proper.

(2)    The Commission shall provide for the classification of all employees subject to this Article.

(3)    All full time paid employees of the Fire and Police departments of the City shall be included under the provisions of this Article, and all existing provisions of state law pertaining to such employees shall be substantially complied with by the Commission. All other full time employees shall be included under the provisions of this Article unless excluded in Section 31.

(4)    The Commission, among other things, shall provide for open competitive examination as to fitness for an eligibility list from which vacancies shall be filled; for a period of probation before employment is made permanent; and for promotion on the basis of merit, experience, and record. Promotional processing/testing fees shall not be charged.

(5)    Employees within the scope of this Article who are in office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall retain their positions, unless removed for cause.

(6)    The Commission, among other things, shall provide for rules and procedures to ensure employees due process in regard to any proposed disciplinary action. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 30 Civil Service Officer:

The Commission shall provide for the selection of a civil service officer by the Mayor, with Council confirmation who shall also serve as secretary. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 31 Employees included in Civil Service:

(1)    The following employees shall be included in Civil Service:

(a)    All full time paid employees of the Fire and Police departments of the City unless specifically excluded or exempt by the City as may be provided by law.

(b)    All other full time employees not exempt in Section 31(2) below.

(2)     There shall be exempt from the operation of this article the following: elected officials, appointive officers not covered in Section 31(1) above, management and professional employees, all non-salaried members of appointive boards and commissions, and any other employee exempt from the operation of this Article by the Council. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE VII. Boards, Commissions and Committees


Section 32 Member Residency Requirement:

The Mayor shall appoint all boards, commissions and committees established by ordinance or charter, except the Audit Committee, with Council confirmation as required by ordinance. All members of boards, commissions and committees established by ordinance or charter shall be residents of the City for at least one year prior to appointment and eighteen years of age, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Any member of a board, commission and committee established by ordinance or charter who is not a resident of the City at the time this provision takes effect shall serve out the balance of the term for which appointed. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE VIII. Recall, Initiative and Referendum


Section 33 Recall:

The holder of any elective office may be recalled and removed from said office as provided in 29.82 RCW. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 34 Initiative and Referendum:

(1)    The powers of initiative and referendum shall be exercised in the manner set forth in RCW 35.17.240 through 35.17.360.

(2)    No ordinance heretofore or hereafter enacted by vote of the people shall be amended or repealed by the Council unless such amendatory or repealing ordinance shall be submitted to the qualified electors for their approval or rejection in the same manner as is required by this section in respect to the submission of an ordinance initiated or referred. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE IX. Franchises


Section 35 Franchises - Term - Renewal:

No franchise shall ever be granted for a term longer than ten years, excepting upon a majority vote of the electors, and in no event will a franchise be granted for a period longer than fifty years, nor any franchise be renewed or extended until within two years of the expiration thereof. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 36 Franchise - Compensation - Publication:

All franchises shall be granted by ordinance and shall specify plainly the streets or other public places or parts thereof to which they apply, and no franchise shall be provided without provision for proper compensation to the City therefor. Council shall adopt such mode of determining the compensation to be paid by such grantee as it shall determine to be reasonable and just. Every applicant for a franchise shall bear all expenses of advertising and submitting the proposed ordinance, including the expense of election, if any. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 37 Franchise - Council Rights:

The grant of every franchise shall be made expressly subject to the condition that Council shall have the right with respect to any franchise so granted to hear and determine what are just, fair and reasonable rates, fares and charges for public service unless regulated by the State or Federal government, and to order that only reasonable charges shall be imposed; to require reasonable extensions of any public service system; to make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and proper service, and to provide sufficient accommodation for the public; to repeal, amend or modify the same; to cancel, forfeit and abrogate the same if the franchise is not operated or exercised in full accordance with its provisions, or any part thereof, or at all; to acquire by purchase or condemnation upon a majority vote of the electors for the use of the City itself or its inhabitants, the property of the grantee at a fair and just value, which shall not include any valuation of the franchise, which shall thereupon terminate. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 38 Franchise - Transfers:

No franchise shall be transferred, sold or leased without the consent of Council, under such terms and conditions as the Council may impose. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE X. Miscellaneous


Section 39 Legal Continuity:

All ordinances and resolutions consistent with this Charter shall remain in effect until amended or repealed or until they expire by limitation. All rights and obligations in favor of or against the City existing at the time this Charter shall go into effect shall continue without modification. All street and other improvements, all vacations of public streets, alleys or places, all assessments for improvements, all suits and actions in court, all fines and forfeitures and all other matters relating to the City that may have been begun and not completed, shall be completed according to the charter, ordinances and law existing prior to the time this Charter shall go into effect, and all taxes and assessments levied and remaining unpaid when this Charter will go into effect, shall be collected as provided by ordinances and laws existing and in effect at the time same were levied. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 40 Employment Continuity:

Whenever by the provisions of this Charter duties and functions are transferred to a different department, board or office, the employees engaged in the performance of such duties and functions at the time this Charter goes into effect, shall be transferred accordingly and be deemed to have been regularly appointed to the respective positions involved in the performance of such duties and functions, until removed therefrom in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Section 41 Report - Requisites of Claim - Time Limitations:

All claims for damages for personal injuries or for injuries to property sustained by any act of the City or any officer, agent, servant, or employee, must be filed with the City Clerk. All such claims for damages must be in writing and verified and must accurately locate and describe the act causing the injury, describe the injury, giving the residence for six months last past of the claimant and contain the items of damage claimed. No action shall be maintained against the City for a claim for tort damages until the claim has been filed with the City Clerk and the time specified by State Law has elapsed after such presentation. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


ARTICLE XI. Amendments


Section 42 Conform to State Law:

Amendments of this Charter shall follow and conform to the procedures set forth in the State Constitution and Laws of the State of Washington. (Amended by election, 11/8/11)


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    CODE ADOPTION

1.02    CITY BUSINESS HOURS

1.04    CODE ENFORCEMENT

1.06    PUBLIC RECORDS

1.12    PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATIONS


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    CODE ADOPTED.

1.01.020    TITLE - CITATION - REFERENCE.

1.01.030    REFERENCE APPLIES TO AMENDMENTS.

1.01.040    CODIFICATION AUTHORITY.

1.01.050    DEFINITIONS - CONSTRUCTION.

1.01.060    TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.

1.01.070    REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.

1.01.075    CHANGES IN CODE REFERENCES.

1.01.080    EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.

1.01.090    EFFECTIVE DATE.

1.01.100    SEVERABILITY.


1.01.010 CODE ADOPTED.

The Bremerton Municipal Code, as compiled from the ordinances of the city of Bremerton, Washington and edited and published by Book Publishing Company of Seattle, Washington, is adopted as the official code of the city of Bremerton, Washington. (Ord. 2962 §1, 1971).


1.01.020 TITLE - CITATION - REFERENCE.

This code shall be known as the "Bremerton Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Bremerton Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the "Bremerton Municipal Code". Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Bremerton Municipal Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that code. (Ord. 2962 §2, 1971).


1.01.030 REFERENCE APPLIES TO AMENDMENTS.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Bremerton Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Bremerton, Washington that reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter made. (Ord. 2962 §3, 1971).


1.01.040 CODIFICATION AUTHORITY.

This code consists of all of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances codified pursuant to RCW 35.21.500 through 35.21.570. (Ord. 2962 §4, 1971).


1.01.050 DEFINITIONS - CONSTRUCTION.

Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where used in the Municipal Code of the city of Bremerton, Washington shall have the meanings and construction given in this section:

(a)    "Code" means the "Bremerton Municipal Code";

(b)    "City" means the city of Bremerton;

(c)    "City council" means the city council of the city of Bremerton, Washington;

(d)    "County" means the county of Kitsap;

(e)    "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them;

(f)    "State" means the state of Washington;

(g)    "Oath" includes affirmation;

(h)    "Gender". The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter;

(i)    "Number". The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular;

(j)    "Tenses". The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the present tense;

(k)    "Shall, May". "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive;

(l)    "Title of Office". The use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Bremerton;

(m)    "Owner" when pertaining to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such building or land;

(n)    "Street" includes all streets, highways, public roads, county roads, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or other public ways in Bremerton which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state;

(o)    "Tenant or occupant" when pertaining to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others;

(p)    "Goods" includes wares and merchandise;

(q)    "Operate" or "engage in" includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained;

(r)    "Across" includes along, in or upon;

(s)    "Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale;

(t)    "Ex officio" means by virtue of office.

(Ord. 2962 §5, 1971).


1.01.060 TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.

Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 2962 §6, 1971).


1.01.070 REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 2962 §7, 1971).


1.01.075 CHANGES IN CODE REFERENCES.

(a)    All references in this code to commissioner of finance and accounting, commissioner of public works, commissioner of public safety and commissioner shall hereby be deleted and mayor shall be substituted in all such instances.

(b)    All references in this code to city commission or commissioners shall be deleted and council or council members, as appropriate, shall be substituted in all such instances. (Ord. 3766/3819 §§1 and 2, 1982).


1.01.080 EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2962 §8, 1971).


1.01.090 EFFECTIVE DATE.

The Bremerton Municipal Code shall become effective on the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. (Ord. 2962 §9, 1971).


1.01.100 SEVERABILITY.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2962 §10, 1971).


Chapter 1.02 CITY BUSINESS HOURS

Sections:

1.02.010    CITY OFFICE HOURS.

1.02.020    LEGAL HOLIDAYS.


1.02.010 CITY OFFICE HOURS.

City offices, which routinely conduct business with the public, shall be open for the transaction of business between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of each business day from Monday through Friday, unless otherwise posted. These offices shall be closed on Saturday, Sunday and holidays. (Ord. 4889 §1, 2004; Ord. 4384 §1, 1992; Ord. 4374 §2 (in part), 1992. Formerly 2.02.010)


1.02.020 LEGAL HOLIDAYS.

(a)    The following holidays are adopted as legal holidays for the City: The first day of January (New Year’s Day); the third Monday of January (Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Birthday); the third Monday of February (President’s Day); the last Monday of May (Memorial Day); the fourth day of July (Independence Day); the first Monday in September (Labor Day); the eleventh day in November (Veteran’s Day); the fourth Thursday and Friday in November (Thanksgiving holiday); the twenty-fifth day of December (Christmas Day); and any other day designated by public proclamation of the Chief Executive of the State as a legal holiday or as a day of thanksgiving. 

(b)    Whenever a legal holiday falls upon a Sunday, the following Monday shall be a legal holiday, and whenever any legal holiday falls upon a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be a legal holiday. (Ord. 4889 §1, 2004; Ord. 4374 §2 (in part), 1992. Formerly 2.02.020)


Chapter 1.04 CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.04.010    PURPOSE.

1.04.020    DEFINITIONS.

1.04.025    VIOLATION UNLAWFUL - CIVIL VIOLATION - MISDEMEANOR.

1.04.030    VOLUNTARY CORRECTION.

1.04.040    NOTICE OF CIVIL VIOLATION.

1.04.050    STOP WORK ORDER.

1.04.060    CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.

1.04.065    NOTICE TO VACATE.

1.04.070    REMOVAL OF STOP WORK, CEASE AND DESIST ORDER, OR NOTICE TO VACATE - MISDEMEANOR.

1.04.080    HEARING BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER.

1.04.090    VIOLATIONS - MONETARY PENALTY AND COSTS.

1.04.100    JOINT AND SEVERAL RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.

1.04.110    ABATEMENT.

1.04.120    COSTS OF ABATEMENT - LIEN.

1.04.130    COLLECTION OF PENALTIES AND COSTS.

1.04.140    CONFLICTING CODE PROVISIONS.

1.04.150    DUTY NOT CREATING LIABILITY.


1.04.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish an efficient system to enforce regulations of the City, providing an opportunity for a prompt hearing and decision on alleged violations and establishing penalties for violations. This chapter shall apply to all regulations as defined in BMC 1.04.020(o); provided, that a violation of any such regulation that provides for criminal penalties in addition to or as an alternative to enforcement under this chapter may, at the discretion of the City, be prosecuted as a criminal violation pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.020 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

(a)    "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition that constitutes a civil violation by such means, in such manner, and to such an extent as the code enforcement officer or the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

(b)    "Act" means doing or performing something.

(c)    "Administrative Hearing Examiner" means the Administrative Hearing Examiner and the office thereof established pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC.

(d)    "City" means City of Bremerton.

(e)    "Civil violation" or "violation" means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in subsection (m) of this section. A violation continues to exist until abated and each day, or a portion thereof, that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

(f)    "Code enforcement officer" means any person or persons authorized by statute, ordinance, regulation, written City policy, or interlocal agreement, or designated by the Mayor or his or her designee, to enforce any of the regulations subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this chapter, and shall expressly include the City’s code enforcement officers; the City Attorney, or his or her designee; the Chief of the Bremerton Police Department, or his or her designee; the Director of the Department of Community Development, or his or her designee; the Director of the Department of Public Works and Utilities, or his or her designee; building inspectors; construction inspectors; the Chief of the Bremerton Fire Department, or his or her designee; Fire Code Official, and fire inspectors.

(g)    "Costs of abatement" means the costs of any abatement action taken by the City to abate the violation using lawful means in the event that the person responsible for the violation fails so to do. The term includes incidental expenses including, but not limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect and including attorney’s fees; costs incurred in documenting the violation; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and actual costs and expenses of the City in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work; the costs of any required printing and mailing; and costs of enforcement.

(h)    "Costs" or "costs of enforcement" means costs incurred related to enforcement under this chapter, including but not limited to costs of service of notice, costs of the hearing, administrative costs established by resolution for enforcement of garbage and refuse and nuisance vegetation violations, as well as other administrative costs.

(i)    "Day" or "days," as used in this chapter, shall mean calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.

(j)    "Notice of violation" or "notice of civil violation" means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, which contains the information required under BMC 1.04.040, and which notifies a person that he or she is responsible for one (1) or more violations of the Bremerton City Code.

(k)    "Omission" means a failure to act.

(l)    "Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any entity, public or private.

(m)    "Person responsible for the violation" or "person who violates" means, unless otherwise defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to the regulation, an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject to the regulation, a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to the regulation and/or any person who created the violation or any person who has control over the property and allows the violation to continue.

(n)    "Property" or "premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and parking strips and any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetland.

(o)    "Regulation" means and includes the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:

1.    All Bremerton City Code provisions making reference to this chapter;

2.    All standards, regulations and procedures adopted by the City that make reference to this chapter; and

3.    The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City, or any concomitant agreement with the City, pursuant to code provisions that make reference to this chapter.

(p)    "Repeat violation" means two (2) or more violations of the same regulation in any location by the same person for which voluntary compliance previously has been sought within two (2) years or for which a notice of civil violation has been issued within two (2) years.

(q)    "Violation" or "civil violation" means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in subsection (o) of this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the City, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.025 VIOLATION UNLAWFUL - CIVIL VIOLATION - MISDEMEANOR.

(a)    The violation of any regulation, the commission of a subsequent violation or the failure or refusal to abate a violation pursuant to an order of the Administrative Hearing Examiner after receipt of written notice of such order shall be unlawful and shall constitute a civil violation subject to enforcement before the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 1.04.080.

In lieu of and as an alternative to a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner, the City Attorney, or designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek enforcement of a notice of violation issued pursuant to BMC 1.04.040, abatement of the violation pursuant to BMC 1.04.110 and assessment and collection of penalties, costs and abatement as provided for in this chapter.

(b)    In addition any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). The City Attorney, or designee, shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file a violation as either a civil violation pursuant to this chapter, or as a criminal misdemeanor. All criminal misdemeanor charges filed under this chapter shall be filed with the Bremerton municipal court. When the City files criminal misdemeanor charges pursuant to this chapter, the City shall have the burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the violation occurred.

(c)    The provisions of this chapter are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to or in conjunction with other enforcement and penalty provisions authorized by the Bremerton City Code or state law. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011)


1.04.030 VOLUNTARY CORRECTION.

(a)    Applicability. The provisions of this section may be utilized whenever the code enforcement officer or Administrative Hearing Examiner determines that a violation of a regulation has occurred or is occurring.

(b)    General. Prior to the issuance of a notice of violation, the code enforcement officer may, at his or her discretion, attempt to secure the voluntary correction of a violation of a regulation by contacting the person responsible for the violation, explaining the violation, and requesting correction. The failure of the code enforcement officer to seek voluntary correction shall not invalidate any code enforcement action taken by the code enforcement officer or the City of Bremerton.

(c)    Issuance of Voluntary Correction Agreement. A voluntary correction agreement may be entered into between the person responsible for the violation and the City, acting through the code enforcement officer.

(d)    Content of Agreement. The voluntary correction agreement is a contract between the City and the person responsible for the violation under which that person agrees to abate the violation within a specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall include the following:

1.    The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and

2.    The street address or a description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3.    A description of the violation and a reference to the regulations which have been violated; and

4.    An acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the violation described in the correction agreement exists; and

5.    The necessary corrective action to be taken, the date or time by which correction must be completed, and an acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that he or she will correct the violation within the time specified in the voluntary correction agreement; and

6.    Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may inspect the premises as may be necessary, during reasonable times, to determine compliance with the voluntary correction agreement; and

7.    Acknowledgement by the person responsible for the violation that the City may abate the violation and recover its costs and expenses of enforcement and abatement and/or a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter from the person responsible for the violation if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met; and

8.    The time and place for a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner in the event that the alleged violation is not abated by the person responsible for the violation.

(e)    Extension - Modification. An extension of the time limit for correction or a modification of the required corrective action may be granted by the code enforcement officer if the person responsible for the violation has shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting the violation but unforeseen circumstances render correction under the original conditions unattainable.

(f)    Abatement by the City. In addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter, the City may seek abatement of the violation in accordance with BMC 1.04.110 if the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met.

(g)    Penalties and Costs. If the terms of the voluntary correction agreement are not met, the person responsible for the violation may be assessed a monetary penalty plus all costs of enforcement pursuant to BMC 1.04.090 and costs of abatement pursuant to BMC 1.04.110. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.040 NOTICE OF CIVIL VIOLATION.

(a)    Issuance of Notice of Violation. When the code enforcement officer determines that a violation has occurred or is occurring, and does not secure voluntary correction pursuant to BMC 1.04.030, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of civil violation to the person responsible for the violation.

(b)    Content of Notice. The notice of civil violation shall include the following:

1.    The name and address of the person responsible for the violation; and

2.    The street address or description sufficient for identification of the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the violation has occurred or is occurring; and

3.    A description of the violation and a reference to the code provisions and regulations that have been violated; and

4.    The required corrective action and the date and time by which the corrective action must be completed; and

5.    The date, time and location of a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner; and

6.    A statement indicating that the hearing will be canceled and no monetary penalty will be assessed if the code enforcement officer approves the completed, required corrective action by the date and time requested in the notice; and

7.    A statement that the costs and expenses of enforcement incurred by the City and a monetary penalty in an amount per day for each violation pursuant to BMC 1.04.090 and costs of abatement pursuant to BMC 1.04.110 may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed as specified and ordered by the Administrative Hearing Examiner; and

8.    A statement that the failure to attend the hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner may result in a default judgment against the person responsible for the violation, whereby the Administrative Hearing Examiner may enter judgment in favor of the City, assess penalties and costs against the person responsible for the violation, and order the abatement of the violation at the expense of the person responsible for the violation.

(c)    Extension. Extensions of the time specified in the notice of civil violation for correction of the violation may be granted at the discretion of the code enforcement officer; the City Attorney, or his or her designee; or by order of the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(d)    Service of Notice. The code enforcement officer shall serve or cause to be served the notice of civil violation upon the person responsible for the violation by personal service pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this section, or by mail pursuant to subsection (e)(2) of this section. If the person responsible for the violation cannot be reasonably personally served within the City and if an address for mailed service cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the notice of civil violation conspicuously on the affected property or structure pursuant to subsection (e)(3) of this section and/or publication pursuant to subsection (e)(4) of this section.

(e)    Methods of Service Defined. The methods of service of notice as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

1.    Personal Service. Personal service on the person responsible for the violation shall mean handing the notice to the person responsible for the violation or leaving it at his or her dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or leaving it at his or her office or place of employment with a person in charge thereof. Personal service shall also be deemed complete when the hearing examiner or his or her assistant hands any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing; or

2.    Mailing. Service by mail shall mean sending the document by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person subject to the document. The last known address shall be an address provided to the City by the person to whom the document is directed; if an address has not been provided to the City, the last known address shall be any of the following as they appear at the time the document is mailed: the address of the property where the violation is occurring, as reflected on the most recent equalized tax assessment roll of the county assessor, or the taxpayer address appearing for the property on the official property tax information website for Kitsap County; the address appearing in any database used for the payment of utilities for the property at which the violations are occurring; the address appearing in any database for the application for a business license or building permit for the property at which the violations are occurring; or the address of the person to whom the documents are being sent that appears in the Washington State Department of Licensing database. Where service of the notice of violation is by mail, service shall be deemed complete upon the third day following the day upon which they are placed in the mail, unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event service shall be deemed complete on the first day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday following the third day; or

3.    Posting. Posting shall mean posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property; or

4.    Publication. Publication of notice shall mean publication as set forth in RCW 4.28.100 and 4.28.110, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

(f)    Proof of Service. Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by which the service was made, and if by posting and/or publication in lieu of personal service or mail, the facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to serve the person personally or by mail.

(g)    Additional Proof of Service Not Necessary. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall not require additional proof of service beyond the requirements in this chapter. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.050 STOP WORK ORDER.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a stop work order whenever a violation of a regulation will materially impair the code enforcement officer’s ability to secure compliance, or when a violation of the regulation threatens the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public or occupants of the property. The stop work order shall contain substantially the same information as required by BMC 1.04.040(b) and may be appended to, or incorporated by reference in, a notice of violation. Notice of the stop work order shall be deemed served upon posting of the notice as required by BMC 1.04.040(e)(3), and shall be effective upon service. The violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.060 CEASE AND DESIST ORDER.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a cease and desist order whenever a violation of a regulation threatens the health, safety, or welfare of any member of the public or occupants of the property. The cease and desist order shall contain substantially the same information as required by BMC 1.04.040(b), and may be appended to, or incorporated by reference in, a notice of violation. Notice of the cease and desist order shall be deemed served upon posting of the notice as required by BMC 1.04.040(e)(3), and shall be effective upon service. The violation of a cease and desist order shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.065 NOTICE TO VACATE.

In addition to any remedy provided for in this chapter, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice to vacate whenever a violation of a regulation results in a condition as to make it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property or safety of the public or occupants of the property. The notice to vacate shall contain substantially the same information as required by BMC 1.04.040(b), and may be appended to, or incorporated by reference in, a notice of violation. Notice of the notice to vacate shall be deemed served upon posting of the notice as required by BMC 1.04.040(e)(3), and shall be effective upon service. The violation of a notice to vacate shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.070 REMOVAL OF STOP WORK, CEASE AND DESIST ORDER, OR NOTICE TO VACATE - MISDEMEANOR.

The removal of a stop work order or cease and desist order posted in conformity with the requirements of BMC 1.04.050 or 1.04.060, without the authorization of the code enforcement officer or Administrative Hearing Examiner, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than ninety (90) days, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.080 HEARING BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER.

(a)    Notice. A person to whom a notice of civil violation is issued will be scheduled to appear before the Administrative Hearing Examiner not less than ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the notice of violation or entrance into a voluntary correction agreement. In the event that the hearing is held after the person responsible for the violation enters a voluntary correction agreement, the date of the hearing shall be the date specified in the voluntary correction agreement. An extension of the time for compliance with the correction requirements of a notice of violation or a voluntary correction agreement, as well as the date and time for a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner, may be granted at the discretion of the code enforcement officer; the City Attorney, or his or her designee; or the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(b)    Prior Correction of Violation. The hearing will be canceled and no monetary penalty will be assessed if the code enforcement officer or the City Attorney, or his or her designee, approves the completed corrective action by the date and time requested in the notice.

(c)    Procedure. Except as otherwise provided for herein, the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall conduct a hearing on the civil violation pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. The City and the person to whom the notice of civil violation was directed may participate in the hearing and each party, or its legal representatives, may call witnesses and present evidence. The City shall have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation has occurred and that the corrective action required by the code enforcement officer is reasonably calculated to correct the violation. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to any such hearing.

(d)    Decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

1.    In the event that the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines that a violation occurred or is occurring, the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall issue an order to the person responsible for the violation which contains the following information:

a.    The decision regarding the alleged violation including findings and conclusions based thereon in support of the decision;

b.    The required corrective action;

c.    The date and time by which the correction must be completed;

d.    The monetary penalties and costs of enforcement, if any, assessed pursuant to BMC 1.04.090 and costs of abatement, if any, assessed pursuant to BMC 1.04.110;

e.    The date and time after which the City may proceed with abatement of the unlawful condition if the required correction is not completed.

(e)    Notice of Decision. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall issue his or her decision within ten (10) working days of the hearing, unless the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines that more time is necessary. The decision shall be mailed by first class or electronic mail or hand-delivered to the person to whom the notice of violation was issued and to the code enforcement officer.

(f)    Failure to Appear. If the person to whom the notice of civil violation was issued fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, the Administrative Hearing Examiner may issue at the City’s request, or upon his or her own ruling, an order of default, assess the appropriate penalty and costs pursuant to BMC 1.04.090 and order abatement of the violation at the expense of the person responsible for the violation. The City may serve notice of the default and penalty and cost assessment on the person responsible for the violation and enforce the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s order and recover all costs of abatement, related costs of enforcement, including the cost of the hearing, and any monetary penalty from that person. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the default order, the party against whom it was entered may file a written motion requesting that the order be vacated. The Administrative Hearing Examiner may, at his or her discretion, based upon a showing of good cause, vacate the order of default and schedule the matter for hearing. In the event that the default order is vacated, the person against whom it was entered shall pay all costs attributable to his or her failure to appear.

(g)    Motion for Reconsideration. A motion for reconsideration of the decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner may be filed pursuant to BMC 2.13.120.

(h)    Appeal to Superior Court. An appeal of the decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner must be filed with the Superior Court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the issuance of the decision. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.090 VIOLATIONS - MONETARY PENALTY AND COSTS.

(a)    Assessment of Monetary Penalty. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, upon finding that a violation of a regulation has occurred, assess a monetary penalty in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day, or a portion thereof, that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense for which a monetary penalty may be assessed. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall have the discretion to assess a lesser amount per day if he or she believes the situation warrants such. The monetary penalty shall, at the discretion of the Administrative Hearing Examiner, be assessed as of:

1.    The date of the issuance of the notice of civil violation; or

2.    The date on which the matter was heard by the Administrative Hearing Examiner; or

3.    The date upon which the person responsible for the violation is or was to have corrected the violation.

(b)    Costs. In addition, the Administrative Hearing Examiner may assess costs of enforcement as defined in BMC 1.04.020(h) and costs of abatement as defined in BMC 1.04.020(g).

(c)    Modification of Monetary Penalty. Upon a finding that the person responsible for the violation will correct the violation within a reasonable time of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Examiner may postpone the assessment of the monetary penalty for a reasonable period. If, prior to the expiration of the period of postponement, the code enforcement officer or the City Attorney or his or her designee is satisfied that the violation has been corrected, the Administrative Hearing Examiner or the City Attorney may relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to pay all or a portion of the monetary penalty. If, after the period of postponement, the violation has not been corrected, the penalties assessed against the person responsible for the violation shall be assessed from the date of the violation, and payment shall be due.

(d)    Monetary Penalty for Repeat Violations. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, upon finding that a repeat violation as defined in BMC 1.04.020(n) has occurred, assess a monetary penalty in an amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) for each repeat violation, per day, or a portion thereof. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall have the discretion to assess a lesser amount per day if he or she believes the situation warrants such.

(e)    Collection of Costs and Monetary Penalties. The costs and monetary penalties assessed pursuant to this section constitute a personal obligation of the person to whom the notice of civil violation is directed or the person responsible for the violation. Any costs or monetary penalties assessed must be paid to the City within ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s decision or a notice from the City that costs or penalties are due. The City Attorney, or his or her designee, is authorized to take legal action to collect the costs or monetary penalties including filing civil actions or turning the matter over to collection pursuant to BMC 1.04.130.

(f)    Continued Duty to Correct. Payment of a monetary penalty pursuant to this chapter does not relieve the person responsible for the violation of the duty to correct the violation. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.100 JOINT AND SEVERAL RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.

Responsibility for violations of the codes enforced under this chapter is joint and several, and the City is not prohibited from taking action against a party where other persons may also be potentially responsible for a violation, nor is the City required to take action against all persons potentially responsible for a violation. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.110 ABATEMENT.

(a)    In General. At the hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner, the code enforcement officer or the City Attorney or his or her designee may request that an order of abatement issue in the event that the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines that a violation of a regulation exists. The order of abatement shall require the person responsible for the violation to abate the violation and permit the City to abate the violation using lawful means in the event that the person responsible for the violation fails so to do. The City may seek such judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition causing the violation.

(b)    Abatement by the City. The City may abate a condition which was caused by or continues to be a civil violation when:

1.    The terms of voluntary correction agreement pursuant to BMC 1.04.030 have not been met; or

2.    A notice of civil violation has been issued pursuant to BMC 1.04.040 and (a) a hearing has been held pursuant to BMC 1.04.080 and the required correction has not been completed by the date specified in the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s order or (b) a hearing has been held by a court of competent jurisdiction and the required correction has not been completed by the date specified in the court’s order; or

3.    The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in subsection (c) of this section.

(c)    Summary Abatement. Whenever any nuisance causes a condition the continued existence of which constitutes an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment, the City may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the person responsible for the violation as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement. No right of action shall lie against the City or its agents, officers, or employees for actions reasonably taken to prevent or cure any such immediate threats, but neither shall the City be entitled to recover any costs incurred for summary abatement prior to the time that actual notice of same is provided to the person responsible for the violation.

(d)    Authorized Action by the City. Using any lawful means, the City may enter upon the subject property and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The City may seek such judicial process as it deems necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.

(e)    Interference. Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the City or its agents, or with the person responsible for the violation in the performance of duties imposed by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days and a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000).

(f)    Other Abatement Proceedings Not Precluded. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from pursuing abatement pursuant to any other laws of the State of Washington or the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.120 COSTS OF ABATEMENT - LIEN.

(a)    Costs of Abatement. The costs and incidental expenses of any abatement action taken by the City as defined in BMC 1.04.020(g), including costs of enforcement set forth in BMC 1.04.020(h), shall become a charge to the person responsible for the violation. These charges may be assessed against the person responsible for the violation or the property upon which the violation occurred. Costs of abatement must be paid to the City within ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of notice from the City that the costs are due. The City may use any lawful means to collect charges, including but not limited to those set forth in BMC 1.04.130. The City Attorney, or his or her designee, is authorized to take legal action to collect the costs of any abatement. All such costs and expenses shall constitute a lien against the affected property, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section.

(b)    Lien - Authorized.

1.    Account of Expense. The code enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of expense incurred for the cost of abatement of property. Upon completion of the work, the code enforcement officer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the itemized total cost of the work, including administrative charge, a description of the property abated, and the name and addresses of the owner or agent, and occupant or tenant if known.

2.    Report Transmitted to Council. Upon receipt of the report, the City Clerk shall present it to Council for consideration. The Council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any protests or objections thereto. The City Clerk shall cause notice of said hearing to be posted upon the property involved, and served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or agent of the owner, and occupant or tenant if known. If the tenant or occupant is not known, notice shall be sent by first class mail to the occupant of the residence subject to the abatement. Such notice will be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing and shall specify the date, hour and place when the Council will hear and pass upon the code enforcement officer report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed as hereinafter provided by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge. Notice of the hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Bremerton when required by law.

3.    Protests and Objections. Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the City Clerk prior to the hearing. Each protest must state the grounds of such protest or objection. The Clerk shall present such protests and objections to the Council at the time of the hearing and no other protests or objections will be considered.

4.    Hearing. The Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the code enforcement officer, together with objections and protests. The Council may revise or modify the report as it may deem just. When the Council is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the report, together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. The decision of the Council on the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive.

(c)    Assessment against Property. The City shall have a lien for the costs and incidental expenses of any abatement as defined in BMC 1.04.020(g), for the cost of any abatement action taken by the City, under this chapter, against the real property on which the work of abatement was performed as follows:

1.    Unfit Structures. Liens established as the result of violations of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted pursuant to BMC 17.04.020 and amended pursuant to BMC 17.04.110 (the "IPMC") shall be assessed pursuant to the IPMC as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. 

2.    Garbage. Liens for garbage and rubbish abatement shall be assessed against the subject property pursuant to RCW 35.21.140 and 35.21.150 and shall be prior to all liens filed subsequent to the filing of the notice of lien with the County Auditor, except liens of general taxes and local improvements.

3.    Nuisance Vegetation. Liens for nuisance vegetation abatement, when initiated by City Council resolution, whether or not enforced in conjunction with a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 1.04.080, shall be assessed against the subject property pursuant to RCW 35.21.310 and shall be enforced and foreclosed in the manner as provided by law for liens for labor and materials.

4.    Other. Other liens shall be assessed against the subject property as authorized by law or court order.

(d)    For any unfit dwelling, building, structure or premises abated pursuant to Chapter 6.12 BMC, the recovery of costs and expenses for such abatement shall be processed and assessed pursuant to BMC 6.12.100 and the provisions of this section shall not be applicable. (Ord. 5346 §3, 2018: Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.130 COLLECTION OF PENALTIES AND COSTS.

(a)    Collection. In addition to or in lieu of the provisions set forth in this chapter, the City may, at its option, turn the matter over to collection or commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect costs and expenses of enforcement, costs of abatement incurred by the City to obtain compliance pursuant to this chapter and/or to collect any penalties that have been assessed. Further, the City Administration, upon concurrence of the City Attorney, may file for injunctive or other civil relief in Superior Court regarding code violations.

(b)    Collection of Monetary Penalty - Use of Collection Agency. The City is authorized to take legal action to collect the monetary penalty. Pursuant to Chapter 19.16 RCW, as currently enacted or hereafter amended, the City may, at its discretion, use a collection agency for the purposes of collecting penalties and costs assessed pursuant to this chapter. The collection agency may add fees or interest charges to the original amount assigned to collections as allowed by law. No debt may be assigned to a collection agency until at least thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed from the time that the City attempts to notify the person responsible for the debt of the existence of the debt and that the debt may be assigned to a collection agency for collection if the debt is not paid. Notice of potential assignment to collections shall be made by regular first class mail to the last known address of the person responsible for the violation; provided, inability to ascertain a current mailing address shall not prohibit the debt from being assigned to collections. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002)


1.04.140 CONFLICTING CODE PROVISIONS.

In the event a conflict exists between the enforcement provisions of this chapter and the enforcement provisions of any uniform code, statute, or regulation that is adopted in the Bremerton City Code that are subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter, the enforcement provisions of this chapter will prevail, unless the enforcement provisions of this chapter are preempted or specifically modified by said code, statute, or regulation. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 1.04.150)


1.04.150 DUTY NOT CREATING LIABILITY.

No provision or term used in this title is intended to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action. (Ord. 5148 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4819, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 1.04.160)


Chapter 1.06 PUBLIC RECORDS

Sections:

1.06.010    AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.

1.06.020    PUBLIC RECORDS OFFICER.

1.06.030    SCOPE OF RULES AUTHORIZED.

1.06.040    AUTHORITY TO AMEND RULES.

1.06.050    AUTHORITY TO PUBLISH RULES.

1.06.060    COSTS OF PROVIDING PUBLIC RECORDS.

1.06.070    INTERPRETATION OF RULES.

1.06.080    REVIEW OF DENIAL OF REQUEST.

1.06.090    OPT OUT OF INDEX OF RECORDS.

1.06.110    RETURN OR TAX INFORMATION.


1.06.010 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.

(a)    The Washington State Public Records Act (the Act) requires public agencies such as Bremerton to make nonexempt "public records" available for inspection and copying in accordance with published rules. The Act defines "public records" to include any "writing containing information relating to the conduct of government or the performance of any governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used, or retained" by the agency.

(b)    The City Clerk is hereby authorized to establish and publish Bremerton Public Records Act rules to provide the public with full access to public records consistent with the Act. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006)


1.06.020 PUBLIC RECORDS OFFICER.

The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall be the Public Records Officer for the City and is authorized to establish and implement policies and procedures for responding to requests for public records. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006)


1.06.030 SCOPE OF RULES AUTHORIZED.

As required by law or to the extent deemed necessary or appropriate, the Bremerton Public Records Act rules will contain:

(a)    A description of Bremerton City services, the Public Records Officer’s contact information, the hours and location for inspection of public records and the Public Records Officer’s responsibilities under the Public Records Act;

(b)    The procedure for making, responding to, inspecting and copying records requests; protecting records from damage or disorganization; preventing excess interference with Bremerton’s other essential functions; protecting the rights of others; providing "fullest assistance" to requestors and timely action on public records requests;

(c)    For informational purposes, a list of laws in addition to the Act that exempts or prohibits the disclosure of public records held by Bremerton;

(d)    Definitions as necessary or appropriate related to the Act. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006)


1.06.040 AUTHORITY TO AMEND RULES.

The City Clerk shall have the authority to amend the Bremerton Public Records Act rules as necessary or appropriate to conform to laws or, as appropriate, to enhance services to the public, protect privacy, and/or increase efficiency in administering the Act to the fullest extent permitted by law. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006)


1.06.050 AUTHORITY TO PUBLISH RULES.

The Public Records Officer shall make the Bremerton Public Records Act rules readily available to the public in electronic and paper mediums. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006)


1.06.060 COSTS OF PROVIDING PUBLIC RECORDS.

(a)    Fees for Records. The fees for the costs of duplication and production of copies, whether photocopying or other form of duplication, including, but not limited to, electronic copies of records, shall be as established in Chapter 3.01 BMC, Rate Table A. If the requested record is an eight and one-half (8-1/2) by fourteen (14) inch page or smaller, the first fifty (50) pages responsive to a request are free of charge. In addition to these fees, each department may:

(1)    Establish fees for records that do not fall into one (1) of the categories set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC, Rate Table A. The department’s fee schedule shall be available for inspection upon request. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006. Formerly 1.06.090)


1.06.070 INTERPRETATION OF RULES.

The Act and the rules will be liberally construed consistent with the Act’s intent and case law, including in favor of disclosure as provided by law. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006. Formerly 1.06.100)


1.06.080 REVIEW OF DENIAL OF REQUEST.

The Bremerton Public Records Act rules shall provide for obtaining internal administrative review of denials, in whole or part, of public records requests. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009)


1.06.090 OPT OUT OF INDEX OF RECORDS.

(a)    Findings.

(1)    RCW 42.56.070 requires all cities and public agencies to maintain and make available a current index of all public records.

(2)    RCW 42.56.070(4)(a) provides that if maintaining such an index would be unduly burdensome, or would interfere with agency operation, a City need not maintain such an index but it must issue and publish a formal order specifying the reasons why and the extent to which compliance would be unduly burdensome.

(3)    The City of Bremerton is comprised of departments, their divisions and subdivisions, which maintain separate databases and/or record-keeping systems for the indexing of records and information.

(4)    Because the City has records which are diverse, complex and stored in multiple locations and in multiple computer systems and databases, it is unduly burdensome, if not physically impossible, to maintain a central index of records.

(5)    The City of Bremerton will make available for inspection and/or copying all nonexempt public records, including any indexes that are maintained by the City pursuant to the Public Disclosure Act, Chapter 42.56 RCW.

(b)    Order Regarding Public Records. Based upon the findings set forth in subsection (a) of this section, and pursuant to RCW 42.56.070(4)(a), the City Council orders the following:

(1)    The City of Bremerton is not required to maintain a current index of public records due to findings of the City Council that the requirement is unduly burdensome and such a list is nearly impossible to create and/or maintain; and

(2)    Pursuant to Chapter 42.56 RCW, the City of Bremerton shall make available for public inspection and/or copying all public records and any indexes of public records maintained by the City to the extent not exempt from inspection and/or copying pursuant to Chapter 42.56 RCW or other applicable law. (Ord. 5080 §1 (part), 2009: Ord. 4964 §1 (in part), 2006. Formerly 1.06.110)


1.06.110 RETURN OR TAX INFORMATION. 

Business and occupation return and/or tax information is confidential, privileged and subject to disclosure in the manner provided by RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 5193 §1, 2012)


Chapter 1.12 PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATIONS

Sections:

1.12.010    TYPES OF VIOLATIONS.

1.12.020    PENALTIES.

1.12.030    ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

1.12.040    FAILURE TO APPEAR, CRIMINAL CASES.

1.12.045    FAILURE TO PAY FINES.

1.12.050    OTHER REMEDIES.


1.12.010 TYPES OF VIOLATIONS.

1.    Every act, or failure to act, that is contrary to this Code shall be a Code violation. Code violations shall be civil infractions or criminal misdemeanors and gross misdemeanors, as established by the respective Code provisions. Any violation not otherwise designated shall constitute a criminal misdemeanor. If a Code provision so provides, a violation may be cited as either criminal or civil at the discretion of the enforcement officer.

2.    Criminal violations shall be charged by the City Prosecutor and processed in the Municipal Court pursuant to the Criminal Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (CrRLJ).

3.    Civil violation cases shall be initiated either: (a) by a Notice of Infraction issued, served, and filed by either the enforcement officer or the City Prosecutor or City Attorney, or (b) by a Complaint filed by either the City Prosecutor or City Attorney. Civil violations shall be processed in the Municipal Court pursuant to RCW Chapter 7.80, so far as it is not inconsistent with this Chapter, and pursuant to the Infraction Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (IRLJ), so far as they are not inconsistent with this Chapter and with RCW Chapter 7.80.

4.    Each day a violation continues shall be a separate violation and may be cited, complained of, or charged as such.

5.    The Municipal Court shall have the authority to adopt such local rules it deems necessary to process cases pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 4748, Amended, 01/19/2001; Ord. 4652, Repealed & Replaced, 06/21/1999)


1.12.020 PENALTIES.

1.    Gross Misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a gross misdemeanor shall, unless otherwise specified, be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000.00 or by confinement in jail for a term not to exceed one year or by both such fine and confinement.

2.    Misdemeanor. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor shall, unless otherwise specified, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and confinement.

3.    Civil Infraction. Unless otherwise specified, a civil infraction is punishable by a maximum penalty of $1,000.00 not including statutory assessments, with the actual amount of the penalty up to the maximum being with the discretion of the court. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 4652, Repealed & Replaced, 06/21/1999)


1.12.030 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

1.    General authority law enforcement officers of the Bremerton Police Department are enforcement officers with respect to all provisions of this Code.

2.    Additional enforcement officers may be designated by Code provision. (Ord. 4652, Repealed & Replaced, 06/21/1999)


1.12.040 FAILURE TO APPEAR, CRIMINAL CASES.

If the Municipal Court issues a bench warrant pursuant to CrRLJ 2.5, the act or failure to act that caused such issuance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. 4652, Repealed & Replaced, 06/21/1999)


1.12.045 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.

In addition to any statutory penalties there shall be a penalty of $50.00 for failure to pay fines imposed herein. (Ord. 4730, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4677, Added, 12/11/1999)


1.12.050 OTHER REMEDIES.

Nothing in this Chapter shall preclude the City from pursuing other forms of enforcement and relief, including civil damages, abatement, and injunction. (Ord. 4652, Repealed & Replaced, 06/21/1999)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.01    ELECTED OFFICIALS - PERS

2.02    CITY COUNCIL

2.03    MAYOR

2.05    DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS

2.06    OFFICE OF CITY ATTORNEY

2.07    OFFICE OF CITY CLERK

2.09    DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

2.10    DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES

2.11    OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES

2.12    PLANNING COMMISSION

2.13    ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER

2.14    INVESTMENT COMMITTEE

2.15    DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

2.16    FIRE DEPARTMENT

2.17    PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT

2.18    AUDIT COMMITTEE AND CITY AUDITOR

2.19    POLICE DEPARTMENT

2.20    BONDS FOR OFFICERS

2.26    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION

2.28    EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM

2.30    CIVIL SERVICE

2.32    ARTS COMMISSION

2.36    DESIGN REVIEW BOARD

2.38    LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.40    PUBLIC ACCESS CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.46    EMPLOYEE AWARD PROGRAM

2.48    EMPLOYEES IN MILITARY

2.50    MANAGEMENT AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF COMPENSATION PROGRAM

2.62    BREMERTON MUNICIPAL COURT

2.74    TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION AND EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT

2.76    PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL CODE

2.78    REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS

2.82    NAMING OF PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES

2.88    ADA ADVISORY COMMITTEE

2.90    INDEMNITY OF PERSONNEL

2.92    OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT

2.96    CODE OF ETHICS

2.98    BREMERTON RESERVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES


Chapter 2.01 ELECTED OFFICIALS - PERS

Sections:

2.01.010    PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM - ELECTED OFFICIALS.


2.01.010 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM - ELECTED OFFICIALS.

The City Council hereby exercises its discretion, as authorized pursuant to RCW 41.40.023 and WAC 415-108-550, to pay employer contributions and interest thereon on established Public Employees Retirement System (PERS) accounts of qualified City elected officials. A qualified City elected official making application for and having established membership in PERS during his or her term of office, and having elected to establish service credit retroactive to the first day of any previous elected term or terms of office, shall be entitled to employer contributions, plus interest, payable by the City, pursuant to RCW 41.40.023 and WAC 415-108-550 as currently enacted and as hereafter amended. The Department of Human Resources is authorized to process applications for reimbursement consistent with this section. (Ord. 4877 §1, 2003)


Chapter 2.02 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.02.010    REGULAR MEETINGS.

2.02.020    SPECIAL MEETINGS.

2.02.030    COMMITTEES.

2.02.040    RULES AND PROCEDURES.

2.02.050    COUNCIL MEMBER SALARY SCHEDULE.


2.02.010 REGULAR MEETINGS.

(a)    Regular Business Meetings. The City Council shall meet regularly to conduct official business and to take action thereon on the first and third Wednesday of each calendar month commencing at 5:00 p.m. at the designated Council Chambers or the City Council Conference Room located at the Norm Dicks Government Center, 345 6th Street, Bremerton, Washington (“City Hall”), or any other place within the corporate limits of the City as provided in the public notice of meeting.

(b)    Study Sessions. Study sessions of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month at 5:00 p.m. at City Hall, or any other place within the corporate limits of the City as provided in the public notice of meeting, to discuss administrative matters and/or to review and discuss items to be considered at future regular business meetings. 

(c)    Holidays and Cancellation of Meetings.

(1)    There shall be no regular meeting of the City Council during the week of Thanksgiving.

(2)    If at any time any regular meeting of the City Council falls on a legal holiday, then pursuant to RCW 42.30.070 such regular meeting shall be held on the next business day. 

(3)    The City Council may, at its discretion, cancel a regular meeting due to circumstances deemed warranted by the Council by providing notice of cancellation in the same manner as notice of agendas of regular council meetings pursuant to subsection (d) of this section.

(d)    Agendas and Notice of Regular Meetings. A regularly scheduled City Council business meeting may consist of a briefing session, study session, general business session, public hearing, a combination thereof, or any other format as established by the City Council as noted in the Council agenda. Notices of agendas of all regular meetings shall be delivered to the local television station and local newspaper of general circulation by mail, facsimile, electronic mail or other similar means. (Ord. 5047 §1, 2008: Ord. 4928 §1, 2005; Ord. 4889 §2, 2004; Ord. 4805, Amended, 06/16/2002; Ord. 4765, Amended, 07/06/2001; Ord. 4666, Amended, 10/17/1999; Ord. 4129 §1, 1987; Ord. 3760, 1982; Ord. 3392 §1, 1977; Ord. 2987 §1, 1971; Ord. 2669 §1 (in part), 1966. Formerly 2.04.010)


2.02.020 SPECIAL MEETINGS.

Pursuant to RCW 42.30.080, special meetings of the City Council may be held, after public notice has been given, at a time and place as specified in the notice of meeting. (Ord. 4928 §1, 2005)


2.02.030 COMMITTEES.

The City Council may, by rule or procedure, establish Council committees, and procedures for such committees, to assist the City Council in conducting its business. (Ord. 4928 §1, 2005)


2.02.040 RULES AND PROCEDURES.

The City Council may adopt any rules and procedures it deems appropriate to implement the provisions of the City Charter and this chapter relating to Council meetings and Council business. (Ord. 4928 §1, 2005)


2.02.050 COUNCIL MEMBER SALARY SCHEDULE.

Council member salary schedules shall be established and filed with the City Clerk by the Bremerton Citizen’s Commission on Council Salaries pursuant to the Charter. (Ord. 4928 §1, 2005; Ord. 4889 §2, 2004; Ord. 4805, Amended, 06/16/2002; Ord. 4611, Added, 01/01/1998. Formerly 2.04.020)


Chapter 2.03 MAYOR 

Sections:

2.03.010    COMPENSATION.


2.03.010 COMPENSATION.

Beginning January 1, 2020, the Mayor of the City shall receive a base salary of one hundred fourteen thousand dollars ($114,000) per year plus benefits, excluding annual cost of living increases, as provided to the management and professional employees of the City pursuant to Chapter 2.50 BMC. Beginning in year 2023, and every four (4) years thereafter, a salary survey shall be conducted on the Mayor’s salary. Any increase to the base salary shall become effective at the beginning of the next calendar year and any decrease to the base salary shall be effective at the beginning of the Mayor’s next term of office. Any adjustment to the base salary shall be by ordinance. (Ord. 5378 §1, 2019: Ord. 5198 §1, 2012: Ord. 4864 §2, 2003)


Chapter 2.05 DEPARTMENTS AND DIRECTORS

Sections:

2.05.010    DEPARTMENTS.

2.05.020    APPOINTMENT AND CONFIRMATION OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS.


2.05.010 DEPARTMENTS.

Departments of the City of Bremerton are created pursuant to the chapters and their provisions as follows:

	Chapter 2.06	Office of the City Attorney

	Chapter 2.09	Department of Financial Services

	Chapter 2.10	Department of Public Works and Utilities

	Chapter 2.15	Department of Community Development

	Chapter 2.16	Fire Department

	Chapter 2.17	Parks and Recreation Department

	Chapter 2.19	Police Department

(Ord. 5110 §1, 2010: Ord. 4966 §2, 2006: Ord. 4900 §2, 2004; Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.05.020 APPOINTMENT AND CONFIRMATION OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS.

(a)    Mayoral appointments of department directors shall be subject to confirmation by the City Council. Prior to an appointment or a provisional appointment to a newly created department director’s position or prior to confirmation of an appointment to a vacancy of department director’s position, a job description for the position as well as the anticipated employment contract, if any, shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval. The appointment and confirmation shall be pursuant to the terms and conditions as approved by the City Council. The Mayor may make provisional appointments to fill the vacancy of a department director. No provisional appointment(s) to a non-civil service department director’s position shall extend beyond one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of original appointment without the consent of the City Council. Provisional appointments to a civil service department director’s position shall be made pursuant to civil service rules. Upon the provisional appointment to a vacancy, the Administration shall notify City Council of such appointment.

(b)    The appointees, when confirmed, shall serve as "at will" employees subject to termination by the Mayor without cause at any time with no notice or hearing unless otherwise provided pursuant to applicable civil service rule or regulation, the City Charter, ordinance, or terms and conditions as approved by the City Council.

(c)    Pursuant to the City Charter, the City Attorney may be removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of the City Council sitting as a whole, or by the City Council alone; provided, that removal by the City Council alone shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the entire City Council. (Ord. 4867 §1, 2003; Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


Chapter 2.06 OFFICE OF CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:

2.06.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.06.020    APPOINTMENT.

2.06.030    DUTIES.

2.06.040    OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.


2.06.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Office of the City Attorney which shall serve as the Legal Department for the City pursuant to the laws of the State of Washington and the Charter of the City of Bremerton for the purpose of representing the City in all legal matters involving the City. The office shall be managed by the City Attorney who shall serve as its director, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the office. The City Attorney shall oversee and manage the civil and prosecution divisions of the office. The City Attorney shall also oversee and manage the Office of Risk Management established pursuant to Chapter 2.92 BMC, the Office of Human Resources established pursuant to Chapter 2.11 BMC, and the Office of City Clerk established pursuant to Chapter 2.07 BMC. (Ord. 5350 §2 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5075 §1, 2009: Ord. 4966 §3, 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4793, Amended, 05/05/2002; Ord. 4152 §1, 1988)


2.06.020 APPOINTMENT.

The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council. The resignation of the City Attorney shall be effective upon the acceptance of resignation by the Mayor. (Ord. 5350 §2 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4808, Added, 07/26/2002)


2.06.030 DUTIES.

To accomplish the directives of the City Charter and requirements of state law, the functions of the Office of the City Attorney shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)    Advise the Mayor, boards, commissions, department heads, Council and its committees, and other City officials and officers, including the rendering of formal legal opinions when so requested or when it appears to the Attorney advisable to do so.

(b)    Attend all regular and special meetings of the Council, unless excused by the President of the Council.

(c)    Prepare, draft, approve as to form, or supervise the preparation of ordinances, resolutions, leases, deeds, contracts and/or agreements, and such other and similar instruments as may be required by the business of the City.

(d)    Represent the City in criminal prosecutions in Municipal Court and appellate courts.

(e)    Represent the City in all litigation and administrative proceedings in which the City is involved either as a plaintiff or defendant, or recommend the appointment of special counsel therein.

(f)    Attend meetings of the Civil Service Commission, pension boards, and other commissions, boards, or committees required by law, or as directed by the Council, or represented by the chair of such board or commission.

(g)    Facilitate bond issues; provided, this shall not mean the rendering of an opinion on the validity of the bonds in any case where special bond counsel has been retained by the City or by any prospective bond buyer.

(h)    On request of the Mayor or Council participate in intergovernmental relations affecting the City.

(i)    Keep litigation files and records, and copies of all other official written communications, and deliver same to successors of the Office of the City Attorney.

(j)    Direct or participate in proceedings for the vacation of streets, condemnation of land, land acquisition, sale of surplus properties, and related legal transactions.

(k)    Prepare and administer the budget for the Office of the City Attorney.

(1)    Serve as advisor and/or participant in labor negotiations and approve labor contracts as to form.

(m)    Coordinate and assist in obtaining information and legal opinion from municipal research as requested by the Mayor, Council President, or Chair of the Audit Committee.

(n)    Prepare and/or approve ballot measures and levies.

(o)    Interpret substance, form, and applicability of the City Charter and ensure consistency of all ordinances, resolutions, and administrative rules therewith.

(p)    Manage the Office of Risk Management.

(q)    Manage the Office of Human Resources.

(r)    Manage the Office of City Clerk. (Ord. 5350 §2 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5075 §2, 2009: Ord. 4966 §4, 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4152 §1, 1988)


2.06.040 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.

The City Attorney and Assistant City Attorneys shall not engage in any legal practice outside the Office of the City Attorney that would interfere or conflict with the duties of this office. (Ord. 5350 §2 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5029 §1, 2007: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4152 §1, 1988)


Chapter 2.07 OFFICE OF CITY CLERK

Sections:

2.07.010    OFFICE CREATED.

2.07.020    CITY CLERK - APPOINTMENT - REMOVAL.

2.07.030    DUTIES.


2.07.010 OFFICE CREATED.

There is created the Office of City Clerk for the purpose of performing all records management and other related functions of the City. The Office of City Clerk shall be administered by the City Clerk. (Ord. 5350 §3 (part), 2018)


2.07.020 CITY CLERK - APPOINTMENT - REMOVAL.

(a)    The position of City Clerk is created pursuant to Section 20 of the Charter of the City of Bremerton ("Charter").

(b)    Pursuant to Section 21 of the Charter, the appointment of the City Clerk shall be by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Mayor may remove the City Clerk at his or her discretion.

(c)    The City Clerk shall report directly to the City Attorney. The City Attorney may assign the duties of the City Clerk to other employees of the City as necessary to assist the City Clerk or to perform the City Clerk’s duties if the position becomes vacant. (Ord. 5350 §3 (part), 2018)


2.07.030 DUTIES.

It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to:

(a)    Perform all records management and other related functions of the City.

(b)    Act as the official records keeper of the City and in such capacity perform those duties as required by the laws of the state, City Charter and City Code.

(c)    Perform such other duties as the City Attorney may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5350 §3 (part), 2018)


Chapter 2.09 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES

Sections:

2.09.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.09.020    DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL SERVICES AND DIVISION MANAGERS - POSITIONS CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.09.030    FINANCE DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

2.09.040    INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

2.09.050    BREMERTON KITSAP ACCESS TELEVISION (BKAT) DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

Prior legislation: Ord. 4982.


2.09.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Department of Financial Services.

(a)    Divisions. The Department of Financial Services shall consist of the following divisions, as well as any other divisions established by the City Council:

(1)    Finance;

(2)    Information Technology; and

(3)    Bremerton Kitsap Access Television (BKAT).

(b)    Duties. The Director of Financial Services shall be in charge of the Department of Financial Services and all divisions established thereunder. The duties enumerated in each division as set forth in this chapter may be reassigned within the Department of Financial Services at the discretion of the Director of Financial Services for the purpose of achieving work efficiencies. The Director of Financial Services is also responsible for the management of the Conference Center operating fund. (Ord. 5350 §1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5128 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5075 §3, 2009: Ord. 4983 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4966 §5 (part), 2006: Ord. 4900 §2, 2004)


2.09.020 DIRECTOR OF FINANCIAL SERVICES AND DIVISION MANAGERS - POSITIONS CREATED AND APPOINTMENT. 

(a)    Department Director - Appointment. There is hereby created the position of Director of Financial Services who shall be in charge of the Department of Financial Services and all divisions established thereunder. The Director of Financial Services shall have complete charge of all of the work of the Department and shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the Department. The Director of Financial Services shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the Department. All appointees to the position of Director of Financial Services are terminable at will by the Mayor as set forth in Chapter 2.05 BMC.

(b)    Division Managers - Appointment. There are hereby created the positions of Assistant Director of Financial Services, Information Technology Manager, and Public Access Manager as managers for their respective divisions. The managers (hereinafter "managers" or "division managers") shall manage the operations of their respective divisions and shall report directly to the Director of Financial Services. The division managers shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of Financial Services, subject to the approval of the Mayor, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the division. All appointees to the division manager positions shall serve as "at-will" employees subject to termination by the Director of Financial Services without cause at any time with no notice or hearing unless otherwise provided pursuant to an applicable rule or regulation, the City Charter, ordinance, or terms and conditions as approved by the City Council. (Ord. 5350 §1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5128 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5075 §4, 2009: Ord. 5003 §2, 2007: Ord. 4983 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4966 §5 (part), 2006: Ord. 4900 §2, 2004)


2.09.030 FINANCE DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

There is hereby created the Finance Division for the purpose of performing all finance and accounting functions of the City of Bremerton. The Division shall be managed by the Assistant Director of Financial Services who shall serve as the City Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Assistant Director of Financial Services to:

(a)    Be responsible for assisting in the management of the City’s investment and debt portfolios.

(b)    Assist City administration in budget preparation and monitoring.

(c)    Maintain the accounting system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).

(d)    Maintain the payroll system.

(e)    Exercise control of accounts payable and purchasing.

(f)    Maintain an inventory of capital assets.

(g)    Collect and account for all City funds.

The Assistant Director of Financial Services shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Director of Financial Services may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5350 §1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5128 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4983 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4966 §5 (part), 2006: Ord. 4900 §2, 2004)


2.09.040 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

There is hereby created the Information Technology Division for the purpose of performing all information technology operations of the City. The Division shall be managed by the Information Technology Manager. It shall be the duty of the Information Technology Manager to:

(a)    Direct the activities of the Information Technology Division with the responsibility to provide technological leadership in systems planning, implementation and support programs.

(b)    Direct the development and maintenance of long-range information processing plans and budgets.

(c)    Act as a contact person with user departments responding to and analyzing their inquiries.

The Information Technology Manager shall perform such other duties as the Mayor or the Director of Financial Services may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5350 §1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5128 §1 (part), 2010. Formerly 2.09.050)


2.09.050 BREMERTON KITSAP ACCESS TELEVISION (BKAT) DIVISION CREATED - DUTIES.

There is hereby created the Bremerton Kitsap Access Television (BKAT) Division for the purpose of performing all public access television functions of the City. The Division shall be managed by the Public Access Manager. It shall be the duty of the Public Access Manager to manage the production, programming and operating of the local access television station. The Public Access Manager shall perform such other duties as the Mayor or the Director of Financial Services may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5350 §1 (part), 2018: Ord. 5232 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5128 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4983 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4966 §5 (part), 2006: Ord. 4900 §2, 2004. Formerly 2.09.060)


Chapter 2.10 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES

Sections:

2.10.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.10.020    DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.10.030    DUTIES.


2.10.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Department of Public Works and Utilities. The department shall be supervised by the Director of Public Works and Utilities who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002)


2.10.020 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

There is hereby created the position known as Director of Public Works and Utilities. The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002)


2.10.030 DUTIES.

The Director of Public Works shall provide for the operation, maintenance and administration of engineering, streets and public works, capital projects, facilities, equipment services, and municipal utilities owned or acquired by the City including, but not limited to, the following:

(a)    Establish and maintain centralized public works and utilities including business operations, customer service and billing, capital projects management, property management and facilities maintenance.

(b)    Manage public works and utilities engineering projects, including field surveys, grant applications, financing, drawings and specifications, permitting, inspections, construction project and contract management and records management.

(c)    Manage public works field operations including construction and maintenance of streets, electronic communications equipment, traffic signs and signals and street lighting programs.

(d)    Manage utility operations including construction and maintenance work on sanitary, storm, and water distribution and collection infrastructure and systems, meter reading, installation and repair services and the First Response customer service program.

(e)    Manage all aspects of water sources, quality, treatment and compliance with applicable regulations, including operation and maintenance of water delivery systems, storage and supply resources.

(f)    Manage wastewater pretreatment, treatment, sanitary systems maintenance and operations.

(g)    Manage watershed operations including forest management and wastewater solids programs.

(h)    Manage all aspects of fleet maintenance and equipment services.

The Director of Public Works shall perform such other duties as the City Council or Mayor may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5128 §2, 2010: Ord. 4983 §2, 2006: Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002)


Chapter 2.11 OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES

Sections:

2.11.010    OFFICE CREATED.

2.11.020    POSITION.

2.11.030    DUTIES.


2.11.010 OFFICE CREATED.

There is created the Office of Human Resources. The Office of Human Resources shall be administered by the Human Resources Manager, subject to the direction and supervision of the City Attorney. (Ord. 5232 §3 (part), 2013)


2.11.020 POSITION.

The Office of Human Resources shall be administered by the Human Resources Manager, or other assigns, subject to the direction and supervision of the City Attorney, or designee. The Human Resources Manager shall report directly to the City Attorney, or designee. The duties of the Human Resources Manager may be assigned to one (1) or more employees in the City Attorney’s Office who shall hereinafter be referred to in this chapter as "Human Resources Manager." (Ord. 5232 §3 (part), 2013)


2.11.030 DUTIES.

It shall be the duty of the Human Resources Manager to:

(a)    Assist City departments with recruitment, testing and hiring as applicable.

(b)    Advise City departments on professional personnel management practices including performance evaluations and employee relations.

(c)    Support City Labor Negotiator and negotiations advisory team.

(d)    Conduct employee training and counseling.

(e)    Administer employee benefit programs.

(f)    Maintain personnel records.

(g)    Perform salary surveys.

(h)    Serve as liaison between the administration and Civil Service Commission.

(i)    Coordinate temporary placements in support of the City Workers Compensation Program.

The Human Resources Manager shall perform such other duties as the City Attorney may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5232 §3 (part), 2013)


Chapter 2.12 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.12.010    ESTABLISHED - APPOINTMENT AND TERMS.

2.12.020    REMOVAL - ATTENDANCE.

2.12.030    CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.

2.12.040    AUTHORITY.

2.12.050    ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON AND OTHER OFFICES.

2.12.060    RECORDKEEPING.

2.12.070    EXPENDITURES.

2.12.080    POWERS AND DUTIES.


2.12.010 ESTABLISHED - APPOINTMENT AND TERMS.

There is established a planning commission which shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be citizens of the United States who are residents of the City, unless a qualified resident is not available. The term of office shall be for four years. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms so that at least one member shall be appointed annually. The members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 4563, Amended, 08/22/1996; Ord. 4069 §1, 1986)


2.12.020 REMOVAL - ATTENDANCE.

Any member of the commission may be removed from office for incompetency, incompatibility, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, nonattendance at meetings, or other good cause after charges in writing have been delivered by the chairperson to the mayor, notice given, and a full hearing conducted. Members of the commission shall automatically be dismissed from the commission if members miss more than twenty-five percent of the regular meetings without written excuse submitted to the chairperson within seventy-two hours before the regular meeting during any twelve-month period or have two consecutive unexcused absences. Upon missing more than twenty-five percent of the regular meetings during a one-year period or having two consecutive unexcused absences, the office shall be declared vacant by the council and filled within a reasonable time. (Ord. 4069 §2, 1986)


2.12.030 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.

The Bremerton Planning Commission shall conduct all meetings in accord with the rules adopted by the planning commission which are designated as the planning commission bylaws. (Ord. 4069 §3, 1986)


2.12.040 AUTHORITY.

The planning commission, planning department, and city council shall perform all planning functions pursuant to the authority of Article XI, §§10 and 11 of the Washington State Constitution. (Ord. 4523 §1, 1995; Ord. 4069 §4, 1986)


2.12.050 ELECTION OF CHAIRPERSON AND OTHER OFFICES.

The commission, each year, shall elect its own chairperson and create and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. The date and time of the commission’s regular meeting shall be specified in the planning commission bylaws. (Ord. 4069 §5, 1986)


2.12.060 RECORDKEEPING.

The city shall provide for the verbatim recording of all planning commission meetings by electronic means. The city shall furnish a copy of a tape recording of any meeting upon written request of any interested party. The party requesting the copy of the tape must bear the costs of recording and tape. The planning commission will also keep a written record of its meetings, resolutions, transactions, findings and conclusions. That record shall be a public record. (Ord. 4069 §1, 1986)


2.12.070 EXPENDITURES.

The expenditures of the planning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the council. (Ord. 4069 §7, 1986)


2.12.080 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The planning commission may:

(a)    Review and recommend to the council the adoption of coordinated comprehensive planning and land use objectives for the development of the City or particular areas of the City;

(b)    Review and recommend to the council the adoption of regulations and code amendments which implement the City’s comprehensive planning objectives;

(c)    Review and recommend to the council the adoption of short plat regulations and long subdivision regulations;

(d)    Participate in regional planning activities or serve on a regional planning commission;

(e)    Make rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. (Ord. 4778, Amended, 11/05/2001; Ord. 4069 §8, 1986)


Chapter 2.13 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER

Sections:

2.13.010    PURPOSE.

2.13.020    CREATION.

2.13.030    APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.

2.13.040    QUALIFICATION AND REMOVAL.

2.13.050    IMPROPER INFLUENCE, CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND APPEARANCE OF FAIRNESS.

2.13.060    ORGANIZATION, RULES.

2.13.070    JURISDICTION.

2.13.080    DUTIES.

2.13.090    FILING OF APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS.

2.13.100    OPEN RECORD PUBLIC HEARING.

2.13.110    DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATION.

2.13.120    RECONSIDERATION.

2.13.130    APPEAL OF DECISION.

2.13.140    CITY COUNCIL ACTION.

2.13.150    CITY ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF ARE TO BE CONSIDERED A PERSON OR PARTY.


2.13.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1)    Separate the land use regulatory function from the land use planning process;

(2)    Ensure procedural due process and appearance of fairness in regulatory hearings and decisions;

(3)    Provide an efficient and effective land use regulatory system which integrates the public hearing and decision-making processes for land use matters;

(4)    Provide for consistency and predictability in decision making and the application of policies and regulations adopted by the city;

(5)    Provide a forum for conducting public hearings required by the Bremerton Municipal Code; and

(6)    Provide a forum for hearing appeals of administrative decisions and other matters as established by the Bremerton Municipal Code. (Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.020 CREATION.

The position of the Administrative Hearing Examiner (also referred to in this chapter as "Hearing Examiner" or "examiner") is hereby created. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall review and interpret land use regulations; conduct hearings, render decisions, and make recommendations on land use applications; hear appeals from administrative orders, recommendations, permits, decisions or determinations made by a city official as set forth in this chapter, and review and hear other matters as provided for in the Bremerton Municipal Code and other ordinances. The term "Administrative Hearing Examiner" shall likewise include the examiner pro tem. (Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.030 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.

The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council. The appointment may be made as a contract employee or as an independent contractor for a term and on conditions determined appropriate by the City Council. The Examiner(s) pro tem shall be selected by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. In the absence or the inability of the Administrative Hearing Examiner to act, or when expertise is needed to hear a particular matter, the examiner pro tem shall serve in place of the Administrative Hearing Examiner and shall have all the duties and powers of the Administrative Hearing Examiner. The Administrative Hearing Examiner may be terminated in accordance with the contract terms. An examiner pro tem may be terminated by the Mayor at will. (Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.040 QUALIFICATION AND REMOVAL.

Examiners shall be appointed solely with regard to their qualifications for the duties of their office and will have such training and experience as will qualify them to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial hearings on regulatory enactments and to discharge the other functions conferred upon them. Examiners shall hold no other elective or appointive office or position with the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.050 IMPROPER INFLUENCE, CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND APPEARANCE OF FAIRNESS.

No city official, elective or appointive, shall attempt to influence the Administrative Hearing Examiner in any matter officially before him so as to constitute misconduct of a public office under Chapter 42.20 RCW or a violation of the appearance of fairness doctrine. No member of the council shall participate in any proceedings on appeal from the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s decision if to do so will constitute a conflict of interest or violation of the appearance of fairness doctrine. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall conduct all proceedings in a manner to avoid conflicts of interest or other misconduct and to avoid violations of the appearance of fairness doctrine. If such conflicts or violations cannot be avoided in a particular case, the examiner shall assign an examiner pro tem to act in his absence. (Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.060 ORGANIZATION, RULES.

The Administrative Hearings Examiner is empowered to adopt rules for the scheduling and conduct of hearings and other procedural matters related to the duties he is required to perform. The rules shall include any procedural rules for conducting hearings as set forth in the Bremerton Municipal Code. The rules shall provide for the process to be effective and efficient while assuring that the participants are afforded an opportunity to present their case without unnecessary emphasis upon formal procedure. The examiner shall have the authority to subpoena witnesses, and to the extent necessary to assure a fair hearing and to afford each party the opportunity to present their case, may allow limited discovery if it is not unduly burdensome, will not unnecessarily delay the proceedings, and the information is not otherwise available. (Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.070 JURISDICTION.

(1)    The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall have jurisdiction to:

(a)    Conduct hearings, render decisions, make recommendations and to hear appeals of administrative decisions on land use applications as specified in BMC Title 20, as amended.

(b)    Conduct public hearings on all local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts.

(c)    Hear an appeal of a department director's administrative decision when provided in the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(d)    Hear code enforcement matters pursuant to provisions of the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(e)    Conduct public hearings when required under the provisions of the State Environmental Policy Act; conduct open-record public hearings or closed-record appeals in accordance with the provisions of the Bremerton Municipal Code; conduct such other hearings as the city council may from time to time deem appropriate.

(f)    Hear such other matters as may be designated by the Bremerton Municipal Code and/or the City Council.

(2)    It is the intent that all quasi-judicial appeals of land use decisions, which have prior to the enactment of this chapter been heard by the city council and/or the planning commission, now be heard by the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to this chapter, and to the extent other provisions of the Bremerton Municipal Code are inconsistent, jurisdiction for such quasi-judicial appeals will be with the Administrative Hearing Examiner unless otherwise required by state or federal law.

(3)    Unless otherwise indicated, all other references in the Bremerton Municipal Code to "Hearing Examiner" shall not mean the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner except for those matters established pursuant to Chapter 2.62 of the Bremerton Municipal Code over which the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner will have jurisdiction. (Ord. 4970 §1, 2006: Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Added, 11/05/2001)


2.13.080 DUTIES.

The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall have the following duties with respect to applications of matters submitted before him or her.

(1)    Appeals of Administrative Decisions/Determinations. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall hear open-record appeals of administrative decisions/determinations submitted before him or her, prepare a record thereof, and enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon these facts, which findings and conclusions shall represent final action unless appealed as specified in BMC 2.13.130, for the following:

(a)    Appeals of all Type I and Type II project permit decisions identified in BMC 20.02.040 and appealed pursuant to BMC 20.02.140(a)(3).

(b)    Appeals of business license denials, revocations and regulations as authorized pursuant to BMC Title 5.

(c)    Appeals of right-of-way use permit application decisions made pursuant to Chapter 11.02 BMC.

(d)    Appeals of administrative decisions on shoreline substantial developmental permits pursuant to BMC 20.02.140(b) and Chapter 7(c)(4) of the City of Bremerton Shoreline Master Program.

(e)    Appeals of administrative decisions on short subdivisions and plats pursuant to BMC 20.12.100.

(f)    Appeals of administrative determinations applying the City Building Code pursuant to BMC 17.04.140.

(g)    Appeals of administrative determinations applying the Uniform Fire Code pursuant to BMC 18.02.180.

(2)    Decisions of the Administrative Hearing Examiner. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open-record public hearings, prepare a record thereof, enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon these facts, and render a decision, which decision shall represent the final action on the application, unless appealed, as specified in BMC 2.13.130 for all Type III project permit applications identified in BMC 20.02.040.

(3)    Recommendations of the Administrative Hearing Examiner. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall receive and examine available information, conduct open predecision public hearings, prepare a record thereof and enter findings of fact and conclusions based upon those facts, together with a recommendation to the city council, for the following:

(a)    All Type IV project permit applications identified in BMC 20.02.040.

(b)    Local Improvement districts and utility local improvement district formation and assessments pursuant to Chapter 11.04 BMC and Chapters 35.43 and 35.44 RCW. (Ord. 4970 §2, 2006: Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.090 FILING OF APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS.

Applications to the Administrative Hearing Examiner for a decision, recommendation or an appeal shall be filed with the Department of Community Development. Applications shall be filed with the applicable filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. When it is found an application or appeal meets the filing requirements of the affected City Code, rule or regulation, the application shall be accepted. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be responsible for assigning a date for the public hearing for each application or appeal. Hearings on project permit applications are subject to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in the Bremerton Municipal Code. (Ord. 4894 §1, 2004; Ord. 4836, Amended, 12/20/2002; Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.100 OPEN RECORD PUBLIC HEARING.

(1)    Before rendering a decision or recommendation on any land use application, the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall hold one (1) open-record public hearing thereon.

(2)    For all applications, notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in the ordinance governing the application. If none is specifically set forth, such notice shall be given at least ten (10) working days prior to such hearing.

(3)    The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of hearings under this chapter and also to administer oaths, and preserve order. (Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.110 DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATION.

(1)    The Administrative Hearing Examiner's recommendation or decision may be to grant or deny the application, or the Administrative Hearing Examiner may recommend or require of the applicant such conditions, modifications and restrictions as the Administrative Hearing Examiner finds necessary to make the application compatible with its environment, with applicable State laws, and to carry out the objectives and goals of the comprehensive plan, the zoning code, the subdivision code, and other codes and ordinances of the City. Conditions, modifications and restrictions which may be imposed are, but are not limited to, additional setbacks, screenings in the form of landscaping and fencing, covenants, easements and dedications of additional road rights-of-way. Performance bonds or other financial assurances may be required to ensure compliance with conditions, modifications and restrictions.

(2)    In regard to all Type IV project permit applications identified in BMC 20.02.040, the Administrative Hearing Examiner's findings and conclusions and recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council, which shall have the final authority to act on such applications. The hearing by the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall constitute an open-record predecision hearing before the final decision is made by the City Council. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall file its recommendation with the City Council at the expiration of the period provided for reconsideration, or if reconsideration is accepted, within ten (10) working days after the decision on reconsideration.

(3)    When the Administrative Hearing Examiner renders a decision or recommendation, the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall make and enter written findings from the record and conclusions therefrom which support such decision. The decision shall be rendered within ten (10) working days following conclusion of all testimony and hearings, unless a longer period is mutually agreed to on the record by the applicant and the Administrative Hearing Examiner. The copy of such decision, including findings and conclusions, shall be transmitted by first class mail to the applicant and other parties of record in the case requesting the same.

(4)    In the case of shoreline substantial development permits, pursuant to RCW 90.58.140(11)(a)(iii), appeals shall be decided within thirty (30) calendar days of filing of the appeal.

(5)    The filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC paid by the appellant for any appeal to the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be refunded to the appellant if the appellant is the substantially prevailing party. (Ord. 4970 §3, 2006: Ord. 4894 §2, 2004; Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.120 RECONSIDERATION.

A party of record believing that a decision or recommendation of the Administrative Hearing Examiner is based on erroneous procedures, errors of law or fact, or the discovery of new evidence which could not be reasonably available at the prior hearing may make a written request for reconsideration by the Administrative Hearing Examiner within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date the decision or recommendation is rendered. This request shall set forth the specific errors or new information relied upon by such appellant, and the Administrative Hearing Examiner may, after review of the record, take further action as he or she deems proper. If a request for reconsideration is accepted, a decision is not final until after a decision on reconsideration is issued. (Ord. 5148 §2, 2011: Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.130 APPEAL OF DECISION.

(1)    Any party who feels aggrieved by the decision or other final action of the Administrative Hearing Examiner may submit an appeal within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date the final decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner is rendered to the Superior Court or to another designated forum.

(2)    No appeal may be made from a recommendation of the Administrative Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.140 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.

(1)    Any application requiring action by the City Council shall be taken by the adoption of a motion, resolution or ordinance by the City Council. When taking any such final action, the City Council shall make and enter findings of fact from the record and conclusions therefrom which support its action. The City Council may adopt all or portions of the findings and conclusions from the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s recommendation.

(2)    The action of the City Council, approving, modifying, or rejecting a recommendation of the Administrative Hearing Examiner, shall be final and conclusive. Appellants have twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of City Council action to file an appeal with the superior court. (Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


2.13.150 CITY ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF ARE TO BE CONSIDERED A PERSON OR PARTY.

For the purpose of BMC 2.13.130 and 2.13.140, the City's administrative staff shall be considered a "person" and/or "party" and shall have the same rights as any other person or party to make requests for reconsideration to the Administrative Hearing Examiner or to appeal decisions of the Administrative Hearing Examiner to Superior Court or to another designated forum. (Ord. 4970 §4, 2006: Ord. 4798, Added, 05/10/2002)


Chapter 2.14 INVESTMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.14.010    INVESTMENT COMMITTEE AUTHORITY.

2.14.020    MEETINGS.

2.14.030    FUND INVESTMENTS - INTERFUND LOANS.

2.14.040    INVESTMENT POLICIES.

2.14.050    REPORTS.


2.14.010 INVESTMENT COMMITTEE AUTHORITY.

As contemplated by RCW 35.39.032, there is created an Investment Committee composed of the Financial Services Director, City Treasurer, and the City Council Finance Committee or its successor committee as determined by the City Council, which Committee is authorized on behalf of the City to develop and recommend policies regarding the investment of City funds and monitor and oversee the investment of all monies in the City Treasury which are in excess of current City needs or which are contained in inactive funds. The Committee may, in its discretion, include as a non-voting member of the Committee an individual chosen from the public sector with appropriate technical expertise. The City Treasurer is directed to implement the Investment Committee’s decisions and to hold such investments for the credit of the funds for which purchased.

The City Treasurer is authorized to convert the securities, or any part thereof, into cash. (S)he shall provide reports to the Finance Committee, monthly, of all investment transactions and shall be subject to the guidance and control of the Committee.

The City Attorney, or an Assistant City Attorney, shall be the legal advisor to the Committee. (Ord. 5024 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4928 §2, 2005; Ord. 4120 §1 1987; Ord. 3955 §1, 1985)


2.14.020 MEETINGS.

The chairperson of the Finance Committee shall also serve as the Investment Committee chairperson. The Investment Committee shall meet as a regular portion of the Finance Committee. Any voting member may call a special meeting by giving notice to all members. (Ord. 5024 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 3955 §2, 1985)


2.14.030 FUND INVESTMENTS - INTERFUND LOANS.

The Investment Committee may, in its discretion:

(a)    Determine which funds shall be invested on an individual fund basis and which funds shall participate within one (1) or more common investment portfolio(s);

(b)    Apportion earnings and losses to those funds participating in a common investment portfolio. Those funds shall receive a return in proportion to the amount of money earned by each, and the remainder shall be allocated to the general fund, as authorized by state law;

(c)    The Investment Committee shall submit to the City Council a resolution establishing general criteria and procedures for interfund loans which shall, at a minimum, include the criteria set forth in Part 3, Chapter 4, §A of the BARS Manual;

(d)    The City Treasurer shall make all interfund loans in accordance with the resolution establishing general interfund criteria and procedures and shall obtain council approval prior to consummation of the loan by resolution. (Ord. 5024 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4928 §3, 2005; Ord. 3955 §3, 1985)


2.14.040 INVESTMENT POLICIES.

(a)    The City’s common investment portfolio(s) shall be managed to further this financial objective: To maximize the City’s return on investment dollars consistent with sound investment principles;

(b)    The Investment Committee shall only authorize the types of investments set forth by state law and which are in accord with the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and other appropriate authorities. All investments shall be made in accord with Article V, §25 of the Bremerton City Charter;

(c)    The Investment Committee shall develop such policies and procedures as are necessary to facilitate the investment process. (Ord. 5024 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 3955 §4, 1985)


2.14.050 REPORTS.

(a)    Annual. An estimate of annual investment earnings for the ensuing fiscal year shall be prepared by the Committee for adoption by the City Council as part of the City’s annual budget. Any proposed revisions to City investment policies which the committee shall find advisable, including, but not limited to, apportionment of interest by fund and for interfund loans will be submitted for adoption by the City Council by resolution. An annual evaluation report, due at the conclusion of the first quarter of the following year, shall also assess the City’s performance in meeting its goals and compare its performance with the results of investments by other governmental entities in Washington.

(b)    Monthly. After the end of each month, the Financial Services Department shall make a monthly report to the Mayor and City Council of the status of the investment portfolio, which report shall describe any material change in the City’s portfolio and its investment practices. (Ord. 5024 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 3955 §5, 1985)


Chapter 2.15 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

2.15.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.15.020    DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.15.030    DUTIES.

2.15.040    COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT ZONE ADMINISTRATOR.

2.15.050    REFERENCE.


2.15.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Department of Community Development to be administered by the Director of Community Development. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002; Ord. 4719, Amended, 09/14/2000; Ord. 4151 §1, 1988)


2.15.020 DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

There is hereby created the position known as the Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.15.030 DUTIES.

The Director of Community Development shall provide for the operation and administration of the building and planning functions for the City including, but not limited to:

(a)    Processing and issuance of development permits.

(b)    Long range planning, preparation of Comprehensive Plan amendments, and development of land use regulations.

(c)    Current planning, providing permit processing, land use compliance and enforcement including environmental and shoreline review.

(d)    Administration of federal community development grant funds and development of resources and policies for other community development projects in the areas of housing, economic development, public facilities, and social service projects.

(e)    Processing of tax and license applications.

The Director of Community Development shall perform such other duties as the City Council or Mayor may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 5343 §1, 2017: Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002; Ord. 4719, Amended, 09/14/2000; Ord. 4151 §1, 1988)


2.15.040 COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT ZONE ADMINISTRATOR.

The City of Bremerton hereby designates the Director of Community Development, or the Director’s designee, as the Community Empowerment Zone Administrator for the area designated as a Community Empowerment Zone within the jurisdiction of the City of Bremerton. This designation is in fulfillment of the requirements of RCW 43.31C.070. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002; Ord. 4787, Added, 01/17/2002)


2.15.050 REFERENCE.

Throughout this code any reference to Department of Building and Planning or Director of Building and Planning shall be interpreted to mean Department of Community Development and Director of Community Development. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002; Ord. 4719, Added, 09/14/2000)


Chapter 2.16 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.16.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.16.020    FIRE CHIEF - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.16.030    DUTIES.


2.16.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Fire Department for the purposes of performing fire suppression, emergency medical response, and fire prevention and inspection services for the City. The department shall be supervised by the Fire Chief who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.16.020 FIRE CHIEF - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

There is hereby created the position known as Fire Chief. With the exception of the incumbent Fire Chief occupying the position on the effective date of the ordinance creating this exemption1, the position of Fire Chief shall be exempt from and shall not be a classified position under the City’s Civil Service System. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. All appointees to the position of Fire Chief are terminable at will by the Mayor except for the incumbent Fire Chief, who shall be subject to the City’s Civil Service rules and regulations relating to demotion and termination. (Ord. 5190 §2, 2012: Ord. 4963 §1, 2006: Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.16.030 DUTIES.

It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to provide for the operation and administration of fire suppression, emergency medical services, and fire prevention and inspection functions for the City. The Fire Chief shall also serve as the Emergency Manager for the City. The Fire Chief shall perform such other duties as the City Council or Mayor may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 5190, effective August 27, 2012, added this exemption. 


Chapter 2.17 PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.17.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.17.020    PARKS DIRECTOR - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.17.030    DUTIES.


2.17.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the Parks and Recreation Department for the purpose of performing parks and recreation services for the City. The department shall be supervised by the parks director who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.17.020 PARKS DIRECTOR - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

There is hereby created the position known as Parks Director. The Parks Director shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.17.030 DUTIES.

It shall be the duty of the parks director to provide for the proper maintenance and operation of public parks, playgrounds, recreational and golf course facilities, and Ivy Green Cemetery; and to provide recreational programs on behalf of the City. The Parks Director shall perform such other duties as the City Council or Mayor may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


Chapter 2.18 AUDIT COMMITTEE AND CITY AUDITOR

Sections:

2.18.010    AUDIT COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP.

2.18.020    COMMITTEE MEMBER TERMS.

2.18.030    CITY AUDITOR.


2.18.010 AUDIT COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP.

(a)    Pursuant to Article III, Section 18 of the Charter of the City of Bremerton (“City Charter”), there shall be an Audit Committee consisting of three (3) designated members (“designated members”) and two (2) selected members (“selected members”) for a total of five (5) members as follows:

(1)    Designated Members. Two (2) Council members and an independent certified public accountant designated by the City Council; and

(2)    Selected Members. Two (2) residents of the City of Bremerton selected by the designated members of the Audit Committee.

(b)    The designation of the Council members to the Audit Committee shall be by the Council President. The designation of the certified public accountant to the Audit Committee shall be by majority vote of the City Council. The selection of the two (2) residents of the City of Bremerton shall be by majority vote of the designated members of the Audit Committee. (Ord. 5311 §1 (part), 2016)


2.18.020 COMMITTEE MEMBER TERMS.

(a)    Audit Committee members shall serve terms as follows:

(1)    The two (2) Council members designated by the City Council shall serve one (1) year terms, or less if the current term of their elected office expires earlier.

(2)    The independent certified public accountant designated by the City Council shall serve a three (3) year term.

(3)    The two (2) City of Bremerton residents selected by the designated members of the Audit Committee shall serve terms as established by the Committee.

(b)    In the event that any member does not serve a full term, either by resignation or removal, a replacement shall be designated or selected, as applicable, by the original appointing authority to serve the remainder of the term. (Ord. 5311 §1 (part), 2016)


2.18.030 CITY AUDITOR.

(a)    Pursuant to the City Charter, the Audit Committee shall appoint the City Auditor to serve at the pleasure of the Audit Committee. The City Auditor shall only be removed by the majority vote of the entire membership of the Committee sitting as a whole.

(b)    The City Auditor shall report to the Audit Committee. In carrying out duties and responsibilities, the City Auditor shall have full, free and unrestricted access to all City records, property and personnel, unless such access is prohibited by law. Additionally, access to confidential and/or security related documents or operations may be restricted or prohibited as determined by the City Attorney based on his/her legal opinion.

(c)    The City Auditor has the same responsibility and authority as a department head in managing the finances and operation of the City Auditor’s office. (Ord. 5311 §1 (part), 2016)


Chapter 2.19 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.19.010    DEPARTMENT CREATED.

2.19.020    CHIEF OF POLICE - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

2.19.030    DUTIES.

2.19.040    WARRANT OFFICERS.


2.19.010 DEPARTMENT CREATED.

There is hereby created the City Police Department. The department shall be supervised by the Chief of Police who shall serve as its director, who shall have complete charge of all of the work of the department, and who shall be responsible for hiring and supervising employees of the department. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.19.020 CHIEF OF POLICE - POSITION CREATED AND APPOINTMENT.

There is hereby created the position known as Chief of Police. With the exception of the incumbent Chief of Police occupying the position on the effective date of the ordinance creating this exemption1, the position of Chief of Police shall be exempt from and shall not be a classified position under the City’s Civil Service System. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, on the basis of professional experience, education and demonstrated knowledge of accepted practices relating to the duties of the department. All appointees to the position of Chief of Police are terminable at will by the Mayor except for the incumbent Chief of Police who shall be subject to the City’s Civil Service rules and regulations relating to demotion and termination. (Ord. 5190 §3, 2012: Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.19.030 DUTIES.

The Chief of Police shall be the chief police officer of the city responsible for maintaining the peace of the city. The Chief of Police shall have the responsibility for appointment, removal and suspension of employees of the department subject to the city’s civil service rules and regulations, the city’s personnel policies, and labor agreements. The chief shall be responsible for the management of the police department and the administration of the department’s budget as authorized and directed by the City Council and the Mayor. The Chief of Police shall perform such other duties as the City Council or Mayor may direct or as may be required by law. (Ord. 4810, Added, 09/14/2002)


2.19.040 WARRANT OFFICERS.

(a)    Position Created. There is hereby established the position of warrant officer. The position of warrant officer shall be maintained within the City Police Department. The number of warrant officers, their duties, qualifications and compensation shall be established by the City’s budget, personnel policies and collective bargaining agreement(s) as applicable. 

(b)    Exempt from Certain Benefits. Warrant officers shall not be entitled to death, disability, or retirement benefits pursuant to Chapter 41.26 RCW entitled "Law Enforcement Officers and Firefighters Retirement System" (LEOFF) on the basis of service as a warrant officer as described in this section.

(c)    Training. The Chief of Police shall establish training requirements consistent with the job description of warrant officer established by the City. Training requirements must be approved by the Criminal Justice Training Commission.

(d)    Authority. To the extent authorized by law and as authorized and directed by the Chief of Police, the City’s warrant officers shall be vested with the special authority to make arrests authorized by warrants and to provide service of civil and criminal process and other related duties. Process issuing from any court that is directed to the Police Department may be served or enforced by a City warrant officer as authorized and directed by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 5278 §1, 2015)1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 5190, effective August 27, 2012, added this exemption. 


Chapter 2.20 BONDS FOR OFFICERS

Sections:

2.20.010    REQUIRED.


2.20.010 REQUIRED.

(a)    Every appointive officer and every employee of the City shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office or employment, be prepared to give a bond appropriate for the position, payable to the City, and conditioned upon the performance of the duties of the office or employment, and for proper accounting of all City funds and property which may come into his possession by virtue of his office or employment. Such bond shall be in an amount recommended by the Risk Manager according to degree of potential exposure to loss, and shall be approved as to form and adequacy by the Risk Manager and City Attorney and filed in the office of the City Clerk.

(b)    The bonds of all appointive and other officers shall be approved by the Mayor and the Council.

(c)    The City may, at its option, elect to cover any or all of the officers and employees of the City under a blanket bond, however, should any officer or employee become unbondable by virtue of his actions or transgressions which may constitute a liability under the City’s bond, such officer or employee may be required to provide an individual bond at his or her own expense.

(d)    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude state law bond requirements for certain public officials and/or employees. (Ord. 4010 §1, 1986)


Chapter 2.26 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION

Sections:

2.26.010    DEFINITIONS.

2.26.020    ESTABLISHED.

2.26.030    POWERS AND DUTIES.

2.26.040    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - CONTROL.

2.26.050    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - COMPOSITION.

2.26.060    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.

2.26.070    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR.

2.26.080    POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.

2.26.090    BUDGET.

2.26.100    FUNDING.

2.26.110    FUND ESTABLISHED.

2.26.120    DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER.

2.26.130    COMPENSATION FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS.

2.26.140    LIABILITY.

2.26.150    COMPENSATION BOARD.

2.26.160    COUNTY DUTIES.

2.26.170    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

2.26.180    CHAPTER TO BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED.

2.26.190    TERM.

2.26.200    WITHDRAWAL BY PARTICIPANTS.

2.26.210    MAYOR’S PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.


2.26.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following terms are defined as follows:

(a)    "Cities" means the cities of Bremerton, Port Orchard, Poulsbo and Winslow.

(b)    "Council" means the emergency management council of Kitsap County.

(c)    "County" means Kitsap County.

(d)    "Director" means the director of the emergency organization.

(e)    "Emergency" or "disaster" means an event or set of circumstances which (1) demands immediate action to preserve public health, protect life, protect public property, or to provide relief to any stricken community overtaken by such occurrences, or (2) reaches such a dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the governor declaring a state of emergency pursuant to RCW 43.06.010.

(f)    "Emergency organization" means the emergency management organization of Kitsap County.

(g)    "Emergency management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the military forces are primarily responsible, to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters, and to aid victims suffering from injury or damage resulting from disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural or manmade, and to provide support for research and rescue operations for persons and property in distress.

(h)    "Search and rescue" means the acts of searching for, rescuing, or recovering by means of ground, marine, or air activity any person who becomes lost, injured, or is killed while outdoors or as a result of a natural or manmade disaster including instances involving searches for downed aircraft when ground personnel are used. (Ord. 4081 §1, 1986)


2.26.020 ESTABLISHED.

The emergency management organization of Kitsap County is established. This organization is the successor to the Kitsap County department of emergency management. (Ord. 4081 §2, 1986)


2.26.030 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The emergency organization shall provide emergency management to the residents of and on behalf of the county and cities. In addition, the emergency organization is, pursuant to RCW 38.52.070, designated as the local organization for emergency management for county and cities. The emergency organization is vested with emergency management power and authority to the maximum extent permitted by Chapter 38.52 RCW. (Ord. 4081 §3, 1986)


2.26.040 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - CONTROL.

(a)    The emergency management council of Kitsap County is established.

(b)    The control, direction and management of emergency organization are vested in the council. (Ord. 4081 §4, §5, 1986)


2.26.050 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - COMPOSITION.

The council shall be composed of nine (9) persons as follows: (1) the three (3) county commissioners; (2) the mayor, city council president and an at-large council member of Bremerton; and (3) the mayors of Port Orchard, Poulsbo and Winslow. If one (1) of the foregoing is unable to attend a meeting of the council, he or she may designate a substitute who shall be empowered to vote and participate in the proceedings. (Ord. 4081 §6, 1986)


2.26.060 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.

(a)    Meetings. The business and other matters which come before the council shall be transacted at open public meetings. Meetings may be scheduled at regular times or may be called only as necessary. Meetings may be called by the council’s chairperson or vice-chairperson or by the director.

(b)    Quorum. Five (5) members of the council shall constitute a quorum and business may be transacted by majority vote.

(c)    Bylaws. Bylaws may be passed and amended by the council but shall require a two-thirds (2/3) favorable vote.

(d)    Election. At the first meeting of each calendar year the council shall elect one (1) of its number chairperson and another vice-chairperson. Each shall serve for the balance of the calendar year or until successors are elected.

(e)    Minutes. The director or someone designated by him or her shall keep the minutes of all meetings.

(f)    Rules. Council meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order.

(g)    Notice. Prior to conducting and holding meetings, each member of the council shall be given forty-eight (48) hours’ advance notice. (Ord. 4081 §7, 1986)


2.26.070 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL - APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR.

The council shall appoint a director who shall organize, administrate and operate the emergency organization on a day-to-day basis. The director shall serve at the pleasure of the council. (Ord. 4081 §8, 1986)


2.26.080 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.

The director shall:

(a)    Implement the policies, programs and directives of the council in regard to emergency management;

(b)    Make recommendations and reports to the council;

(c)    Represent the emergency management program on behalf of the council in dealings with public and private entities;

(d)    Organize, appoint and train volunteers and salaried employees needed to assist in the implementation of emergency management;

(e)    Coordinate the local emergency management program with state, federal, and other local programs;

(f)    Develop an all-hazard emergency plan including procedures to be utilized in emergencies;

(g)    Conduct studies and surveys of hazards and the resources available to deal with them;

(h)    Develop mutual aid agreements for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance. (Ord. 4081 §9, 1986)


2.26.090 BUDGET.

(a)    Submittal. Prior to the expiration of each calendar year the director shall submit a proposed budget to the council.

(b)    Adoption. The council shall adopt a budget ninety (90) days prior to the end of the calendar year. (Ord. 4081 §10, 1986)


2.26.100 FUNDING.

The annual budget amount of emergency organization not funded after receipt of grants or gifts shall be funded by assessments from the county and cities. The assessment amount for each city shall be that amount which is obtained when the population of that city is divided by the total population of the county and that percentage is then multiplied by the budget amount. The assessment amount for the county shall be that amount which is obtained when the population of the unincorporated portion of the county is divided by the total population of the county and that percentage is then multiplied by the budget amount. Population figures utilized shall be the latest figures available from the Bureau of Census, State Office of Financial Management. (Ord. 4081 §11, 1986)


2.26.110 FUND ESTABLISHED.

Moneys received and collected on behalf of the emergency organization shall be deposited in a fund known as the "Kitsap County Emergency Management Fund," maintained by the county’s treasurer. Expenditures by emergency organization shall be made from this fund. (Ord. 4081 §12, 1986)


2.26.120 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER.

(a)    Declaration. If the circumstances warrant, the council may declare the existence of an emergency or disaster; provided, if the circumstances are sufficiently exigent the director may declare the existence of an emergency or disaster if there is not sufficient time for the council to meet in person or by telephone; provided further, if an emergency or disaster is declared by the director, the council shall meet with all dispatch to affirm or rescind the declaration.

(b)    Abatement. When a declared emergency or disaster has sufficiently abated, the council shall declare an end to the emergency or disaster.

(c)    Use of Government Resources. If an emergency or disaster has been declared, the emergency organization may utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the state and all governmental entities organized pursuant to state law.

(d)    Impressment of Citizens. If an emergency or disaster has been proclaimed by the governor, the emergency organization may command the service and equipment of citizens.

(e)    Rules and Regulations. If an emergency or disaster has been declared, the council may make such rules and regulations necessary for the protection of life and property. (Ord. 4081 §13, 1986)


2.26.130 COMPENSATION FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS.

Emergency workers or their dependents shall be compensated for injuries or death as provided in Chapter 38.52 RCW and WAC Title 118. (Ord. 4081 §14, 1986)


2.26.140 LIABILITY.

Liability for emergency management operations shall be as limited by Chapter 38.52 RCW. (Ord. 4081 §15, 1986)


2.26.150 COMPENSATION BOARD.

The compensation board for emergency organization shall be composed of those individuals as would a compensation board for a county pursuant to RCW 38.52.210(1). (Ord. 4081 §16, 1986)


2.26.160 COUNTY DUTIES.

The county shall:

(a)    Provide office space and related amenities for the emergency organization;

(b)    Recommend the salaries of the director and the salaried staff of the emergency organization;

(c)    Treat the director and salaried staff as a county department, insofar as possible, with respect to such matters as auditing, accounting, fringe benefits and personnel policies. (Ord. 4081 §17, 1986)


2.26.170 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Any person, firm or corporation knowingly violating any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to BMC 2.26.120(e) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each day or portion thereof it continues. Punishment upon conviction shall be a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 4081 §18, 1986)


2.26.180 CHAPTER TO BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED.

This chapter shall be liberally construed to secure the public health, safety and welfare, and the rule of strict construction shall have no application. (Ord. 4081 §19, 1986)


2.26.190 TERM.

This chapter shall be of perpetual duration unless terminated as provided in BMC 2.26.200. (Ord. 4081 §21, 1986)


2.26.200 WITHDRAWAL BY PARTICIPANTS.

Any of the five (5) participants of this joint emergency services program may withdraw from it by giving written notice of such to each of the other participants no later than sixty days prior to the end of a calendar year; provided, that no participant may withdraw unless it is current in its monetary assessment. In the event such notice is given, the withdrawal shall be effective December 31st of the year such notice was given. Forthwith upon receipt of a notice of withdrawal, the remaining participants shall meet with respect to the adjustments to the joint program necessitated by such withdrawal. (Ord. 4081 §22, 1986)


2.26.210 MAYOR’S PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.

(a)    When unforeseen circumstances, beyond the control of the City, present an emergency or disaster as defined in the City of Bremerton’s Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, RCW 38.52.010(6)(a), and/or other federal, state or local law, the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore, or in both their absence, the next successor in line on the City Council, may issue a proclamation (“Mayor’s Proclamation”) that an emergency situation exists (“State of Emergency”) which necessitates activation of the City of Bremerton’s Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan, and the utilization of emergency powers granted pursuant to said plan, as well as Chapter 2.26 BMC, RCW 38.52.070(2) and other applicable federal, state and/or local laws. Upon such proclamation, the City departments are authorized to do the following:

(1)    In accordance with BMC 2.76.130, make purchases and enter into related contracts for material, equipment and services necessary and appropriate to address the emergency situation and the implementation of emergency protective measures without the necessity to follow the standard purchasing requirements outlined in Chapter 2.76 BMC;

(2)    Make purchases and enter into related contracts for material, equipment and services necessary and appropriate to address the emergency situation without utilization of competitive bidding requirements of Chapter 39.04 RCW;

(3)    To incur obligations necessary to combat such emergency situations to protect the health and safety of persons and property;

(4)    To exercise the powers vested under this proclamation in light of an extreme emergency situation without regard to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law (excepting mandatory constitutional requirements); 

(5)    Provide appropriate assistance to the victims of such disaster; and

(6)    To take any other emergency protective measures deemed appropriate.

(b)    The use of the emergency powers granted in this section shall be in effect only so long as emergency protective measures are deemed necessary to:

(1)    Eliminate or reduce any immediate threat to life, public health, or safety; or

(2)    Eliminate or reduce an immediate threat of significant damage to improved public property (and private property when it is in the best interest of the general public) through cost-effective measures.

(c)    Upon the conclusion of the event, the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore, or in both their absence, the next successor in line on the City Council, will issue a declaration (“Mayor’s Declaration”) terminating the state of emergency as declared in the Mayor’s proclamation ending the event period. (Ord. 5042 §1, 2008)


Chapter 2.28 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM

Sections:

2.28.010    EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY.

2.28.020    EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY OFFICERS.

2.28.030    EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMITTEE.

2.28.040    EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.


2.28.010 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY.

(a)    The Mayor, through City department heads, shall recruit, hire, upgrade, train, and promote in all position classifications, without regard to race, color, sex, age (forty (40) plus), religion, marital status, national origin, sexual orientation/gender identity, political affiliation, military status, or the presence of any physical, mental or sensory disability, except where age and sex are essential bona fide occupational requirements, or where handicap is a bona fide occupational disqualification.

(b)    All department heads shall ensure that all personnel actions are administered without regard to race, color, sex, age (forty (40) plus), religion, marital status, national origin, sexual orientation/gender identity, political affiliation, military status, or the presence of any physical, mental or sensory disability except where age and sex are essential bona fide occupational requirements, or where handicap is a bona fide occupational disqualification.

(c)    All department heads shall base employment decisions on the principles of Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO). (Ord. 5394 §1 (part), 2020: Ord. 4165 §1, 1988)


2.28.020 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY OFFICERS.

(a)    The Mayor shall appoint two (2) City-wide EEO Officers as follows:

(1)    One (1) EEO Officer would oversee compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act. Title VI prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin in programs and activities receiving federal financial assistance/grants/loans. This EEO Officer would also be responsible for processing complaints related to Title VI.

(2)    The second EEO Officer would oversee compliance with Title VII of the Civil Rights Act. Title VII protects employees and applicants from discrimination based on race, color, and national origin or religion. This EEO Officer would also be responsible for processing complaints related to Title VII.

(b)    The Mayor will ensure the EEO Officers are properly trained and qualified. The EEO Officers will implement and coordinate compliance with the EEO Policy. Funds to support administrative training and costs will be placed in the General Miscellaneous section of the City’s annual budget. The EEO Officers’ responsibilities shall include:

(1)    Monitoring the effectiveness of the Policy and making an annual report to the Mayor. The Mayor will make an annual report to the Council on Policy implementation.

(2)    Determining and establishing goals and a realistic schedule for attainment.

(3)    Establishing and maintaining a dialogue with minority and women’s organizations to promote a viable recruitment program both within and external to the City area to achieve program goals.

(4)    Work actively with department heads to achieve a climate of understanding and involvement toward employment of underrepresented groups.

(5)    Work with the Civil Service Commission and Human Resources Manager in the dissemination of information and requirements of equal employment opportunity.

(6)    Ensure that contractors and potential bidders comply with federal and state policy regulations where the City enters into contracts requiring compliance with state and federal law.

(7)    Assure program understanding, support, and compliance. Training programs for supervisors and department heads will be scheduled and accomplished to ensure proper compliance with established rules, statutes, and regulations.

(8)    The Title VI EEO Officer will be responsible for completing and submitting the Nondiscrimination Agreement to the Washington State Department of Transportation and any other documents required by Title VI.

(9)    The Title VII EEO Officer will be responsible for completing and submitting the required EEO – 4 Report to the EEO Commission and any other documents required by Title VII. (Ord. 5394 §1 (part), 2020: Ord. 4461 §2, 1994; Ord. 4165 §1, 1988. Formerly 2.28.030)


2.28.030 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMITTEE.

(a)    The Mayor will establish an EEO Committee with representatives from each of the following areas:

(1)    Fire Department.

(2)    Police Department.

(3)    Department of Financial Services.

(4)    Department of Community Development.

(5)    Parks and Recreation Department.

(6)    Office of the City Attorney.

(7)    Bremerton Municipal Court.

(8)    Department of Public Works and Utilities.

The representatives listed above shall be appointed by the department head. For the court, the appointment shall be made by the municipal court judge. The Mayor will establish procedures to ensure the EEO Committee contains the widest possible minority representation. Representatives shall serve for a period of one (1) year. Appointments shall be made immediately following the effective date of this section and annually thereafter.

(b)    The EEO Committee will assist the EEO Officers with EEO policy compliance and complaint resolution. (Ord. 5394 §1 (part), 2020: Ord. 4165 §1, 1988. Formerly 2.28.040)


2.28.040 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.

It is the intent of the City, and the purpose of this policy, to resolve all discrimination complaints fairly and expeditiously. To achieve this objective, an employee may, but is not required to, utilize the following procedure:

(a)    Informal Review:

(1)    Any employee who believes he or she has encountered discrimination may attempt to resolve the matter by meeting and discussing the problem(s) with their supervisor or the appropriate EEO Officer as soon as possible.

(2)    Every effort will be made to resolve the matter internally within twenty (20) working days. Toward this end, the EEO Officer, if requested by the employee, will assist in the discussion of the problem with the employee’s supervisor or department head, or any other party to the problem, and will take other appropriate steps which may assist in resolving the dispute.

(3)    All complaints will be treated in the strictest confidence, except as necessary to investigate the allegations.

(4)    The EEO Officer will have access to all appropriate documents and information necessary to provide the EEO Officer a basis for recommending action.

(5)    If the EEO Officer is unable to resolve the complaint through conciliation, complainant may file a formal complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

(b)    General Provisions, Reports and Record Maintenance:

(1)    All steps will be taken to guarantee that the complainant is free from restraint, interference, coercion, retaliation or reprisal which may occur as a result of the employee exercising his/her rights as provided by this policy.

(2)    In the event the complainant withdraws the complaint, the EEO Officer may pursue an independent investigation with or without the consent of the complainant, provided good cause exists to pursue the matter.

(3)    All reports, correspondence, supportive information, and statements shall be maintained in a separate file classified as "Confidential."

(4)    Access to confidential files will be limited to only the complainant and his/her representative, the Mayor, the EEO Officer, Human Resources and City Attorney staff, and any other party to the complaint, provided the complainant agrees and there exist valid reasons to furnish the information. (Ord. 5394 §1 (part), 2020: Ord. 4165 §1, 1988. Formerly 2.28.050)


Chapter 2.30 CIVIL SERVICE

Sections:

2.30.010    CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.

2.30.020    EMPLOYEES INCLUDED IN CIVIL SERVICE.

2.30.030    POSITION CREATED.

2.30.040    DUTIES OF THE CIVIL SERVICE OFFICER.


2.30.010 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.

There is created in Article VI (Sections 28 through 31) of the City Charter the City of Bremerton Civil Service System. The creation of the Civil Service Commission is set forth in Section 28 and its rules and powers are set forth in Section 29 of the Charter. (Ord. 5003 §3 (part), 2007)


2.30.020 EMPLOYEES INCLUDED IN CIVIL SERVICE.

(a)    Except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, all full time paid employees of the Police Department and the Fire Department are included in and covered by the City’s Civil Service System. 

(b)    With the exception of the incumbent Chief of Police and Fire Chief on the effective date of the ordinance creating this subsection1, the positions of Chief of Police and Fire Chief shall be exempt from and shall not be classified positions under the City’s Civil Service System. 

(c)    As authorized pursuant to Section 31 of the City Charter, all other employees of the City are exempt from the City’s Civil Service System. (Ord. 5190 §1, 2012: Ord. 5003 §3 (part), 2007)


2.30.030 POSITION CREATED.

There is created, in Section 30 of the City Charter, the position of Civil Service Officer. (Ord. 5003 §3 (part), 2007: Ord. 4177 §1, 1988. Formerly 2.30.010)


2.30.040 DUTIES OF THE CIVIL SERVICE OFFICER.

The Civil Service Officer shall be responsible for the following functions:

(a)    Design and conduct employee selection procedures for the Civil Service Commission.

(b)    Maintain civil service records.

(c)    Administer the City’s Equal Employment Opportunity Plan for civil service employees.

(d)    Provide for civil service employee classification as required by the work force needs of the City.

(e)    Coordinate hearings of appeals and other requests for relief made to the Civil Service Commission.

(f)    Conduct such investigations or perform such other duties as may be directed by the Civil Service Commission for the efficient administration of the Civil Service System.

(g)    Perform non-civil service duties as assigned. (Ord. 5003 §3 (part), 2007: Ord. 4177 §1, 1988. Formerly 2.30.020)1

Code reviser’s note: Ordinance No. 5190, effective August 27, 2012, added this subsection. 


Chapter 2.32 ARTS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.32.010    PURPOSE OF ARTS COMMISSION.

2.32.020    ARTS COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.

2.32.030    ART/ARTIST SELECTION.


2.32.010 PURPOSE OF ARTS COMMISSION.

(a)    The City of Bremerton supports expanding experiences with the arts through public art to enhance the quality of life for its citizens. Public art has enabled people in all societies to understand more clearly their communities and individual lives. Artists creating art for public places benefits the community and enhances the City’s standing as a center for artists.

A policy is therefore established to direct the inclusion of works of art in public places ("public art") in the City through a program to be known as "one (1) percent for arts program" funded through a one (1) percent for arts fund as set forth in Chapter 3.12 BMC.

In administering the arts program, it is the City’s desire to:

(1)    Enhance and enrich the City’s physical environment and public spaces.

(2)    Consider opportunities to celebrate the multicultural and diverse character of Bremerton.

(3)    Contribute a sense of ownership and pride in spaces and public facilities to Bremerton citizens. (Ord. 5270 §2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4940 §1 (part), 2005)


2.32.020 ARTS COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.

(a)    Membership. The Arts Commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall include but not be restricted to representatives of: painters, sculptors, music, literature, architects, and landscape architects. Appointment to the Arts Commission shall be made by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council.

(b)    Terms. Terms of office shall consist of four (4) year staggered terms with the initial terms consisting of two (2) members with four (4) year terms, two (2) members with three (3) year terms, two (2) members with two (2) year terms and one (1) member with a one (1) year term.

(c)    Compensation. Commissioners shall serve without compensation.

(d)    Conflict of Interest. No City official or employee may be a member of the Arts Commission, nor may any citizen having a conflict of interest be a member of the Arts Commission. No Commission member may submit work for consideration during his/her term of office. As soon as a conflict of interest becomes apparent, the commission member shall disclose to each of the members voting on the matter the nature of his/her interest in the issue and shall be disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating to that issue.

(e)    Administrative Support. Administrative support will be provided to the Arts Commission by City staff as assigned by the Mayor.

(f)    Maintenance. The Arts Commission shall oversee the conservation and maintenance of any public art and shall prepare reports as requested for submittal to the City Council on the condition and maintenance requirements of all public art.

(g)    Community Outreach. The Arts Commission shall support citizen forums and workshops, gather information and/or assist in education/informing the public about public art and the City’s public art collection.

(h)    Rules and Procedures. The Arts Commission shall establish rules and procedures it deems necessary and appropriate to administer and implement the one (1) percent for arts program. These rules and procedures may address the following:

(1)    Methods for selection of artists and art for public art projects;

(2)    Incentives for the inclusion of art in private projects;

(3)    Artists’ rights and responsibilities relative to public art;

(4)    Maintenance and preservation of public art;

(5)    Decommissioning and removal of public art;

(6)    Public education and community outreach;

(7)    Private funding and gifts for public art. (Ord. 5270 §2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4940 §1 (part), 2005)


2.32.030 ART/ARTIST SELECTION.

(a)    Planning. Artists may be selected to assist in the evaluation of options, strategies, limitations, opportunities for art, and aesthetic design in capital projects before the scope, quality, schedule, and budget are fixed.

(b)    Site-Specific Work. Artists may be selected to design artwork for a specific location.

(c)    Individual Works of Art. Artists may be commissioned to create a work of art or existing works of art may be acquired. (Ord. 5270 §2 (part), 2015: Ord. 4940 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 2.36 DESIGN REVIEW BOARD*

Sections:

2.36.010    PURPOSE OF BOARD.

2.36.020    DEFINITIONS.

2.36.030    BOARD ESTABLISHED.

2.36.040    MEETINGS.

2.36.050    POWERS AND DUTIES.

2.36.060    DIRECTOR’S DECISION.

2.36.070    CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

2.36.080    ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT.

2.36.090    RULES AND PROCEDURES.

*    Code reviser’s note: Section 4 of Ordinance 4981 provides, "The provisions set forth in Chapter 2.36 BMC adopted herein shall be implemented upon the appointment and confirmation of a quorum of the Design Review Board."


2.36.010 PURPOSE OF BOARD.

The purpose of the Design Review Board is to review development applications in areas having adopted design guidelines. The Design Review Board will review applications and make recommendations to the Director of Community Development regarding design criteria for incorporation into the development consistent with the adopted design guidelines. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.020 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Board" means the Design Review Board.

(b)    "Director" means the Director of Community Development, or designee.

(c)    "Design guidelines" means the document entitled "Highland Avenue/Pleasant Avenue Design Guidelines" dated June 7, 2006, adopted by Resolution 2994, and other similar design guidelines adopted by City Council resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.030 BOARD ESTABLISHED.

(a)    Membership. The Board shall consist of five (5) appointed members. In addition, the Director shall sit on the Board as a nonvoting member for purposes of advising the Board on regulatory and urban design issues. It is preferred that members of the Board be knowledgeable in matters of design and aesthetic judgement by virtue of training, education, and/or experience. They shall possess qualities of impartiality and broad judgement, and an ability to review two (2) dimensional plans. Desired qualifications for Board members include an expertise in the fields of architecture, landscape architecture, urban design/planning, structural engineering, graphic, industrial and interior design, or similar disciplines. Appointees must be residents of the City for one (1) year prior to appointment.

(b)    Appointment. Appointment to the Board shall be made by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council. Terms of office shall consist of four (4) year staggered terms with the initial terms consisting of two (2) members with two (2) year terms and three (3) members with four (4) year terms.

(c)    Compensation. Board members shall serve without compensation.

(d)    Removal. When a member misses three (3) consecutive meetings not excused by the Board, the position may be declared vacant by a majority vote of the Board.

(e)    Chairperson. The Board shall, each year, elect its own Chairperson and create and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.040 MEETINGS.

The Board shall meet at such times deemed necessary for conducting business. A majority of the full membership shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. Any action to be taken by the Board shall require the concurrence of a simple majority of the members of the Board qualified to vote. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public but are not subject to the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 42.30 RCW. No special notice of the meetings need be given nor shall such meetings be public hearings although nothing shall prohibit the Board from soliciting explanations and additional input from citizens, the applicant or applicant’s representatives and such other sources as the Board deems necessary to enable them to complete their review of the application. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.050 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Design Review Board shall review all applications for building permits in areas having adopted design guidelines. The Board will review the application and make a recommendation to the Director. The Board is not delegated any executive or legislative power, authority or responsibility and is not acting on behalf of the City Council or the Mayor but rather serves in an advisory capacity and makes recommendations to the Director. The Board and its members are to be free from undo influence by individual City Council members, Planning Commission members, City officials or other persons. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.060 DIRECTOR’S DECISION.

The Board’s recommendation shall hold substantial weight in the decision by the Director; however, the Director has the authority to accept, reject or modify the Board’s recommendation or to request clarification by the Board of its recommendation. Any deviation from the recommendation shall be documented in the findings and conclusions. The Director’s decision shall be incorporated into the decision on the permit application. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.070 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

A member of the Board shall not participate in review of a project for which he or she has a conflict of interest in accordance with the City code. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.080 ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT.

The Department of Community Development shall provide administrative support for the Board. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


2.36.090 RULES AND PROCEDURES.

The Board may adopt rules and procedures it deems necessary for the conducting of business. Provision shall be made for a record of proceedings (minutes), reports, studies, findings, conclusions and recommendations. (Ord. 4981 §1 (part), 2006)


Chapter 2.38 LODGING TAX ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.38.010    COMMITTEE CREATED - MEMBERSHIP.

2.38.020    APPOINTMENT.

2.38.030    TERMS.

2.38.040    COMMITTEE DUTIES.

2.38.050    SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS.


2.38.010 COMMITTEE CREATED - MEMBERSHIP.

There is hereby created the Lodging Tax Advisory Committee ("Committee"). The Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and City Council. The Committee shall consist of five (5) members as follows:

(a)    Two (2) members appointed by the City Council who are representatives of businesses required to collect tax under Chapter 67.28 RCW;

(b)    Two (2) members appointed by the City Council who are persons involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under Chapter 67.28 RCW;

(c)    One (1) member of the City Council who shall serve as chair of the Committee. (Ord. 5043 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 5001 §3 (part), 2007. Formerly 2.36.010)


2.38.020 APPOINTMENT.

Pursuant to Section 32 of the City Charter and as provided for in RCW 67.28.1817(1), appointments to the Committee shall be made by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council, except the appointed Council member who shall be appointed by the Council President. Pursuant to Section 32 of the City Charter, the members identified in BMC 2.38.010(a) and (b) need not be residents of the City; however, said members should represent interests doing business in the City. (Ord. 5043 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 5001 §3 (part), 2007. Formerly 2.36.020)


2.38.030 TERMS.

With the exception of the City Council member serving on the Committee, who shall be appointed by the City Council on an as-needed basis, all members appointed pursuant to BMC 2.38.020 shall serve three (3) year terms. The initial appointment shall be staggered with one (1) appointment serving a one (1) year term, one (1) appointment serving a two (2) year term, and two (2) appointments serving a three (3) year term. Organizations representing businesses required to collect tax under Chapter 67.28 RCW and organizations involved in activities authorized to be funded by revenue received under said tax as well as local agencies involved in tourism and promotion may submit recommendations for membership on the Committee to the Mayor. (Ord. 5043 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 5001 §3 (part), 2007. Formerly 2.36.030)


2.38.040 COMMITTEE DUTIES. 

The Committee shall review and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council as follows:

(a)    The Committee shall review and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on any increases in the rate of tax imposed, repeal of any exemption from a tax imposed or a change in the use of revenue received, including allocation of City lodging tax revenues, pursuant to RCW 67.28.1815. 

(b)    Any such proposal shall be submitted to the Committee at least forty-five (45) days before final action on or passage of the proposal by the City Council. The Committee shall consider any such proposal, provide for public input, and submit comments in a timely manner to the Mayor and City Council. The comments shall include an analysis of the extent to which the proposal will accommodate activities for tourists or increase tourism, and the extent to which the proposal will affect the long-term stability of the fund created under RCW 67.28.1815. Failure of the Committee to submit comments before final action on or passage of the proposal shall not prevent the City Council from acting on it. An amended proposal is not required to be submitted to the Committee under this section.

(c)    The Committee may adopt, and amend from time to time as deemed necessary, rules and procedures for submittal, reviewing and processing of applications consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 5043 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 5001 §3 (part), 2007. Formerly 2.36.040)


2.38.050 SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS.

The following criteria must be met and included in applications by all applicants and recipients for any use or disbursements of the lodging tax funds, and any reserve created with lodging tax funds:

(a)    Applicants must provide information and documents as required in the application form, pursuant to rules and procedures as may be established by the Committee and as otherwise requested by the Committee. 

(b)    Proposals shall be dated and submitted in writing on a form or in a format as required by the Committee. Proposals shall be submitted to the City Council office by the date established by the Committee for submitting applications. (Ord. 5043 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 5001 §3 (part), 2007. Formerly 2.36.050)


Chapter 2.40 PUBLIC ACCESS CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.40.010    COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

2.40.020    MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT.

2.40.030    SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

2.40.040    OFFICERS.

2.40.050    RULES OF PROCEDURE.

2.40.060    COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ETHICS.

2.40.070    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

2.40.080    MEETINGS.

2.40.090    OPERATING EXPENSES.

2.40.100    REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.

2.40.110    VACANCIES.


2.40.010 COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.

There is established a Public Access Citizens Advisory Committee, hereinafter referred to as "Committee," which shall act solely as an advisory body to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Bremerton and the Kitsap County Commissioners to promote and develop optimal utilization of the Public Access Television system known as Bremerton Kitsap Access Television ("BKAT"). (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.010)


2.40.020 MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT.

(a)    The Committee membership shall be comprised of staff, community, and youth member(s). The appointment of the members to the Committee shall be made by the City of Bremerton and Kitsap County. In addition, appointments may be made by any entity that has entered into a long-term service contract with BKAT ("participating entity") that desires to participate in the Committee. The City of Bremerton, Kitsap County and the participating entities are each referred to as "appointing jurisdiction." With the exception of staff appointments, appointed members must be residents of the County and the participating City as noted below. There are no minimum residency time period requirements for appointment. The membership may increase or decrease as noted in subsection (c) of this section. The initial appointments shall be made as follows: 

(1)    One (1) staff member representing the City of Bremerton - City of Bremerton appointment who does not need to be a resident of the City or the County;

(2)    One (1) staff member representing Kitsap County - Kitsap County appointment who does not need to be a resident of the County;

(3)    Two (2) community members representing users (one (1) City of Bremerton appointment who is a resident of the City and one (1) Kitsap County appointment who is a resident of the County);

(4)    One (1) community member representing educational interests - City of Bremerton appointment who is a resident of the County;

(5)    Three (3) community members, one (1) from the three (3) Kitsap County Commissioner Districts - each District Commissioner makes an appointment of a resident from his/her represented district); 

(6)    One (1) community member - City of Bremerton appointment who is a resident of the City;

(7)    One (1) community member from the City of Bainbridge Island - City of Bainbridge Island appointment who is a resident of the City; 

(8)    One (1) community member from the City of Poulsbo - City of Poulsbo appointment who is a resident of the City; and

(9)    One (1) youth member (eighteen (18) years old or younger) representing youth - City of Bremerton appointment who is a resident of the County.

(b)    Terms of appointment for staff membership shall be one (1) year. Terms of appointment for the community members shall be two (2) years. Initial term lengths will be staggered as decided by the members. Outgoing members will continue to serve until successors are appointed. The anniversary date of any member’s term will be the date of appointment by the respective appointing jurisdiction. For the City of Bremerton, appointments will be made by the Mayor with confirmation by City Council. For the other jurisdictions, appointments shall be made pursuant to policies and procedures for appointment as established by each jurisdiction. The Public Access Citizens Advisory Committee chairman will notify the appointing jurisdiction as applicable of vacancies and representation.

(c)    Any time a new long-term service contract is entered into between BKAT and a new participating entity, that entity may appoint a citizen member to the Committee. If the entity is a city located within Kitsap County, the appointed member must be a resident of the appointing city. For all other entities, the appointed member must be a resident of the County. Upon the expiration or termination of a long-term service contract with a participating entity, membership of the Committee will be reduced accordingly if said entity has an appointed member on the Committee. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.020)


2.40.030 SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

The members of the Committee shall receive no salaries or other remuneration for their services in such capacity, and shall not be entitled to personal expenses incurred by them in the discharge of their official duties, except to the extent and purposes and amount such expense is first authorized and approved in advance by the City of Bremerton Director of Financial Services. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.030)


2.40.040 OFFICERS.

(a)    The Committee shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary by a simple majority of the members present.

(1)    The officers so elected shall serve for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter annually, new officers shall be elected by Committee members and shall serve until their successors are elected.

(2)    A vacancy in any position of any office of the Committee shall be filled by a vote of a simple majority of the members present. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.040)


2.40.050 RULES OF PROCEDURE.

Any action to be taken by the Committee shall require the concurrence of a simple majority of the members of the Committee present and voting. The Committee may establish policies and procedures to operate the Committee as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.050)


2.40.060 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ETHICS.

The Committee shall comply with the City Code of Ethics ordinance codified as Chapter 2.96 BMC. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.060)


2.40.070 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

The Committee shall have the following specific functions:

(a)    Through the BKAT Public Access Manager, make recommendations regarding general policy relating to the services and facilities provided to subscribers and users of the system;

(b)    Promote community outreach;

(c)    Provide a forum for citizen complaints and concerns regarding use of facilities, programming and other related issues;

(d)    Submit an annual report to the City of Bremerton and Kitsap County regarding all activities of the committee during the reporting year; and

(e)    Perform such other duties as requested by the Mayor or City Council of the City of Bremerton or the County Commissioners. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.070)


2.40.080 MEETINGS.

The Committee shall establish a regular meeting day and time and shall meet at least on a quarterly basis. All meetings of the Committee shall be held in accordance with City and state law regarding public meetings. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.080)


2.40.090 OPERATING EXPENSES.

All approved operating costs of the Committee shall be paid out of revenues derived for the operation of public access. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.090)


2.40.100 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.

Members of the Committee serve at the pleasure of their respective appointing jurisdiction. Respective appointees may be removed by their appointing jurisdiction. A member shall not be absent more than three (3) consecutive meetings. After the absence from three (3) consecutive meetings, the remaining members of the Committee shall vote to retain or recommend to their appointing jurisdiction that the absentee member be relieved of his or her duties on the Committee. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.100)


2.40.110 VACANCIES.

Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with BMC 2.40.020 for the unexpired term of the member affected. (Ord. 5279 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4624, Repealed & Replaced, 03/27/1998. Formerly 2.100.110)


Chapter 2.46 EMPLOYEE AWARD PROGRAM

Sections:

2.46.010    ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.

2.46.020    DEFINITIONS.

2.46.030    SUGGESTION AWARD.

2.46.040    SUGGESTION AWARD BOARD - ANNUAL REPORT.

2.46.060    CRITERIA FOR SUBMISSION OF SUGGESTIONS.

2.46.070    PROCEDURE FOR MAKING AND CONSIDERING SUGGESTIONS.

2.46.080    CERTIFICATES OF MERIT.

2.46.090    CASH AWARDS - AMOUNT.

2.46.100    EMPLOYEE RECOGNITION - AWARDS.


2.46.010 ESTABLISHMENT AND INTENT.

There is established an employee award program in order to recognize suggestions and exemplary service from City employees which benefits the City in providing services to the citizens. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 6/11/97; Ord. 4071 §1, 1986)


2.46.020 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

(a)    "Board" means the Employee Suggestion Awards Board.

(b)    "Program" means the suggestion program developed under this chapter.

(c)    "Employee" means any person employed by the City and occupying an authorized budget position but not including elected officials of the City.

(d)    "Eligible suggestions" means suggestions which fulfill the criteria for submission and have been submitted in conformance with procedures for submission established in this chapter.

(e)    "Days" means the normal office hours and days that City Hall is open. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 6/11/97; Ord. 4071 §2, 1986)


2.46.030 SUGGESTION AWARD.

(a)    There is created a Suggestion Award Board composed of seven (7) members, as follows: the Human Resources Manager, one (1) department head, one (1) management and professional employee, one (1) commissioned police officer, one (1) commissioned fire fighter, and two (2) general employees. The administration of the program is vested in this Board.

(b)    The Board shall elect annually a Chairperson from among its members. The Board shall meet in regular session at least once each quarter. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairperson.

(c)    A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business; provided, however, a majority vote of the members of the Board shall be necessary in order to adopt any motion or resolution with reference to the making of awards. The Chairperson shall keep minutes of Board meetings and other such records as the Board may deem necessary for its proper function. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 6/11/97; Ord. 4071 §3(1 - 2), 1986)


2.46.040 SUGGESTION AWARD BOARD - ANNUAL REPORT.

The Board shall prepare an annual report covering the preceding calendar year. This report shall be submitted to both the City Council and the Mayor, and shall include:

(a)    Information concerning suggestions approved for awards;

(b)    Total amounts and type of awards;

(c)    Administrative costs of the program;

(d)    Measurable savings to the City; and

(e)    Other information and statistical data deemed pertinent by the Board. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 6/11/97; Ord. 4071 §3(3), 1986)


2.46.060 CRITERIA FOR SUBMISSION OF SUGGESTIONS.

Participation in the program shall be limited to those employees who submit a suggestion in accordance with the following regulations:

(a)    To be eligible for a money or a paid leave award, a suggestion must make possible an extension of public service commensurate with the expense involved or an elimination or reduction of City expenditures without substantially impairing such service, or provide a desirable safety factor.

(b)    Employees shall not be eligible for an award for suggestions pertaining to subjects in which the suggestor, either directly or indirectly, has a proprietary interest.

(c)    If duplicate suggestions are submitted, only the first received by the Board shall be eligible for an award. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 6/11/97; Ord. 4071 §4, 1986)


2.46.070 PROCEDURE FOR MAKING AND CONSIDERING SUGGESTIONS.

The following procedure for making and consideration of suggestions is established:

(a)    Suggestions may be submitted directly to a Board member, to the individual employee’s department head for transferal to the Board or by any other method established by the Board pursuant to this chapter.

(b)    Suggestions shall be submitted in a legible form and shall include:

(1)    A specific statement of what is suggested and how it can be accomplished;

(2)    A brief statement describing the present methods, practices or problem; and

(3)    A statement of the potential of the savings, improved services or benefits which will occur from the adoption of the suggestion.

(c)    Suggestions must be signed and each suggestor shall execute the following agreement:

"In consideration of my participation in the Suggestion Award Program, I hereby agree that the use by the City of Bremerton of my suggestion concerning ... shall not be the basis of a claim of any nature against the City of Bremerton by me, my heirs, executor or assigns."

(d)    The Board shall record and acknowledge receipt of eligible suggestions, shall advise the suggestors of any undue delay in the consideration thereof, and shall notify the suggestor of action taken as soon as final consideration has been made.

(e)    Eligible suggestions may be referred for consideration to the departments affected, which shall, within twenty (20) days thereafter, report its findings and recommendations to the Board. The departmental report shall indicate whether or not a suggestion has been adopted and the actual or estimated reduction of expenditures or the value thereof to the City.

(f)    The Board shall evaluate each eligible suggestion, taking into consideration departmental action and the intent of the program; and it shall formulate and transmit to the Mayor an official recommendation covering the justifications of each suggestion that merits an award and the type and amount thereof. A suggestion which has been put into effect by the City department concerned must be submitted to the Board for award consideration.

(g)    The Mayor, upon approval of a recommendation of the Board, may authorize a money award, a paid leave award or an appropriate commendation.

(h)    A suggestor may file a written request to the Mayor for reconsideration of an adopted suggestion which had been rejected by the Board. Rejected suggestions subsequently adopted may be resubmitted to the Board in the regular manner.

(i)    The City Council may request, through the Audit Committee, a cost benefit analysis of the program. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 06/11/1997; Ord. 4071 §5, 1986)


2.46.080 CERTIFICATES OF MERIT.

The Board may issue certificates of merit in such form and manner as they determine. Such certificates may be in addition to or in lieu of other awards. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 06/11/1997; Ord. 4071 §6, 1986)


2.46.090 CASH AWARDS - AMOUNT.

No cash award shall be for less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or for more than the maximum amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000) or equivalent paid leave. The Board shall consult with the employee and department head in awarding cash and/or paid leave. The award shall be calculated as follows:

(a)    Awards for suggestions which will result in demonstrable savings of money shall be approximately ten (10) percent of the estimated value to the City of the suggestion during the first year following its adoption, as determined by the Board.

(b)    Suggestions which will result in noncost savings improvements, such as benefits in safety, health and welfare, insofar as possible, will be commensurate with the benefits anticipated from the suggestion. (Ord. 4593, Amended, 06/11/1997; Ord. 4071 §7, 1986)


2.46.100 EMPLOYEE RECOGNITION - AWARDS.

(a)    The Mayor, or assigns, shall have the authority to recognize and award employees, either individually or as a class, for accomplishments including outstanding achievements, performance, longevity, outstanding public service, or service. Recognition awards may not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) in value per employee. Such awards may include, but not be limited to, cash or such items as pen and desk sets, plaques, pins, framed certificates, clocks, calculators, flowers, candy and gift certificates.

(b)    The following standards are established for making the award:

(1)    Department directors may submit a recommendation to the Mayor for recognition and an award together with the basis for the recommendation.

(2)    The Mayor will consider and evaluate the recommendation and approve the award at his/her discretion. (Ord. 4995 §1, 2007: Ord. 4593, Added, 06/11/1997)


Chapter 2.48 EMPLOYEES IN MILITARY

Sections:

2.48.010    REINSTATEMENT IN POSITION.

2.48.020    MEMBER OF RESERVE FORCES.

2.48.030    RESERVE DEEMED ACTIVE DUTY.


2.48.010 REINSTATEMENT IN POSITION.

Any regular employee of the city who shall during any war in which the United States may become involved, enlist or be drafted in any branch or department of the military or naval services of the United States, shall retain his standing and eligibility as a city employee, and upon receipt of an honorable discharge from the service of the United States, said employee upon reporting for duty within ninety days after his discharge, in an able-bodied condition shall be reinstated in his position as an employee of the city. (Ord. 1337 §1, 1940)


2.48.020 MEMBER OF RESERVE FORCES.

So long as the present national emergency shall continue, and during any war in which the United States may become involved, any regular city employee, who shall be an enlisted man or officer in the reserve forces of any branch or department of the United States military or naval services, or an enlisted man in the National Guard, shall be granted a leave of absence by the city council in the event such employee is called to active duty, and the employee upon being released from active duty in good standing and upon reporting for duty to the city, in an able-bodied condition, as soon as possible and not more than ninety days after such release, shall be reinstated in his position as an employee of the city. (Ord. 1337 §2, 1940)


2.48.030 RESERVE DEEMED ACTIVE DUTY.

For the purposes of this chapter, a call to report for training, to any city employee who is in the reserve forces of any branch or department of the military or naval services in the United States, or an enlisted man in the National Guard, shall be deemed active duty. (Ord. 1337 §3, 1940)


Chapter 2.50 MANAGEMENT AND PROFESSIONAL STAFF COMPENSATION PROGRAM

Sections:

2.50.010    POLICY STATEMENT.

2.50.020    APPLICABILITY, EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.

2.50.030    SALARY PLAN.

2.50.031    ADJUSTMENT OF SALARY BAND LEVELS.

2.50.032    ACTUAL SALARY RATE.

2.50.034    INITIAL BENEFITS FOR DEPARTMENT HEADS.

2.50.040    WORK SCHEDULES AND LEAVE BENEFITS.

2.50.050    DEFERRED COMPENSATION/INSURANCE OPTIONS.

2.50.060    RETIREMENT BENEFITS.

2.50.070    MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSURANCE BENEFITS.

2.50.080    WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.

2.50.090    SEVERANCE PAY.


2.50.010 POLICY STATEMENT.

(a)    It is the policy of the City of Bremerton to provide a management and professional compensation program which enables the City to employ staff who possess the necessary skills and abilities to effectively:

(1)    Manage the delivery of existing City services and the provision of essential municipal government support functions;

(2)    Evaluate and plan future service needs;

(3)    Advise and support the policy-making activities of the City’s elected officials; and

(4)    Implement policy changes enacted by the elected representatives of the citizens of Bremerton.

(b)    It is also the policy of the City of Bremerton to structure the classification and compensation program for management and professional staff in a manner which assures that:

(1)    The actual duties assigned to a classification are appropriate to the assigned level of responsibility;

(2)    Compensation levels are consistent with the level of responsibilities assumed by staff and appropriate to the City’s financial circumstances;

(3)    Individual salary rates appropriately reflect each person’s performance and experience at the responsibility level assumed with the City of Bremerton.

(c)    The provisions of this program shall be applied equally to all persons included in the program without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, political affiliation; or mental, physical or sensory handicap, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification. (Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991).


2.50.020 APPLICABILITY, EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.

(a)    Applicability. The provisions of the program adopted by this chapter shall only apply to salaried management and professional appointive positions designated as such and authorized in the City’s annual budget; provided, however, for the City Auditor, the responsibilities of the Mayor shall be exercised by the Audit Committee, and for the City Attorney, Mayoral approvals shall be forwarded to the City Council and may be modified by the Council President.

(b)    Exclusion from Representation. All classifications and all positions within classifications covered by this program along with other City officials represent "the employer" for purposes of labor relations. As such, no classification and no position within a classification which is included in a representation unit for the purpose of collective bargaining under the State of Washington’s public employee collective bargaining statutes contained in Chapter 41.56 RCW shall be included in this program.

(c)    Noncoverage and Exemption under Fair Labor Standards Act. No classification, no position within a classification and no incumbent of a position which does not qualify for noncoverage or exemption from the Fair Labor Standards Act shall be included in this program. (Ord. 4539, Amended, 12/18/1995; Ord. 4462 §1, 1994; Ord. 4461 §3, 1994; Ord. 4452 §1, 1994; Ord. 4430 §1, 1993; Ord. 4408 §1, 1993; Ord. 4387 §1, 1992; Ord. 4358 §2, 1992; Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.030 SALARY PLAN.

A salary plan for management and professional staff shall be established and salaries set for covered employees as follows:

(a)    Each position included in BMC 2.50.020 shall be assigned to a salary band. Assignment of positions to bands shall be based upon general salary levels paid by municipal governments of similar size, demography and financial resources for similar responsibilities. Assigned salary bands shall not be changed or established without conducting a salary survey for the position being changed. All changes must be approved by the Mayor and City Council.

(b)    The salary bands shall be structured as follows:

(1)    Band Differential. The percentage differential between the maximum rates of salary bands shall be approximately five (5) percent.

(2)    Band Range. Salary rates of a band range shall have eight (8) rates. Rate 1 is approximately five (5) percent below Rate 2. Rate 2 through Rate 8 in the band shall be spread approximately two and one-half (2.5) percent. The spread between the minimum and maximum rates shall be approximately twenty-two (22) percent. (Ord. 5347 §1, 2018: Ord. 4984 §1, 2006: Ord. 4401 §1 (in part), 1993)


2.50.031 ADJUSTMENT OF SALARY BAND LEVELS.

The City Council shall provide for adjustments to salary band levels as are consistent with the Council’s CPI salary adjustment policy each year. (Ord. 4984 §2, 2006: Ord. 4401 §1 (in part), 1993)


2.50.032 ACTUAL SALARY RATE.

(a)    Initial Rate. The salary rate of a person upon appointment to a management or professional position shall be set no lower than Rate 1 of the salary band to which an employee’s position is assigned. When it is in the best interest of the City, the City Council may authorize an initial salary of a newly hired person at a rate which exceeds Rate 1.

(b)    Salaries may be increased as follows:

(1)    Salary Rate Advancement. Each person shall be eligible for a salary rate advancement upon completion of twelve (12) full months of regular (as opposed to interim) service at each rate in the salary band. To receive a salary rate advancement, the employee must be evaluated as "meets expectations" (or equivalent) on his or her work performance evaluation. Salary rate advancements shall be an increase of one rate in the same salary band, if available.

(2)    Additional Advancement. Those employees who receive a rating that exceeds the rating "meets expectations" (or equivalent) may be eligible to receive an additional salary rate advancement for an increase of one additional rate in the same salary band, if available, above the initial rate advancement provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section. This additional advancement shall require the recommendation of the department head, or equivalent, and approval of the Mayor and City Council. 

(3)    A rate advancement that was denied may be granted following a minimum sixty (60) day review period of the employee’s performance.

(4)    Notwithstanding the above, when it is in the best interest of the City, the City Council upon the recommendation of the Mayor may authorize an in-range adjustment to provide additional salary in instances of promotion, to provide for internal equity corrections, or for another reason deemed appropriate by the City Council.

(c)    Changes to Employee Classifications. 

(1)    Downgrading an Employee’s Classification. Upon the City Council’s approval of downgrading a person’s classification to a lower salary band, the person’s initial salary rate will be set at the same rate in the new band that was in effect in the former salary band. In the event a person’s salary rate exceeds the maximum rate of the salary band to which his or her position is assigned on the date of downgrading, his or her actual salary rate shall be frozen until such time as the maximum rate of the new band is equal to or greater than his or her actual salary and, at such time, the employee’s salary rate shall be set at the maximum rate of the salary band to which his or her position is assigned.

(2)    Upgrading an Employee’s Classification. If an employee’s classification is moved from one salary band to a higher band (excluding promotions), the employee’s salary rate at the higher band shall be set at the next rate which is higher than the salary he or she was receiving at the former band. Any additional rate advancements shall require City Council approval. The employee’s salary rate advancement date does not change. 

(3)    Promotions. In the event an employee is promoted from one classification to a higher classification (one salary band to a higher salary band), the employee’s salary rate at the higher band shall be set at the next rate which is higher than the salary he or she was receiving at the former band. Promoted employees shall be eligible for a salary rate advancement upon completion of twelve (12) full months of regular (as opposed to interim) service at each rate in the new salary band, which shall be the employee’s new salary rate advancement date. Any additional rate advancements shall require City Council approval. (Ord. 5210 §1, 2013: Ord. 4984 §3, 2006: Ord. 4551, Amended, 05/23/1996; Ord. 4458 §1, 1994; Ord. 4401 §1 (in part), 1993)


2.50.034 INITIAL BENEFITS FOR DEPARTMENT HEADS.

When it is in the best interest of the City, the City Council may authorize increased or additional benefits in hiring a department head beyond those specified in this chapter. Any extraordinary benefits must be included in the department head’s employment contract approved by the City Council. (Ord. 4551, Added, 05/23/1996)


2.50.040 WORK SCHEDULES AND LEAVE BENEFITS.

(a)    Work Schedules. Full-time managers and professional staff shall arrange such work schedules as are needed for the effective accomplishment of work and which shall be the equivalent of forty (40) hours per week, including paid holiday, vacation and sick leave time. The work schedules of part-time managers and professional staff shall be apportioned accordingly. Alternative work schedules to the forty (40) hour week may be authorized by the department director and Human Resources Manager. Managers and professional staff may be called back to their work place at any time to respond to emergencies. Managers and professional staff covered by this program are noncovered or exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act’s overtime provisions.

(b)    Holiday Time. Managers and professional staff shall receive a full day of time off without loss of compensation for each holiday observed by the City on the day the City observes the holiday and one additional floating holiday. Holidays observed by the City are:

New Year’s Day

Martin Luther King’s Birthday

President’s Day

Memorial Day

Independence Day

Labor Day

Veteran’s Day

Thanksgiving Day

Day after Thanksgiving

Christmas

In addition, similar time off without loss of compensation is granted for any other holiday which the City Council takes specific official action to observe.

(c)    Vacation. 

(1)    Vacation Leave. Managers and professional staff shall be granted vacation time off without loss of compensation based upon years of employment in management or professional position(s) as follows:

	through 2 full years	15 days (120 hours)

	through 5 full years	20 days (160 hours)

	after 5 full years and thereafter	25 days (200 hours)

Upon hire and with the approval of the Mayor, the vacation leave time granted a new staff member may be set at twenty (20) days or if a current City employee at twenty-five (25) days unless otherwise approved by City Council.

(2)    Vacation Availability - Adjustment at Hire or Separation. Annual vacation leave is granted in full on January 1 of each calendar year; however, a pro rata increase shall accrue on the employee’s anniversary date in the year the employee qualifies for a larger vacation benefit. Managers and professional staff who are hired or who separate from employment with the City within a budget year receive vacation days on a pro-rated basis which covers the time of employment.

(3)    Vacation Eligibility. Vacation time is taken in segments of one (1) whole day or more. Vacation leave available to a manager or professional staff member at the beginning of a vacation leave is to be sufficient to cover any vacation time to be taken. 

(4)    Maximum Unused Vacation. The maximum vacation time that shall be allowed to carry forward from one calendar year to the next is as follows:

	Years of Continuous Employment	Maximum Balance

	 	 

	0 through 5 years	20 days (160 hours)

	more than 5 years	30 days (240 hours)

In the event a manager or professional staff member has not reduced his or her vacation balance to the maximum allowable carryover at the end of a calendar year, excessive days are forfeited unless the Mayor grants an extension of time beyond the end of the calendar year during which all vacation days which exceed the maximum allowable carryover are to be taken.

(5)    Vacation Pay-Out. Upon separation from City employment, unused vacation time will be paid to the manager or professional staff member in a cash payment as follows:

i.    Prorated Adjustment. Vacation time balance accrued during the year of separation and adjusted pursuant to subsection (c)(2) of this section; plus

ii.    Allowable Carryover Balance. The maximum allowable vacation time carryover established in subsection (c)(4) of this section. Any unused vacation leave exceeding the maximum allowable carryover that has been approved by the Mayor for carryover pursuant to subsection (c)(4) of this section is not eligible for cash out.

(d)    Sick Leave. 

(1)    Accrual. Sick leave is accrued at the rate of twelve (12) full days per year and is proportionately credited to sick leave balances each pay period.

(2)    Maximum Sick Leave Balance. Sick leave may be accrued to a maximum of one hundred twenty-five (125) days. Upon reaching a maximum of one hundred twenty-five (125) days, no further accrual is added until such time as sick leave time is taken. Accrued sick leave time is provided as a form of self-insured short-term disability coverage and no cash payment for unused sick leave time is made under any circumstances except as set forth in subsections (d)(9) and (10) of this section.

(3)    Banked Sick Leave for Certain Managers and Professional Staff. Any person covered by this program who was employed by the City on January 20, 1985, and who had accrued, unused sick leave time set aside in a sick leave bank at that time shall have the banked time remain on record and made available for his or her use. Upon service retirement from City service, the person shall receive payment of thirty-five (35) percent of banked sick leave time to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) banked days (a maximum of forty-two (42) paid days). In the event the person dies while employed with the City, the person’s estate shall be paid for all days of banked time.

(4)    Sick Leave Incentive. Anyone who takes two (2) days or less of sick leave in a full calendar year shall have one (1) day added to his or her vacation leave balance at the beginning of the following calendar year. 

(5)    Sick Leave Use. Sick leave is charged in one (1) day segments and must be accrued prior to use in order to qualify for paid sick leave time off. Shorter periods of absence due to any of the reasons provided below are administered by the Mayor under subsection (a) of this section and are not charged to sick leave balances for salaried employees. Sick leave is available up to the amount of accrued sick leave balance days and may be used for:

i.    Temporary disability resulting from personal illness or injury.

ii.    Providing care for children under the age of eighteen (18) when they have a health condition that requires parental supervision or treatment.

iii.    Attending medical, dental and/or oculist appointments as needed for preventive or rehabilitative health personal care or a child’s care, when such care requires parental presence to supervise or authorize treatment.

iv.    Pursuant to the Family Leave Act, to care for a sick child or other family member (spouse, parent, parent-in-law or grandparent).

(6)    Notification of Sick Leave Use. A person who is absent or expects to be absent from work due to causes specified in subsection (d)(5) of this section is to promptly notify the City by telephone or otherwise by 9:00 a.m., if possible, of the day of his or her scheduled work day.

(7)    Sick Leave During Authorized Paid Leave. A person who becomes ill or is injured during paid vacation may request the conversion of the vacation leave to sick leave with pay by promptly notifying the City of the illness or injury and providing such information as is required by the City to verify the appropriateness of such a conversion.

(8)    Sick Leave Documentation and Approval. Within three (3) days after returning to work, a person who has been absent on sick leave is to submit such forms and provide such information as is required by the City to approve the payment of sick leave. The Mayor may require a person to demonstrate that he or she has sought treatment or require other verification needed to assure that the person is fit for duty or as needed to approve paid sick leave for the absence. 

(9)    Sick Leave Retirement Payment. An employee who retires from City service on a PERS or LEOFF service or disability retirement shall be provided a sick leave retirement payment at thirty-five (35) percent of the employee’s accrued and unused sick leave hours to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent of nine hundred sixty (960) hours (a maximum total of three hundred thirty-six (336) hours). The payment will be made to the employee at the employee’s regular hourly wage rate in effect at the time of retirement.

(10)    Payment of Sick Leave Upon Death. In the event of the death of an employee, the employee’s estate shall be paid for the total accrued and unused sick leave hours at the employee’s regular hourly wage rate in effect at the time of death.

(e)    Bereavement Leave. Three (3) days of bereavement leave are allowed for attending funerals in the State of Washington and five (5) days for attending out of State funerals upon the death of a member of the immediate family. The first three (3) days of time off for bereavement leave will be compensated at the employee’s current salary. The additional two (2) days of time off for bereavement leave shall be charged against the employee’s vacation, floating holiday, sick leave or compensatory time leave balance at the option of the employee. Immediate family is defined as spouse, State registered domestic partner, child, stepchild, mother, father, step-parents, mother/father in-law, brother, sister, brother/sister in-law, grandparents and grandchildren of both an employee and his or her spouse.

(f)    Jury Duty, Witness Leave. Leave of absence with pay for the purpose of reporting to jury duty or if subpoenaed as a witness for the City is provided. Any juror or witness fees received by a person for the performance of such duties shall be assigned to the City. 

(g)    Military Leave. A leave of absence with pay for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) working days is granted for the purpose of responding to training orders as a member of the organized military reserves of the United States or of the State of Washington. 

(h)    Administrative Leave. The Mayor may place any manager or professional staff member on paid administrative leave for up to thirty (30) working days under circumstances which make it appropriate that the person be absent from the work place during the investigation, resolution or pendency of procedures appropriate to the circumstances involving the manager or professional staff member. The Mayor may place other lawful conditions upon the person on administrative leave as are deemed appropriate by the Mayor.

(i)    Leave of Absence. A leave of absence without compensation may be granted by the Mayor for a period of up to thirty (30) working days and may be subsequently extended with the approval of the City Council. Any leave of absence greater than thirty (30) days will be without compensation and benefits unless required by law. (Ord. 5210 §2, 2013: Ord. 5074 §1, 2009; Ord. 4551, Amended, 05/23/1996; Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.050 DEFERRED COMPENSATION/INSURANCE OPTIONS.

The City will contribute a total of four percent (4%) of gross salary to options selected by each person from City deferred compensation and/or tax exempt benefits made available through approved City policies. (Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.060 RETIREMENT BENEFITS.

Each manager or professional staff member covered by this program will be enrolled in the Federal OASDI and/or State of Washington LEOFF I or II, or PERS I, II or III, or PSERS retirement system for which he or she qualifies. Contributions to the respective retirement systems by the City and by each employee will be made in conformance with Federal FICA Laws and State Retirement Laws. (Ord. 5210 §4, 2013: Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.070 MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSURANCE BENEFITS.

(a)    A manager or professional staff member covered by this program and who qualifies for and is a member of the LEOFF I or II, and PERS I, II or III State Retirement Systems has the same medical and dental insurance plans, coverages and premium payments made available to him or her as are granted to the represented employees employed in his or her department who are included in that particular system. A manager or professional staff member who can provide documentation of alternative medical insurance coverage may elect to receive two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month in lieu of enrolling in a medical plan offered by the City. The City will pay one hundred (100) percent of the cost of coverage for employees and dependents for vision coverage provided through the Association of Washington Cities.

(b)    The City will offer short-term disability insurance coverage to management and professional employees on a voluntary basis, which will be paid by the employee through payroll deduction. (Ord. 5210 §3, 2013: Ord. 4984 §4, 2006: Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.080 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION.

Each manager and staff member shall receive such workers’ compensation benefits as are provided by the City pursuant to State laws. A manager or staff member who incurs a work-related illness or injury and who qualifies to receive workers’ compensation benefits shall be allowed to use accrued sick leave to supplement the workers’ compensation benefits so as to provide the same salary he or she would have received for full-time active service, taking into account that workers’ compensation payments are not subject to federal or social security taxes. In no event shall the combination of workers’ compensation and sick leave exceed the amount of an employee’s regular salary at any time of the disability period. (Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


2.50.090 SEVERANCE PAY.

Unless otherwise provided pursuant to the City Charter, ordinance, or civil service rule or regulation as applicable, a manager or professional staff member may be separated from employment without cause ("at will") from a position included in this program upon receiving thirty (30) calendar days’ written notice of separation or pay in lieu of all or part of said notice. A person so separated shall not have the right to displace any other person employed by the City by virtue of employment in a management or professional position. The person so separated shall receive severance pay upon separation based upon years of employment with the City as follows:

(a)    Through two (2) full years of employment: two (2) months’ severance pay.

(b)    Through five (5) full years of employment: two and one-half (2.5) months’ severance pay.

(c)    Over five (5) years of employment: three (3) months’ severance pay. (Ord. 4810, Amended, 09/14/2002; Ord. 4305 §1 (in part), 1991)


Chapter 2.62 BREMERTON MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

2.62.010    ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.

2.62.020    MUNICIPAL JUDGE - APPOINTMENT - QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM.

2.62.030    SESSIONS OF THE COURT.

2.62.035    MUNICIPAL JUDGE - SALARY AND BENEFITS.

2.62.040    JUDGES PRO TEMPORE, COURT COMMISSIONERS, MUNICIPAL COURT HEARING EXAMINER.

2.62.045    MUNICIPAL COURT HEARING EXAMINER - PROCEDURE - APPEAL.

2.62.050    JUROR FEES AND MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT.


2.62.010 ORGANIZATION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.

Bremerton Municipal Court is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 3.50 RCW. (Ord. 4132 §1, 1987)


2.62.020 MUNICIPAL JUDGE - APPOINTMENT - QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM.

The office of Municipal Court Judge shall be an elected position and filled pursuant to RCW 3.50. (Ord. 4473 §1, 1994; Ord. 4344 §1, 1991; Ord. 4132 §1, 1987)


2.62.030 SESSIONS OF THE COURT.

The municipal court shall be open and hold such regular and special sessions as the Municipal Judge shall prescribe, provided that the court shall not be open on nonjudicial days. (Ord. 4132 §1, 1987)


2.62.035 MUNICIPAL JUDGE - SALARY AND BENEFITS.

(a)    The judge of the Bremerton Municipal Court shall receive in 2002 an annual salary of ninety-one thousand seven hundred fifty-two dollars ($91,752.00). For each year thereafter, the salary shall be adjusted by City Council action.

(b)    The judge of the Bremerton Municipal Court shall receive benefits provided in accordance with the Management and Professional Staff Compensation Program as set forth in BMC 2.50.040 through 2.50.080. (Ord. 4791, Amended, 03/08/2002; Ord. 4474 §1, 1994)


2.62.040 JUDGES PRO TEMPORE, COURT COMMISSIONERS, MUNICIPAL COURT HEARING EXAMINER.

Pursuant to RCW 3.50.090 the presiding Municipal Court Judge may designate one (1) or more persons as judges pro tempore to serve in the absence or disability of the elected or duly appointed judge of the court or in addition to the elected or duly appointed judge when administration of justice and the accomplishment of the work of the court make it necessary. The qualifications of a judge pro tempore shall be the same as for judges as provided under RCW 3.50.040 except that a judge pro tempore need not be a resident of the city or county in which the municipal court is located. A judge pro tempore of Bremerton Municipal Court shall receive a salary for each hour in which the judge pro tem serves at a rate equivalent to eighty percent (80%) of the hourly salary of the Bremerton Municipal Court Judge, or sixty-three dollars and forty-one cents ($63.41) per hour, whichever is higher. 

The Municipal Court Judge may appoint one (1) or more court commissioners under RCW 3.50.075. An appointed commissioner of Bremerton Municipal Court shall receive a salary for each hour in which the commissioner serves at a rate equivalent to ninety percent (90%) of the hourly salary of the Bremerton Municipal Court Judge.

To utilize the services of judicial officers of the court for the purpose of hearing contested matters relating to the interest of the City and its citizens and the operation of various departments of the City, the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner is created in the Municipal Court. (Ord. 5295 §1, 2016: Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4791, Amended, 03/08/2002; Ord. 4716, Amended, 08/12/2000; Ord. 4526 §2, 1995; Ord. 4474 §2, 1994; Ord. 4142, §1, 1987)


2.62.045 MUNICIPAL COURT HEARING EXAMINER - PROCEDURE - APPEAL.

(a)    The Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall have jurisdiction to receive, hear and rule on complaints referred under the City’s Code of Ethics, Chapter 2.96 BMC. All references to Hearing Examiner in Chapter 2.96 BMC shall mean Municipal Court Hearing Examiner.

(b)    The Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall also have jurisdiction to receive, hear and rule on appeals of administrative decisions specified in the following chapters of the Bremerton Municipal Code:

(1)    Animals: Chapter 7.12 BMC, Dangerous Animals, and Chapter 7.16 BMC, Miscellaneous Provisions;

(2)    Traffic: Chapter 10.10 BMC, Parking Code, and Chapter 10.20 BMC, Commute Trip Reduction Plan;

(3)    Nuisance properties: Chapter 6.12 BMC, Unfit Dwellings, Buildings, Structures, and Premises.

In addition to the chapters identified above, the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall have jurisdiction to hear and rule on other matters as may be designated by the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(c)    For appeals from a final decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner issued under Chapter 6.12 BMC, the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall have jurisdiction to receive and rule on appeals pursuant to the time period and procedures for appeals set forth in Chapter 6.12 BMC.

(d)    For all other appeals, the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall have jurisdiction to receive and rule on appeals by aggrieved appellants of administrative decisions after a written complaint has been denied by the Department Director or designee. Appeals to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner from any final administrative decision covered by the provisions of this chapter shall be made within seven (7) working days, unless a different appeal period is specifically provided for in the Bremerton Municipal Code relating to the appeal, from the date of appellant’s notification of the decision. Date of mailing shall be considered date of notification. Appeals shall include the appellant’s name, address and telephone number, the written decision being appealed and the municipal code section establishing the appeal.

(e)    Appeals shall be accompanied by a filing fee, pursuant to Chapter 3.01 BMC, which shall be refunded if the appellant substantially prevails. The Municipal Court Judge shall adopt rules for scheduling and conduct of administrative hearings.

(f)    Unless otherwise provided by state law or the Bremerton Municipal Code, enforcement of the administrative decision being appealed to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal which has been properly and timely filed, provided there is not imminent threat to the public’s safety and welfare.

(g)    The Municipal Court Hearing Examiner’s decision shall be final and conclusive unless the appellant or the City files for a writ of certiorari in Kitsap County Superior Court within thirty (30) days. Procedures of this section including filing fee and appeal of the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner’s decision shall apply unless different procedures are specified in the ordinance establishing the administrative appeal. (Ord. 5346 §2, 2018: Ord. 5216 §2, 2013: Ord. 5154 §6, 2011: Ord. 5147 §6, 2011: Ord. 5103 §5, 2010: Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4730, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4677, Amended, 12/11/1999, Ord. 4655, Amended, 07/18/1999; Ord. 4547, Amended, 03/28/1996; Ord. 4526, §1, 1995)


2.62.050 JUROR FEES AND MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT.

Each person called to serve as a juror shall receive the same daily fee as is paid to jurors in district court; provided, that the fee shall be not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In addition, each person called to serve as a juror shall receive a daily mileage allowance in an amount computed in accordance with RCW 43.03.060. (Ord. 4142, §1, 1987)


Chapter 2.74 TRAVEL AUTHORIZATION AND EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT

Sections:

2.74.010    PURPOSE.

2.74.020    ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION TO TRAVEL.

2.74.030    ELIGIBLE EXPENSES.

2.74.040    INELIGIBLE EXPENSES.

2.74.050    USE OF CREDIT CARDS.

2.74.060    DOCUMENTATION AND REIMBURSEMENT.

2.74.070    RIGHT OF PRIOR LIEN.

2.74.080    ADMINISTRATION.


2.74.010 PURPOSE.

To authorize the reimbursement of expenses incurred in connection with the performance of official City business and the use of purchase/credit cards for travel purposes, pursuant to Chapter 42.24 RCW, and to direct the Mayor and Director of Financial Services to implement administrative policies and procedures to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.020 ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION TO TRAVEL.

Travel by City officials, employees, City Council, and members of boards and commissions shall be specifically provided for as follows: 

(a)    Department heads shall approve all overnight travel for employees of their department. The Mayor shall approve overnight travel for all department heads. All out-of-state travel for City employees must be approved by the Mayor.

(b)    Travel by the Mayor is self-approved. Travel by members of the City Council shall be approved by the Council President.

(c)    Travel by members of boards and commissions shall be approved by the Council President or Mayor. 

(d)    Requests must include the nature of the travel, method of travel, costs to the City and the budgetary authority. Use of e-mail is acceptable documentation. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.030 ELIGIBLE EXPENSES.

Generally, eligible expenses include travel and living costs incurred by the employee while away from the City and expenses incurred within the City necessitated by City business. In the Bremerton area, necessary expenses will be reimbursed only for an employee representing the City in his/her official capacity and in the discharge of his/her duties. Eligible expenses and the basis for payment or reimbursement will be as follows:

(a)    Registration. Actual cost of registration of any employee at a meeting, conference, or convention for which he/she has received approval. Employees shall attend all conferences, meetings, and training sessions that are paid for at City expense.

(b)    Transportation. Actual costs for bus travel, train travel, taxi (including a customary gratuity), car rentals, parking fees, and air travel are eligible. Employees using a personal vehicle to travel on City business will be reimbursed at the mileage rate established by the Internal Revenue Service. Payment shall not exceed economy class airfare (government rate or Internet rate) to and from the same destination for employees traveling to out-of-town destinations on City business using a personal vehicle. 

(c)    Lodging. Actual cost of hotel or motel accommodations is an eligible expense. If a family member or guest accompanies the employee, the employee shall pay for the amount over that of a single accommodation. 

(d)    Meals. Any employee traveling on City business will be reimbursed for meals at the established federal per diem rate for the travel destination as established by the U.S. General Services Administration (www.gsa.gov). 

(1)    An individual shall be deemed on travel status where the travel includes reimbursable lodging. 

(i)    An employee must be in travel status for two (2) hours prior to the start of their normal work time to receive a full day of per diem. Employees not in a travel status two (2) hours prior to the start of their normal work day will receive seventy-five (75) percent of a full day per diem.

(ii)    If an employee returns from overnight travel, to their duty station or home, more than two (2) hours after the end of their normal work day, they will receive a full day of per diem. If they return less than two (2) hours after the end of their normal work day, they will receive seventy-five (75) percent of a day’s per diem.

(iii)     Where conference registration or training tuition fees include one (1) or more meals, the City shall reimburse only those meals not covered by such fees. If the employee elects not to participate in one (1) or more optional meals offered by the conference, the following percentages of per diem will be used: Breakfast twenty (20) percent; lunch thirty (30) percent; dinner fifty (50) percent.

(2)    Reimbursement for meals incurred when an employee is away from their duty station on official City business, but not on a travel status, will be reimbursed with approval of the department Director using the above percentages. Expenses for meals where City business is conducted and that could reasonably occur during non-meal periods are not eligible for reimbursement. Meals for City Council, Mayor and City staff conducting formal City business during meal times are specifically authorized.

(3)    All per diem meals will be handled on a reimbursement basis. Use of the City’s purchase/credit card is not authorized for meal expenditures. Employees that will be in a travel status and have received proper authorization to travel may receive a travel advance up to the maximum anticipated per diem for their trip. No advance will be allowed if not in a travel status. Settlement of advances shall be made within fifteen (15) days of return from travel.

(e)    Laundry Service. Actual cost of laundry service is an allowable expense when employees are required to be away from the City for more than six (6) days at one (1) time or the conditions under which they are required to work while away from the City create a more than normal need for such services.

(f)    Telephone. Charges for telephone are an allowable expense if City business requires such communication. Employees staying outside of the City of Bremerton on business are allowed one personal call to the employee’s home at City expense for each trip. Such calls shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00). Any personal calls in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) are to be paid by the employee. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.040 INELIGIBLE EXPENSES.

None of the following expenses shall be paid by the City: Travel paid for by any other organization, alcoholic beverages, valet services, meals or lodging accommodations for family or guest, tour bus fees for sightseeing tours, mileage if traveling as a passenger in a privately owned car, trip insurance, hosting, tips unless otherwise authorized or any other personal expenses for entertainment or other purposes. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.050 USE OF CREDIT CARDS.

Credit cards will be made available to officials and employees for the purpose of covering all eligible travel expenses except meals, which will be handled on a reimbursement basis. Employees shall be restricted from use of their own personal credit cards, except in such cases when the employee has not been issued or does not have access to a City credit card. Disallowed charges or charges not properly identified will be paid by the employee before the charge card billing is due. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.060 DOCUMENTATION AND REIMBURSEMENT.

A report of overnight travel will be documented and submitted to the Financial Services Department on an Employee Claim for Expenses form within fifteen (15) days of return from travel. The Claim will contain a complete report of all travel costs incurred through use of a credit card or by reimbursement to the employee. The Claim shall be submitted even if no reimbursable expenses were incurred. Requests for reimbursement for other eligible expenses shall be submitted on an Employee Claim for Expenses no less than monthly. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.070 RIGHT OF PRIOR LIEN.

Failure to pay any disallowed credit card charges or settle any advances within the time frame prescribed will render the employee personally liable for the unpaid amount plus interest at the rate charged by the bank that issued the credit/purchase card or ten (10) percent, whichever is applicable. The City shall have a prior lien against and a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the employee in the amount due, plus interest. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


2.74.080 ADMINISTRATION.

The Mayor and Director of Financial Services are directed to prepare administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5004 §1 (part), 2007)


Chapter 2.76 PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL CODE

Sections:

2.76.010    PURPOSE.

2.76.020    APPLICABILITY.

2.76.030    DEFINITIONS.

2.76.040    REQUESTS FOR BIDS AND BID LISTS.

2.76.050    REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.

2.76.060    PROFESSIONAL AND CONSULTANT CONTRACTS.

2.76.070    SUPPLY CONTRACTS AND BLANKET PURCHASE ORDERS.

2.76.080    DETERMINING COST OF CONTRACT.

2.76.090    SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES.

2.76.100    CONTRACT APPROVAL REQUIRED.

2.76.110    AMENDMENTS AND CHANGE ORDERS - APPROVAL.

2.76.120    EXCEPTION FOR RECYCLED PRODUCTS.

2.76.130    EMERGENCIES.

2.76.140    CREDIT/PURCHASE CARD USE.

2.76.150    PERSONAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL.

2.76.160    POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.


2.76.010 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide guidelines for the purchase of goods and services by the City in order to maintain an efficient and accountable purchasing process. It is also the purpose of this chapter to allow for the flexible application of these guidelines for more efficient and cost-effective purchases where their strict application would not be in the City’s best interest, such as, for example, in those instances where requests for bids or quotations would not be appropriate due to a sole source supplier or where negotiations with a particular supplier would be more appropriate due to a specialized need of the City. (Ord. 4975 §1, 2006: Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.020 APPLICABILITY.

Any contract, written or oral, for the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment or services or the lease or rental of equipment shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter; provided, that except for the requirements set forth in BMC 2.76.100 and 2.76.110 relating to authorization by the Mayor and City Council, the limitations contained in this policy do not apply to:

(a)    Public works or improvement contracts which shall be entered into pursuant to RCW 35.22.620 as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended.

(b)    Contracts for architectural and engineering services governed pursuant to Chapter 39.80 RCW as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended.

(c)    Purchases of materials at auctions conducted by the United States Government or any agency thereof, or by the State of Washington and any of its political subdivisions. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.030 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions will apply:

(a)    "Best bid" shall mean a bid that is the best value to and in the best interests of the City when considering items such as price, available discounts, the product or service purchased including any alterations or modifications thereto, shipping, time of delivery, warranty and other terms of purchase, and any other factors relevant to the purchase. Best bid does not necessarily mean lowest price.

(b)    "Bid" shall mean an offer or quotation to provide goods and/or services at a specified price.

(c)    "Contract" or "contract for purchase" shall mean a purchase from a wholesaler, retailer or dealer, or other similar transaction for the purchase of goods and services. 

(d)    "Director" shall mean the director of the department for which the contract for purchase is made, authorized purchasing agent, or his or her designee.

(e)    "Director of Financial Services" shall mean Director of the Department of Financial Services, or his or her designee.

(f)    "Emergency" shall mean any situation where the public health, safety and welfare are endangered.

(g)    "Purchase of goods and services" shall mean a contract to supply materials, supplies, equipment, the lease or rental of equipment, and/or the performance of work or labor.

(h)    "Written bid" or "written request for bid" shall include e-mail and facsimile transmittals. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.040 REQUESTS FOR BIDS AND BID LISTS.

Requests for bids required in this section shall be solicited for the purpose of establishing comparable and competitive bid pricing and the best price for the proposed purchase. Bids received in response to such requests for bids shall be documented and submitted, along with any other relevant material, to the approving authority as set forth in BMC 2.76.100. Bids for purchases shall be obtained as follows:

(a)    Purchases of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) or Less. Any contract for which the estimated cost to purchase goods or services is ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or less shall be entered into pursuant to such terms and conditions as may be authorized by the Director. Purchases under this subsection are not required to be entered into pursuant to solicitation or requests for bids and may be entered into through direct negotiations.

(b)    Purchases over Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) but Not Exceeding Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000). If it appears that the estimated cost of a contract to purchase goods or services, other than professional and consulting services, will be over ten thousand dollars ($10,000) but not exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the Director may contract as follows:

(1)    Telephone and/or Written Bids. Solicit, obtain and document telephone and/or written comparable bids for each purchase from at least three (3) sources. If less than three (3) vendors are available for bids after reasonable attempts, then such shall be documented and bids may be obtained from the available sources;

(2)    Bid Lists. For regularly made purchases, a list of comparable bids may be maintained and updated periodically and purchases made from that list without soliciting bids for each such purchase;

(3)    Written Request for Bids. Request in writing, and obtain from at least three (3) sources, written comparable bids for each purchase. Requests for bids should be in writing and contain appropriate specifications and terms of purchase as may be applicable. If less than three (3) vendors are available for bid after reasonable attempts, then such shall be documented and bids may be obtained from the available sources; or

(4)    Advertised Request for Bids. Publish notice calling for bids in a newspaper of general circulation most likely to bring responsive bids at least ten (10) days before entering into that contract. The notice shall generally state the nature of the contemplated purchase and the description or specifications thereof, and it shall require that the bids be filed with the City Clerk or other designated office of the City within the time specified therein.

(c)    Purchases over Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000). If it appears that the estimated cost of a contract to purchase goods or services, other than professional and consulting services, will be over twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the Director may contract for purchase as follows:

(1)    Written request for bids pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of this section; or

(2)    Advertised request for bids pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(d)    Award of Contract on Best Bid. Subject to the authorization requirements set forth in BMC 2.76.100, the Director may:

(1)    Award a contract for purchase to the best bid as defined in BMC 2.76.030(a) in response to a solicitation or request for bid pursuant to this section;

(2)    Reject any and all bids; and/or 

(3)    Enter into direct negotiations with a bidder to modify the product or service to be purchased or to obtain a more favorable price or terms for the City.

If an award of a contract for goods and services is made to a supplier who is not the lowest bidder, then the reason for awarding the contract to another supplier shall be documented (delivery time, warranty, the bid did not meet the product or service requirements of the City, or specific product line preferred for uniform equipment fleet, etc.).

(e)    Local Preference Purchase for Goods. When reviewing bids for purchase, all things being equal when considering factors such as product quality, delivery, warranty or service provided, there is a preference to purchase from a local supplier. A local supplier is a supplier having an office or facility located in Kitsap County and licensed to do and doing business in the County. 

(f)    Contracts with Other Public Entities. In lieu of the requirements for requests for bids pursuant to this section, the City may, pursuant to an interlocal agreement with another public entity which has entered into a contract with a supplier pursuant to an advertised request for bid, contract with said supplier on similar terms for the purchase of materials, supplies or equipment. (Ord. 4975 §2, 2006: Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.050 REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.

In lieu of the requirements for requests for bids pursuant to BMC 2.76.040, requests for proposals may be utilized when deemed appropriate under such terms and conditions determined suitable to meet the needs and requirements of the particular purchase. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.060 PROFESSIONAL AND CONSULTANT CONTRACTS.

This section shall apply to professional and/or technical service consultant contracts in which the City enters into an agreement to purchase consultant services for City government from a corporation, firm, agency, individual, or group of individuals based on their recognized experience and knowledge within a specialized area of expertise. Contracts for professional and consultant services are not required to follow the purchasing requirements set forth in BMC 2.76.040, but may be entered into through direct negotiations. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.070 SUPPLY CONTRACTS AND BLANKET PURCHASE ORDERS.

In lieu of requesting bids for each purchase or maintaining bid lists, the City may solicit bids or proposals for a supply contract for a specific term or issue a blanket purchase order for the supply of goods, materials, supplies, equipment or services on an as-needed basis in those instances where the specific service or product in a product line or volume of units is undetermined, such as the City’s needs and use of office supplies. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.080 DETERMINING COST OF CONTRACT.

To determine the cost of a contract for the purpose of establishing the appropriate purchasing procedures under this chapter, when the contract has no definite term or unit amount such as a supply contract or blanket purchase order, the amount of each individual purchase shall determine the appropriate purchasing procedures. Contracts may not be split to avoid the bidding and authorization requirements set forth in this chapter. Bid splitting includes the inappropriate division of a purchase into separate units for purchase and/or over a period of time merely for the purpose of avoiding the required approval processes. Bid splitting does not include the purchase of goods or services by different City departments or offices for unrelated projects or purposes. (Ord. 4975 §3, 2006: Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.090 SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES.

The requirements set forth in BMC 2.76.040 for requests for bids may be waived by a written determination by the Director that either the materials, supplies, equipment or services are clearly and legitimately limited to a single source of supply, or that the materials, supplies, equipment or services are subject to special market conditions, involve special facilities or services, or that a bid would otherwise not be practicable or in the City’s best interests under the circumstances, in which instances the purchase price may be best established by direct negotiation. The written determination shall also recite why this situation exists. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.100 CONTRACT APPROVAL REQUIRED.

(a)    Mayor/Director Approval. Any contract which is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less intended for the purchase, lease or rental of supplies, material, equipment or services must be approved by the Mayor or Director or his or her designee to become effective and binding upon the City. 

(b)    Council Approval. Any contract which is over twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) intended for the purchase, lease or rental of supplies, material, equipment or services must be approved by the City Council to become effective and binding upon the City. 

(c)    Prior Council Consideration. When the Council has specifically considered and approved by formal action a particular program or matter in which the amount of the contract and the contracting parties have been identified, such as awards of bids, funding of certain programs, authorization to purchase or to negotiate for the purpose of a particular item or service, or other similar program or matter, such consideration and approval shall constitute Council authorization for the purpose of this section. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.110 AMENDMENTS AND CHANGE ORDERS - APPROVAL.

(a)    Amendments or change orders to contracts requiring City Council approval under this chapter may be administratively approved by the Mayor if the changes are:

(1)    Within the scope of the project;

(2)    Consistent with an initial bid process, if any;

(3)    Executed in writing; and

(4)    An increase of the contract award amount (CAA) as follows:

	Contract Award Amount	Percentage Increase in CAA (the Greater Of)	Limits

	Less than $100,000	30% or minimum	Min.	$0

	Max.	$30,000

	$100,000 to $500,000	20% or minimum	Min.	$30,000

	Max.	$100,000

	Greater than $500,000	10% or minimum	Min.	$100,000

	Max.	$200,000

(b)    The value of all change orders will be aggregated. When any single change order, or combined change orders on the same project or single purchase exceeds the value limit, the change must be approved by the City Council, except in the following instances:

(1)    On service contracts used to accomplish an ongoing City program as opposed to completing a short-term project or purchase, change order rules, including the aggregate rule, shall be applied on an annual basis.

(2)    Where the size of the contract and the exhausting of change order authority make further change order authorization impractical, the City Council may, upon recommendation of the Mayor, extend the aggregate limits of subsection (a)(4) of this section for specific contracts.

(c)    A work change directive may be used to:

(1)    Authorize and direct work that will result in an increase in contract price within the administrative authority of the Mayor as provided in subsection (a) of this section for specific contracts. Work change directives that affect the contract price shall be incorporated into a change order.

(2)    Authorize and direct work that will result in an increase in contract price in excess of the administrative authority of the Mayor as provided in subsection (a) of this section:

(i)    Where unforeseen conditions necessitate an immediate change to avoid a contractor’s claim against the City for delays; or

(ii)    Due to an emergency as defined in BMC 2.76.030(f).

In such circumstances, the work change directive shall be incorporated into a change order and presented to the City Council at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, subject to scheduling. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.120 EXCEPTION FOR RECYCLED PRODUCTS.

Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City from preferentially purchasing products made from recycled materials or products that may be recycled or reused. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.130 EMERGENCIES.

When any emergency requires the immediate execution of any contract to purchase, lease or rent as described in this chapter, upon the finding of the existence of such an emergency, the Mayor shall have the power to make and enter into such contract without strict compliance with the purchasing requirements set forth in this chapter. The designated department director shall issue a written basis for the emergency determination accompanied by a description and/or specification and cost estimate of the contract at the time of or as soon as practicable after the commencement of the purchase. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.140 CREDIT/PURCHASE CARD USE.

(a)    The Director of Financial Services shall implement and maintain the following system for the distribution, authorization and control of credit/purchase cards issued to or for the benefit of the City and used by City officials and employees.

(1)    Distribution. Credit cards may be distributed to those City officials and employees who, in the opinion of the Director of Financial Services, have job responsibilities that would benefit or otherwise be facilitated by use of credit/purchase cards.

(2)    Authorization and Control. The Director of Financial Services shall develop specific administrative guidelines and accounting controls to ensure the proper usage of credit/purchase cards and related funds. Credit/purchase cards are to be used when it is in the best interest of City administrative affairs.

(3)    Application. The individual holder, upon prior approval of the Director of Financial Services, shall use each credit/purchase card in a responsible manner.

(4)    Credit Limits. The Director of Financial Services shall set credit/purchase limits on each card issued subject to final approval by the Mayor. Individual purchases shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) and in no event shall the credit/purchase card limit exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for any individual credit/purchase card account without pre-approval of the Director of Financial Services.

(5)    Credit Card Restriction. The following will be considered an unauthorized transaction, purchase or use of any City credit/purchase card:

(i)    Cash advances;

(ii)    Payment of invoices or statements;

(iii)    Purchases where an open charge account would be utilized;

(iv)    Personal purchases of any kind; and/or

(v)    Obtaining cash refunds for goods purchased with a City credit/purchase card.

(6)    Disallowed Charges. Disallowed charges or charges not properly identified will be paid by the employee before the charge card/purchase billing is due. Failure to do so will render the employee personally liable where the City shall have a prior lien against and a right to withhold any and all funds payable or to become payable to the employee up to the unpaid amount, plus interest and/or fees at the rate charged by the bank that issued the card. The employee shall not use the credit/purchase card if any disallowed charges are outstanding.

The act of obtaining a City credit/purchase card does not indicate pre-approval of expenditures.

(7)    Return of Credit/Purchase Card. The employee shall return all City credit/purchase cards at the request of the Director of Financial Services, or upon separation of employment. Final paycheck will be held until all outstanding City property has been returned.

(b)    The Mayor and/or Director of Financial Services are authorized to implement any additional policies or administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this section. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.150 PERSONAL PROPERTY DISPOSAL.

(a)    Surplus Personal Property of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) or Less in Value. Approval of the City Council is not required for the sale or disposition of any City-owned surplus personal property with an estimated value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less. When such personal property has been certified for disposition by a Director, sale or disposition shall be made by the Director in accordance with methods described in subsection (c) of this section. Items having a nominal value may be disposed of in any reasonable and prudent manner or the Mayor may donate the item to a specific bona fide charitable organization which is tax exempt pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3). 

(b)    Surplus Personal Property over Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) in Value. Disposition of surplus personal property with an estimated value over twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) must be approved by the City Council. The City Council may:

(1)    Approve the disposition;

(2)    Approve the disposition with conditions; or

(3)    Disapprove the proposed disposition, whereupon it shall give the Director directions for further action.

(c)    Methods of Disposition. Permissible methods of disposition of surplus personal property include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Public auction;

(2)    Solicitation of bids;

(3)    Negotiated sale for approximate fair market value; or

(4)    Transfer to another agency of government pursuant to subsection (d)(4) of this section.

 (d)    Statutory Conditions/Exceptions. Certain provisions of the Revised Code of Washington impose special conditions or procedures for the disposition of municipal personal property. When required, the Director shall comply with those laws, and when authorized the Director may utilize said laws, treating them as limited exceptions to the extent inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter. These laws include, but are not limited to, the following as currently enacted and hereinafter amended:

(1)    Chapter 35.94 RCW - Sale or Lease of Municipal Utilities;

(2)    Chapter 63.32 RCW - Unclaimed Property in Hands of City Police;

(3)    RCW 35.21.088 - Equipment rental fund;

(4)    Chapter 39.33 RCW - Intergovernmental Disposition of Property; 

(5)    Chapter 39.34 RCW - Interlocal Cooperation Act; 

(6)    Chapter 63.21 RCW - Lost and Found Property;

(7)    RCW 35.21.730 through 35.21.755 - Transfers to public corporations; and

(8)    RCW 46.55.230 and 46.55.240 - Disposition of junk vehicles. (Ord. 4934 §3 (part), 2005)


2.76.160 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.

The Mayor is authorized to establish and implement policies and procedures deemed appropriate for the administration of this chapter. These policies and procedures shall be set forth in City Policy No. 1-20-03. (Ord. 4975 §4, 2006)


Chapter 2.78 REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS

Sections:

2.78.010    PURCHASES AND SALES.

2.78.020    LEASES.

2.78.030    RIGHT-OF-WAY ACQUISITIONS.

2.78.040    UTILITY PROPERTY - SURPLUSING.

2.78.050    PARKS PROPERTY.

2.78.060    INTERGOVERNMENTAL SALES AND LEASES.

2.78.070    RELOCATION.


2.78.010 PURCHASES AND SALES.

(a)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Council shall approve all purchases of real property and shall surplus as appropriate and approve all sales of real property by the City.

(b)    When disposing of real property, the City may list the property with a real estate broker, negotiate directly with a prospective purchaser or utilize any other appropriate means to sell the property.

(c)    If the City determines that the real property has value only to an abutting owner of land because of the size, shape, topography, feature or restriction of the property, the City shall notify the abutting owner that the property is for sale to allow them an opportunity to submit an offer to purchase the property and/or to match any offer presented.

(d)    Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all real property purchases and sales shall be pursuant to terms and conditions as approved by the City Council, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section.

(e)    The purchase or sale of real property including easements and the granting or acquisitions of rights-of-way with a purchase or sale cost which does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) may be approved by the Mayor or designee and shall not require City Council approval. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.020 LEASES.

The leasing of real property by or to the City for a term which, including options, does not exceed two (2) years and rent or lease payments which do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per year may be approved by the Mayor or designee and shall not require City Council approval. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.030 RIGHT-OF-WAY ACQUISITIONS.

City Council approval of project budgets or condemnation proceedings for right-of-way, easement or other land acquisitions for street or road development or improvements shall constitute City Council approval for the purpose of BMC 2.78.010. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.040 UTILITY PROPERTY - SURPLUSING.

Prior to the sale or lease of City public utility real property, the City Council shall, by resolution, surplus and authorize the sale or lease of said property following a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.94.040. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.050 PARKS PROPERTY.

The sale or lease of parks property as designated in BMC 13.12.020 shall be subject to the provisions of the Parks Protection Code, Chapter 13.12 BMC. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.060 INTERGOVERNMENTAL SALES AND LEASES.

Prior to the sale or lease of surplus City property having an estimated value of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) to another governmental entity, the City Council shall hold a hearing following notice pursuant to the provisions of RCW 39.33.020. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


2.78.070 RELOCATION.

Pursuant to RCW 8.26.010(2), the City hereby elects not to comply with the provisions of RCW 8.26.035 through 8.26.115 regarding moving and related expenses when acquiring property in connection with a program or project not receiving federal financial assistance. (Ord. 5379 §1 (part), 2019: Ord. 4893 §1, 2004)


Chapter 2.82 NAMING OF PARKS AND PUBLIC FACILITIES

Sections:

2.82.010    POLICY.

2.82.020    PROCEDURE.


2.82.010 POLICY.

(a)    In naming City parks and other City facilities, the following criteria will be considered:

(1)    Neighborhood, geographic or common usage identification;

(2)    A natural or geological feature;

(3)    Significant historical place or event;

(4)    A person who has contributed outstanding civic service to the community or is a significant historical figure; or

(5)    A person who has made a significant land or monetary contribution to the City.

(b)    For purposes of this chapter, "person" shall mean:

(1)    An individual, individuals or a family (living or deceased); or

(2)    A public or private corporation, organization or other similar entity. (Ord. 4939 §1 (part), 2005)


2.82.020 PROCEDURE.

(a)    Naming suggestions may be solicited from the public and/or from civic organizations. When solicited, all suggestions shall be recorded by the applicable department and forwarded to the Parks Commission, when naming a City park or facility, and to the City Council for consideration.

(b)    When naming a City park facility, park or a portion thereof, the Department of Parks and Recreation shall submit its recommendation to the Parks Commission for approval and then to the City Council for consideration and final approval.

(c)    The department seeking to name a public facility, or a portion thereof, other than a City park facility or park, shall present its recommendation to the City Council for consideration and final approval.

(d)    The City Council may, upon consideration of any proposals and recommendations presented to it or upon its own initiative, designate the name for the park or other public facility or portion thereof, which shall thereafter be identified by the name so designated. (Ord. 4939 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 2.88 ADA ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.88.010    ESTABLISHED.

2.88.020    MEMBERSHIP.

2.88.030    SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

2.88.040    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

2.88.050    MEETINGS.


2.88.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is established an ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) Advisory Committee which will act solely as an advisory group to City departments and staff. (Ord. 5318 §1 (part), 2017)


2.88.020 MEMBERSHIP.

Committee membership shall function as follows:

(a)    The Committee will ideally consist of not more than ten (10) members.

(b)    The Committee shall operate in an ad hoc fashion, without formal appointment.

(c)    Persons with disabilities shall be encouraged to join the Committee and attend Committee meetings.

(d)    The ADA Coordinator shall be the Chairperson of the Committee. (Ord. 5318 §1 (part), 2017)


2.88.030 SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

The members of the Committee shall receive no salaries or other remuneration for their services in such capacity and shall not be entitled to reimbursement for personal expenses incurred by them in the discharge of their duties, except to the extent and purposes and amounts such expenses are authorized and approved in advance by the Mayor. (Ord. 5318 §1 (part), 2017)


2.88.040 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

The Committee shall have the following specific functions:

(a)    Recommend appropriate modifications to City services, policies and practices to help implement the ADA.

(b)    Report to the ADA Coordinator its concerns, or concerns brought to it by others, regarding possible non-compliance with the ADA, and make advisory suggestions as to any action to be taken.

(c)    Assist the City in identifying the priority of issues related to the ADA, and assist in prioritizing improvements related to ADA transition planning. (Ord. 5318 §1 (part), 2017)


2.88.050 MEETINGS.

The Committee shall meet on an as-needed basis. (Ord. 5318 §1 (part), 2017)


Chapter 2.90 INDEMNITY OF PERSONNEL

Sections:

2.90.100    DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.

2.90.200    DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS, BOARD MEMBERS, COMMISSIONERS OR EMPLOYEES.


2.90.100 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.

(a)    POLICY - The City of Bremerton shall provide legal defense and will pay all legitimate claims, settlements, judgments, and associated costs for its officials, board members, commissioners, employees and their marital communities, named as parties or defendants in claims or lawsuits as a result of acts or omissions made in the good faith performance of the City’s business.

(b)    NOTIFICATION - Within 7 days after receipt of a claim or suit against them, a City official, board member, commissioner or employee shall tender it to the office of risk management. (Ord. 4107, 1987)


2.90.200 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS, BOARD MEMBERS, COMMISSIONERS OR EMPLOYEES.

All City officials, board members, commissioners or employees named as parties to a claim or defendants in such a lawsuit shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the City Attorney, Risk Management Specialist and other authorized representatives. This shall include, but is not limited to, providing requested information, statements, testimony, exhibits and documents. Failure to fully cooperate shall result in City’s withdrawal of defense and shall absolve City of all responsibility for payment of judgments and settlements. (Ord. 5075 §6, 2009: Ord. 4107, 1987)


Chapter 2.92 OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT

Sections:

2.92.010    CREATED.

2.92.020    FUNCTIONS.

2.92.030    RESPONSIBILITY - SAFETY, LOSS REDUCTION, PREVENTION.

2.92.040    INSURANCE/SELF-INSURANCE/POOLED COVERAGE PROGRAMS.

2.92.050    CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - SELF-INSURED WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CLAIMS.

2.92.060    CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - NON-LITIGATION CLAIMS.

2.92.070    CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - LITIGATION CLAIMS.

2.92.080    CLAIMS NEGOTIATION, DISCUSSION, AND REPORTING.

2.92.090    RECOVERY OF LOSSES.


2.92.010 CREATED.

(a)    Office. There is created the Office of Risk Management within the City Attorney’s Office. The supervisor of said office shall be the City Attorney, or designee.

(b)    Position. The Office of Risk Management shall be administered by the Risk Management Specialist, or other assigns, subject to the direction and supervision of the City Attorney, or designee. The Risk Management Specialist shall report directly to the City Attorney, or designee. The duties of the Risk Management Specialist may be assigned to one or more employees in the City Attorney’s Office who shall hereinafter be referred to in this chapter as "Risk Management Specialist."

(c)    References in Code. All references in the Bremerton Municipal Code to the Risk Manager shall mean the Risk Management Specialist. (Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3394 §1, 1985)


2.92.020 FUNCTIONS.

The Office of Risk Management shall be responsible for:

(a)    Loss reduction or prevention where such reduction or prevention is cost effective;

(b)    Transfer of risks to other parties where feasible through the purchase of insurance, and/or risk retention through a system of self-insurance and/or participation in programs providing pooled coverage, in whatever combination is most responsible and cost effective;

(c)    Coordination and handling of all claims, including workers’ compensation claims;

(d)    Coordination with other City departments, through the City’s Safety and Health Committee and City Safety Officer, of an effective employee safety program within the City; and

(e)    Writing interdepartmental rules as he or she deems appropriate for the implementation and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 5181 §1, 2012: Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3394 §2, 1985)


2.92.030 RESPONSIBILITY - SAFETY, LOSS REDUCTION, PREVENTION.

(a)    The Risk Management Specialist shall be responsible for risk identification, analysis and control and shall assist the City’s Safety and Health Committee and City Safety Officer with development and administration of the City’s Safety Program.

(b)    The Risk Management Specialist will assist the City’s Safety and Health Committee and City Safety Officer to provide safety training to all City employees and ensure that required certifications for employees are kept current. He or she shall also become actively involved in the ongoing training programs provided by Human Resources and other departments and ensure that a portion of that training is on safety awareness and loss prevention.

(c)    The Risk Management Specialist is a permanent member of the City’s Safety and Health Committee and shall work with the Committee to ensure compliance with all applicable WISHA directives, provide input, and offer advice and assistance in helping the Committee to achieve its stated goals. The Risk Management Specialist shall maintain the file of minutes of each Committee meeting.

(d)    The City Attorney shall advise and recommend to all City departments appropriate contractual clauses providing for indemnity, hold harmless and insurance provisions. The Risk Management Specialist shall review all proposed City contracts, permits and leases to ensure that all contractual provisions relating to insurance, indemnity and hold harmless provisions adequately protect the City.

(e)    The Mayor shall have the authority to appoint and remove a City Safety Officer. The City Safety Officer may be an employee or a contract position. If a City of Bremerton employee, the appointed City Safety Officer shall report directly to his/her Department Director and shall perform the duties of City Safety Officer as established by policy by the Mayor. (Ord. 5181 §2, 2012: Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3994 §3, 1985)


2.92.040 INSURANCE/SELF-INSURANCE/POOLED COVERAGE PROGRAMS.

The Risk Management Specialist is responsible for the procurement and administration of all insured, self-insured and/or pooled property, casualty and liability coverage programs:

(a)    The Risk Management Specialist may, with the approval of the City Attorney, negotiate with insurance brokers for any type of insurance and may recommend that the City engage the services of such brokers.

(b)    The Risk Management Specialist shall purchase all insurance policies including funded self-insurance programs, pooled coverage and related services, and shall administer the same. The purchase of any policy shall be as follows:

1.    For any insurance policy with an annual premium of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) or less, the Risk Management Specialist may purchase the policy with the approval of the City Attorney or designee. Such purchase shall not require City Council approval.

2.    For any insurance policy with an annual premium exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), the Risk Management Specialist, with the approval of the City Attorney or designee, is authorized to bind policy coverage without prior City Council approval subject to budget authority. Within sixty (60) days of binding coverage, the Risk Management Specialist shall advise City Council that coverage was bound and seek City Council approval for continuation of the bound coverage. (Ord. 5380 §1, 2019: Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 5007 §1, 2007: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3994 §4, 1985)


2.92.050 CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - SELF-INSURED WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CLAIMS.

The Risk Management Specialist, or designee, shall be responsible for the direction and monitoring of all workers’ compensation claims to a fair and equitable conclusion.

(a)    Every employee shall immediately complete the appropriate report form when work-related injury or illness occurs and promptly forward same to the designated supervisor, who is responsible for immediately forwarding to the Risk Management Specialist with any pertinent comments. The Risk Management Specialist shall complete the employer section.

(b)    The Risk Management Specialist may coordinate activity on workers’ compensation claims, including time loss, medical verification, and instruction involving progress of the claim.

(c)    The Risk Management Specialist shall coordinate with the City Attorney for retaining such outside expertise as necessary for the resolution of claims. These may include, but are not limited to, doctors, rehabilitation specialists, and investigators. The City Attorney’s Office may elect to represent the City in all hearings and/or trials involving workers’ compensation claims, or appoint outside counsel.

(d)    The Human Resources Manager shall develop appropriate return-to-work opportunities for injured employees and, when feasible, will coordinate the implementation of specific return-to-work plans with the department heads involved. (Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 4461 §4, 1994; Ord. 3994 §5, 1985)


2.92.060 CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - NON-LITIGATION CLAIMS.

The Risk Management Specialist shall be responsible for the investigation and evaluation of all non-litigation claims by or against the City.

(a)    The City Clerk is hereby designated to receive all claims. He/she shall forward to the Risk Management Specialist all non-litigation claims naming the City and/or its officers or employees, which claims allege that said officers or employees, acting within the scope of their duties, caused the claimant damages.

(b)    All City departments, divisions and other City agencies shall report immediately to the Risk Management Specialist the occurrence of any accident or incident which may give rise to a claim by or against the City to ensure prompt investigation of the incident.

(c)    The Risk Management Specialist shall initiate and/or coordinate the investigation of all non-litigation claims. The Risk Management Specialist may employ, subject to the City Attorney’s approval, the services of claims specialists. All investigation of non-litigation claims and potential claims shall be conducted as the agent of the City Attorney, and protected by the attorney-client privilege and attorney work product rule, to the extent allowed by law.

(d)    The City Attorney shall have the authority to negotiate and approve the settlement of any non-litigation claim; provided, however, the settlement of any such claim in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall require the approval of the Mayor and the settlement of any non-litigation claim in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

(e)    The Risk Management Specialist shall maintain complete histories of all non-litigation claims reported to the Office of Risk Management, and investigation thereof sufficient to document at least a seven (7) year claims history or such other period of time deemed necessary for purposes of reporting claims history to insurance companies. (Ord. 5380 §2, 2019: Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3994 §6, 1985)


2.92.070 CLAIMS MANAGEMENT - LITIGATION CLAIMS.

(a)    Service of process on the Mayor, Mayor’s designee or City Clerk shall constitute service on the City. No other City official or employee may accept service of a summons and/or complaint unless such official or employee is specifically named in the lawsuit.

(b)    The Mayor, Mayor’s designee or City Clerk or defendant employee, upon accepting service of the summons and/or complaint, shall deliver copies to the City Attorney.

(c)    The Risk Management Specialist shall transmit copies of the lawsuit to the affected department and/or individual and, where appropriate, to the insurance company, pool or representative.

(d)    The Risk Management Specialist shall initiate and/or coordinate the investigation of all lawsuits which may be insured against involving the City and/or its officials/employees. The Risk Management Specialist may employ, subject to City Attorney’s approval, the services of claims specialists. All investigation of lawsuits shall be conducted as the agent of the City Attorney, and protected by the attorney-client privilege and attorney work product rule, to the extent allowed by law.

(e)    The City Attorney shall have the authority to negotiate and approve the settlement of any litigation claim; provided, however, the settlement of any such claim in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) shall require the approval of the Mayor and the settlement of any litigation claim in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.

(f)    The City Attorney shall maintain complete histories of all lawsuits sufficient to document at least a seven (7) year claims history of same or such other period of time deemed necessary for purposes of reporting claims history to insurance companies. (Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3994 §7, 1985)


2.92.080 CLAIMS NEGOTIATION, DISCUSSION, AND REPORTING.

(a)    Except as specifically directed by the Mayor or City Attorney, no City department, division, or other City agency, and no City official or employee, other than the City Attorney or Risk Management Specialist, acting individually or collectively, may engage in the following acts:

(1)    Negotiate or otherwise effect the settlement of a claim or lawsuit involving the City;

(2)    Discuss with persons other than the Risk Management Specialist, Mayor, City Attorney, or persons authorized by the Risk Management Specialist, Mayor or City Attorney, incidents which could reasonably lead to a claim or lawsuit against the City; provided, however, that the employee may discuss the incident with his/her supervisor.

(b)    Prior to any formal settlement offer, the Risk Management Specialist shall be advised, in writing, of all proposed settlements of claims and lawsuits against the City. The Risk Management Specialist shall seek approval of its insurers, in conformance with the provisions of any insurance policies applicable to the claim or lawsuit. In the event the insurer does not provide necessary settlement approval, no settlement shall be made without the Mayor’s written approval and acknowledgment that the City’s insurers have withheld approval.

(c)    The Risk Management Specialist shall annually report to the council the total number and amount of all claims filed against the City and the number and amounts of all claims or lawsuits paid by the City during the preceding calendar year. (Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Added, 06/13/1996. Formerly 2.92.075)


2.92.090 RECOVERY OF LOSSES.

(a)    Action for Recovery. The City Attorney shall be responsible for bringing all actions, including claims and lawsuits, for recovery of losses to the City arising out of the acts of others. Such losses may include property damage or losses which impact on the City as a result of personal injuries to City officers or employees. In addition, the City Attorney may join the City as a party with any third party in a lawsuit involving recovery of loss to the City.

(b)    Allocation of Recoveries. Any moneys recovered (excluding costs of recovery) by the City Attorney on account of losses to the City shall be paid to the budget unit or department which has expended funds and/or materials as a result of the loss. Any moneys in excess of those so expended shall be transferred to the risk management fund. (Ord. 5075 §7 (part), 2009: Ord. 4966 §6 (part), 2006: Ord. 4808, Amended, 07/26/2002; Ord. 4556, Amended, 06/13/1996; Ord. 3994 §8, 1985. Formerly 2.92.080)


Chapter 2.96 CODE OF ETHICS

Sections:

2.96.010    PURPOSE.

2.96.020    DEFINITIONS.

2.96.030    VIOLATIONS.

2.96.040    ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.

2.96.050    ENFORCEMENT.

2.96.060    FRIVOLOUS COMPLAINTS.

2.96.070    CIVIL PENALTY AND ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.

2.96.080    NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

2.96.090    DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS.


2.96.010 PURPOSE.

The proper operation of democratic government requires public confidence in the integrity of its officials. As a cornerstone to open and responsive government, this Ethics Code sets standards for city officials, officers and employees. It serves as a restatement of state codes and standards in addition to Chapter 42.23 RCW, in areas of municipal operations where public trust is served by clear definition of expected behavior. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.020 DEFINITIONS.

(1)    Immediate Family - Husband, wife, father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter; like relatives by marriage such as stepson, stepdaughter; father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law or daughter-in-law.

(2)    Public Officer or Employee - Any person, officer or employee holding a full-time regular position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the City, whether paid or unpaid, includes members of any board, committee or commission.

(3)    Quasi-judicial Proceedings - Those actions that determine the legal rights, duties or privileges of a specific party in a hearing or contested proceeding. They do not include legislative actions of area-wide significance or which affect the public generally.

(4)    RCW 42.52.010 is hereby adopted. Any reference to the State, it’s agencies, employees, agents, and similar references shall be understood to refer to the City of Bremerton, its departments, employees, agents, and similar references. Reference to "statute" shall mean statute or ordinance. Additionally, Subsections (1) through (3) of this Section shall control over conflicting provisions in RCW 42.52.010. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.030 VIOLATIONS.

(1)    The following Sections of the Revised Code of Washington, and any amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. This Ethics Code and Chapter 42.23 RCW shall control over any conflicting provisions adopted under this Section. Any reference to State, or similar references, shall be interpreted to refer to the City of Bremerton:

RCW 42.52.020    Activities incompatible with public service

RCW 42.52.030(1)&(3)    Financial interests in transactions

RCW 42.52.040    Assisting in transactions

RCW 42.52.050    Confidential information - Improperly concealed records

RCW 42.52.060    Testimony of state officials and state employees

RCW 42.52.070    Special Privileges

RCW 42.52.080    Employment after public service

RCW 42.52.090    Limited assistance by former state officers and employees

RCW 42.52.100(1)    Conditions on appearance before state agencies

RCW 42.52.110(1)    Compensation for official duties or nonperformance

RCW 42.52.130    Honoraria

RCW 42.52.140    Gifts

RCW 42.52.150    Limitation on gifts

RCW 42.52.160(1)&(2)    Use of persons, money, or property for private gain

RCW 42.52.170    Giving, paying, loaning, etc., anything of economic value

(2)    Appearance of fairness: No public officer or employee with decision-making authority shall participate in or influence any pending quasi-judicial proceeding whom:

(a)    Has a financial interest in the matter;

(b)    Has pre-judged the merits before hearing; or

(c)    Has a personal bias for or against any party affected by the action.

Provided, however, an officer may participate under the exceptions provided under chapter 42.36 RCW. Any contacts with an opponent or proponent by a decision-making official regarding a pending quasi-judicial proceeding is prohibited unless disclosure is made on the record pursuant to RCW 42.36.060. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.040 ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.

The following conduct shall be deemed additional violations of this chapter:

(1)    To knowingly file a false charge or complaint of a violation of this ethics code,

(2)    To induce or coerce or attempt to induce or coerce anyone into violating a provision of this ethics code,

(3)    To knowingly commit or allow any breach of confidentiality contrary to this ethics code,

(4)    To retaliate or engage in reprisals against any person making a complaint of violations of this ethics code. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.050 ENFORCEMENT.

A.    Any person who has knowledge of a violation of this Code of Ethics committed by any person may make a signed written report of the same to the City Clerk. The report must set forth specific facts detailing the alleged violation, including the date and place of violation; names and telephone numbers of all persons having knowledge of the alleged conduct; the sections and subsections of this code alleged to have been violated; and the specific conduct at issue. The report must be signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of this state and include the name, address and telephone number of the person submitting the report. The fact that a report has been received, the contents of the report, and the identity of the person making the report shall remain confidential to the extent allowed by law, including public disclosure laws of the State of Washington. The Mayor, after receipt of a copy of the report, shall, within five (5) days, refer the same to the City Auditor for an initial threshold determination of whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred.

B.    Upon receipt of a report, the City Auditor, without benefit of subpoenas or sworn testimony, shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt by City, make such preliminary investigation as he or she deems appropriate to determine whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a violation of the Code of Ethics has occurred. If the City Auditor believes that the allegations may constitute a criminal matter, he or she shall refer the report to the proper authorities for consideration of criminal prosecution. If the City Auditor determines that reasonable cause exists to believe that a violation of this Code of Ethics has occurred, the City Auditor shall present the matter to the Hearing Examiner in a public hearing. The City Auditor shall be represented by the City Attorney, or the City Attorney’s designee, to pursue any remedies provided by this Chapter.

C.    If the City Auditor should determine reasonable cause does not exist, he or she shall communicate his or her decision in writing to the person who made the initial report with ten (10) days of making the determination. The City Auditor may make a determination that the complaint is frivolous and without merit pursuant to Section 2.96.060. See Section 2.96.080 for notice requirements.

D.    Within thirty (30) days of rendering a determination of reasonable cause, the City Auditor shall notify, in writing, the person who make the report and the person complained against, of the public hearing which will be held to determine if a violation has occurred. Notice shall be provided at least thirty (30) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The person complained against shall have the right to file a written answer to the charge and to appear at the hearing with or without legal counsel, submit testimony, be fully heard, and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. See Section 2.96.080 for notice requirements.

E.    Hearings conducted by the Hearing Examiner shall be informal, meaning that the Hearing Examiner shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. The Hearing Examiner may call witnesses on his or her own motion and compel the production of books, records, papers, or other evidence needed by the parties. To that end, the Hearing Examiner shall issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum on his or her own or at the request of the City Auditor or the person complained against. All testimony shall be under oath administered by the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner may adjourn the hearing from time to time in order to allow for the orderly presentation of evidence. The Hearing Examiner shall prepare an official record of the hearing, including all testimony, which shall be recorded by mechanical device, and exhibits; provided that the Hearing Examiner shall not be required to transcribe such records unless presented with a request accompanied by payment of the cost of transcription.

F.    Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing the Hearing Examiner shall, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, make and fully record in his permanent records, findings of fact, conclusions of law, determination of a recommended disposition, and his or her order. A copy of the findings, conclusions, recommended disposition, and order shall be forwarded by certified mail, or personal service, to the person who made the initial report and to the person complained against at addresses as given by both persons to the Hearing Examiner. An additional copy of the findings, conclusions, recommendations, and order shall be forwarded to the City Auditor, the City Attorney, and the person(s) responsible for acting on the recommendations.

G.    Any person found, by final written order of the Hearing Examiner, to be in violation of this Code of Ethics may seek review of the Hearing Examiner’s order and any other decision based upon that order in the following manner:

(1)    Civil penalty: If the Hearing Examiner orders the person to pay a civil penalty, the person may appeal in the form of a trial de novo in the Bremerton Municipal Court, which shall hear the case according to the Civil Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction (CRLJ) and applicable local rules of the Bremerton Municipal Court. This appeal shall be taken by filing in the Bremerton Municipal Court a notice of appeal within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Hearing Examiner’s order. Proof of actual and timely receipt by the Bremerton Municipal Court is on the person filing the appeal. The person filing the appeal shall also, within the same fourteen (14) days, personally serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the Hearing Examiner, the City Auditor, and the City Attorney, and file an acknowledgment or affidavit of service in the Bremerton Municipal Court.

(2)    Cease and Desist. If the Hearing Examiner orders a person to cease and desist violating this chapter, the person may seek a writ of review from the Superior Court pursuant to RCW 7.16, within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Hearing Examiner’s order.

(3)    Public Disclosure. If the Hearing Examiner orders a person to file any documents or papers required by this chapter, the person may seek a writ of review from the Superior Court pursuant to RCW 7.16, within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Hearing Examiner’s order.

(4)    Discipline. If the Hearing Examiner recommends either discipline, for any City official or employee; or removal from employment for a City employee, excluding elected officials, and the discipline or removal actually occurs, the City employee or official may seek whatever remedies exist at law or in equity, including applicable labor agreements and Civil Service Rules.

(5)    Debarment. If the Hearing Examiner recommends that the person be excluded from bidding on public contracts and the exclusion actually occurs, the person may seek whatever remedies exist at law or in equity.

(6)    Termination of Contract. If the Hearing Examiner recommends that the person’s contract with the City be terminated and the contract is actually terminated, the person may seek whatever remedies exist at law or in equity. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.060 FRIVOLOUS COMPLAINTS.

1.    The Hearing Examiner may, at the request of a party, or on his or her motion, make a finding that a complaint brought pursuant to this Ethics Code is frivolous and without merit.

2.    If the City Auditor or the Hearing Examiner makes a finding that a complaint has been brought which is frivolous and without merit, the person making such a complaint shall be liable to the City for the cost of the City Auditor’s investigation and the Hearing Examiner’s hearing, if applicable. If the complainant is a City employee, he or she may additionally be subject to disciplinary action. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.070 CIVIL PENALTY AND ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.

Violators shall pay a civil penalty of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or three (3) times the economic value of anything received in violation of this chapter, whichever is greater. Any monetary penalty assessed civilly shall be placed in the City’s general fund. The Hearing Examiner will also have the authority to issue orders specified in BMC 2.96.050(G). (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.080 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

Any written notice, notice of appeal, or other document required to be served under the terms of this Ethics Code may be personally served pursuant to Superior Court Rules for service of process; or may be mailed by first class mail three working days prior to the last day for service. This section applies unless specific provision is made for service in another manner. Proof of proper service is the burden of the serving party. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


2.96.090 DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS.

The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to every public officer and employee of the City within thirty (30) days after enactment of this code. Each public officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall acknowledge receipt of a copy before entering service. (Ord. 4654, Repealed & Replaced, 08/07/1999)


Chapter 2.98 BREMERTON RESERVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES

Sections:

2.98.005    EXTENSION OF RELIEF PROVISIONS.

2.98.010    ESTABLISHED.

2.98.020    MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.

2.98.030    SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

2.98.040    OFFICERS.

2.98.050    RULES OF PROCEDURE.

2.98.060    COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ETHICS.

2.98.070    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

2.98.080    MEETINGS.

2.98.090    NON-PARTICIPATION IN THE RETIREMENT PENSION PROVISIONS OF RCW 41.24.


2.98.005 EXTENSION OF RELIEF PROVISIONS.

The City of Bremerton extends the relief provisions of RCW 41.24 to Bremerton Police Reserve Officers, pursuant to RCW 41.24.400. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is established a Bremerton Reserve Officer Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the "Reserve Officer Board", which shall administer the relief provisions of RCW 41.24 extending to City of Bremerton reserve officers specified medical, death, and disability benefits made necessary from death, sickness, injury, or disability arising in the performance of reserve officer duty. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.020 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE.

(a)    The Reserve Officer Board shall consist of the following five members:

(1)    The Mayor, or designee

(2)    One member of City Council, or designee

(3)    The City Clerk

(4)    The Police Chief

(5)    One reserve officer, elected by Bremerton reserve officers

(b)    Terms of appointment for the members identified in (1) and (2) shall continue until successors have been designated. The reserve officer member shall serve for one year after election by Bremerton reserve officers. In the event that an elected reserve officer is unable to complete the elected term, a successor shall be elected as soon as feasible. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.030 SALARIES AND PERSONAL EXPENSES.

The members of the Reserve Officer Board shall receive no salaries or other remuneration for their services in such capacity, and shall not be entitled to personal expenses incurred by them in the discharge of their official duties, except when such expense is first authorized and approved in advance by the Mayor. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.040 OFFICERS.

The Reserve Officer Board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman by a simple majority of the members present. The officers so elected shall serve for a term of one year. Thereafter annually, new officers shall be elected by the Reserve Officer Board and shall serve until their successors are elected. A vacancy in any position of any office of the Reserve Officer Board shall be filled by a vote of a simple majority of the members present. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.050 RULES OF PROCEDURE.

Any action to be taken by the Reserve Officer Board shall require the concurrence of a simple majority of the members qualified to vote. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.060 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ETHICS.

The Reserve Officer Board shall comply with the city code of ethics ordinance codified as Chapter 2.96. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.070 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

The Reserve Officer Board shall have the following specific functions:

(a)    Provide for the enrollment of all Bremerton reserve officers under the relief provisions of RCW 41.24, the Volunteer Fire Fighters’ and Reserve Officers’ Relief and Pension Principal Fund

(b)    Initially hear and decide all applications for relief

(c)    Pass on all claims and direct payment thereof from the Washington State Volunteer Fire Fighters’ and Reserve Officers’ Relief and Pension Principal Fund created under RCW 41.24 to those entitled thereto

(d)    Provide for the payment of the annual fee for each reserve officer enrolled under the relief provision of the Washington State Volunteer Fire Fighters’ and Reserve Officers’ Relief and Pension Principal Fund

(e)    Keep a public record of all proceedings and of all receipts and disbursements made by the Reserve Officer Board

(f)    Make an annual report of its expenses and disbursements with a full list of the beneficiaries

(g)    Make all required reports to the State Board for Volunteer Fire Fighters and Reserve Officers.

(Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.080 MEETINGS.

The Reserve Officer Board shall meet on the call of its chair on a regular monthly meeting day when there is business to come before it. The chair shall be required to call a meeting on any regular meeting day at the request of any enrolled reserve officer or his or her beneficiary claiming relief. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


2.98.090 NON-PARTICIPATION IN THE RETIREMENT PENSION PROVISIONS OF RCW 41.24.

The City shall not provide retirement pension benefits to its reserve officers under the provisions of RCW 41.24 and the Reserve Officer Board has no authority to administer any retirement pension provisions of that chapter. (Ord. 4669, Added, 11/05/1999)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.01    RATES AND FEES

3.02    BUDGET STRUCTURE AND POLICY

3.04    LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

3.06    PUBLIC ACCESS TELEVISION FUND

3.08    CLAIMS FUND

3.12    ONE PERCENT FOR ARTS FUND

3.24    ARTERIAL STREET FUND

3.25    PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND

3.26    GIFT AND DONATION FUND

3.28    ADMINISTRATIVE TRUST FUND

3.30    RISK MANAGEMENT FUND

3.32    SELF-INSURED HEALTH AND WELFARE RESERVE FUND

3.36    CONTINGENCY RESERVE FUND

3.40    CURRENT WATER FUND

3.42    STORMWATER OPERATING FUND

3.46    SALES OR USE TAX

3.48    BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES

3.49    USE TAX - NATURAL OR MANUFACTURED GAS

3.50    UTILITY TAXES

3.52    MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX

3.64    LODGING TAX FUND

3.65    REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND

3.68    EQUIPMENT RENTAL RESERVE FUND

3.72    GAMBLING TAX

3.74    AMUSEMENT DEVICES

3.76    MOTOR VEHICLE INTOXICATION FUND

3.78    MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION

3.80    LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

3.82    COMMERCIAL PARKING TAX

3.84    EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES

3.86    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR TAXES

3.88    WASTEWATER OPERATING FUND

3.96    DEFERRED COMPENSATION FUND

3.99    PENDERGAST REGIONAL PARK CONSTRUCTION FUND

 


Chapter 3.01 RATES AND FEES

Sections:

3.01.010    RATES AND FEES ESTABLISHED.


3.01.010 RATES AND FEES ESTABLISHED.

Rates and fees for services relating to the Department of Financial Services, Municipal Court, Department of Community Development, Police Department, Fire Department, Parks and Recreation Department, Department of Public Works and Utilities, Bremerton Kitsap Access Television (BKAT) and other related services are established by resolution or ordinance and are on file with the City Clerk and may be posted or linked on the City of Bremerton’s website.* (Ord. 5130 §1, 2010)

*    Code reviser’s note:

The link to the Rates and Fees page of the City website is: http://www.BremertonWA.gov/164/Rates-Fees.

The link to the Rates and Fees Table is: http://www.BremertonWA.gov/DocumentCenter/View/98.


Chapter 3.02 BUDGET STRUCTURE AND POLICY

Sections:

3.02.010    BUDGET STRUCTURE.

3.02.020    GENERAL BUDGET POLICY.

3.02.030    ADMINISTRATIVE BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

3.02.040    CITY COUNCIL FISCAL AND BUDGET COMMITTEE BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

3.02.050    CITY COUNCIL BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

3.02.060    IMPLEMENTATION.


3.02.010 BUDGET STRUCTURE.

The City Council hereby establishes an annual budget for the City of Bremerton, beginning January 1, 2003. The 2003 Budget and all subsequent budgets shall be prepared, considered and adopted pursuant to the provisions of RCW Chapter 35.33 and of this Chapter.

The adopted budget of the City of Bremerton shall consist of various Funds and Departments within those Funds as provided in the chart of accounts pursuant to statute. Each Department shall contain five (5) distinct Category Groups, which shall be classified as: 1. Personnel, 2. Supplies, Services and Taxes, 3. Debt Service, 4. Capital Expenditures and 5. Transfers. (Ord. 4814, Amended, 10/31/2002; Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332 §1, 1991; Ord. 3964 §1, 1985)


3.02.020 GENERAL BUDGET POLICY.

Except as specifically authorized in subsequent sections of this Chapter, no administrator or legislator shall expend or authorize expenditure of monies that would cause the overexpenditure of any budget Category group. Further, no administrator or legislator shall employ or authorize the employment of a person into a permanent position not specifically authorized in the adopted budget. (Ord. 4814, Amended, 10/31/2002; Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332 §2, 1991; Ord. 3964 §2, 1985)


3.02.030 ADMINISTRATIVE BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

The Mayor may authorize the transfer of appropriations between Category Groups within Departments. Each authorization is limited to $10,000 except authorizations made to correct technical errors in classification of projects or tasks to a Category Group which can be in any amount. Only one such adjustment may be applied to any Category Group within a department in a fiscal year. These authorizations may not result in the addition or deletion of capital projects or items and shall be accomplished in a manner which provides for audit review. Further, the Mayor is empowered to authorize recruitment for and filling of a permanent position at a level lower than that approved in the adopted budget. (Ord. 4609, Repealed & Replaced, 10/16/1997; Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332, §3, 1991; Ord. 3964, §3, 1985)


3.02.040 CITY COUNCIL FISCAL AND BUDGET COMMITTEE BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

The City Council Fiscal and Budget Committee may authorize the addition or deletion of capital projects and items, provided that individual deletions or additions do not exceed a cost of $10,000 and provided all council members have been advised of the Committee agenda item. Further, the Committee may authorize the transfer of appropriations between Category Groups to accomplish capital additions and/or to reappropriate surplus funds generated by capital deletions. Such transfer authorizations shall be accomplished in a manner which provides for audit review. In exercising this exception authority, the Committee shall not deviate from the policy outlined in the adopted budget, nor shall it authorize any budget adjustment that exceeds the total Department appropriation. Denials of requests for authorizations allowed in this section may be appealed to the City Council. All adjustments related to capital expenditures additions and deletions shall be reported to the Council by the Council Fiscal and Budget Committee. (Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332 §4, 1991; Ord. 3964 §4, 1985)


3.02.050 CITY COUNCIL BUDGET ADJUSTMENTS.

Except as specifically provided in this Chapter, all adjustments to the adopted budget shall be authorized only by the City Council. Further, no adjustments to the adopted budget shall be considered by the City Council without prior review and recommendation or comment by the Mayor and the Fiscal and Budget Committee. (Ord. 4814, Amended, 10/31/2002; Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332 §5, 1991; Ord. 3964 §5, 1985)


3.02.060 IMPLEMENTATION.

Policies and procedures to insure the implementation and maintenance of the policies set forth in this Chapter may be prepared by the City Treasurer and provided to the administrators responsible for each Department. (Ord. 4814, Amended, 10/31/2002; Ord. 4601, Amended, 09/29/1997; Ord. 4332 §6, 1991; Ord. 3964 §6, 1985)


Chapter 3.04 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND

Sections:

3.04.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.04.020    DESIGNATION.

3.04.030    POWER TO LEVY TAXES.

3.04.040    PURCHASE OF CERTIFICATES OF DELINQUENCY.

3.04.050    CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.


3.04.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is established by the city a fund for the purpose of guarantying, to the extent of fund and in the manner hereinafter provided, the payment of its local improvement bonds and warrants issued to pay for any local improvement hereafter ordered by the city. (Ord. 834 §1, 1926)


3.04.020 DESIGNATION.

Such fund shall be designated "local improvement guaranty fund", for the purpose of maintaining such fund the city shall be deemed and held to have pledged to the fund a tax credit of such city in an amount equal to five percent of the bonds or warrants hereafter so issued. The credit so pledged shall not constitute an indebtedness of the city within the meaning of any statutory or charter condition or limitations respecting indebtedness. Such pledge shall be deemed to have been made as to any local improvement district upon the delivery of the roll to the treasurer of the city for collection. Such pledged tax credits with the other resources of the fund enumerated in Section 3.04.030 shall constitute a reserve wherewith to purchase default bonds and warrants guaranteed by the fund. As among several issues of the bonds or warrants by the fund no preference shall exist, but default interest coupons, bonds and warrants shall be purchased out of the fund in the order of their presentation. (Ord. 834 §2, 1926)


3.04.030 POWER TO LEVY TAXES.

The city shall levy from time to time, as other taxes are levied, such sums as may be needed to meet the financial requirements of such guaranty fund, but not in excess of the total of the tax credits pledged herein to the guaranty fund. Whenever there shall be paid out of the guaranty fund any sum on account of the principal or interest of the local improvement bond or warrant, the city, as trustee for the fund, shall be subrogated to all the rights of the holder of the bond or interest coupon or warrant so paid, and the proceeds thereof, or the assessments underlying the same, shall be part of the guaranty fund, there shall also be paid into such guaranty fund the interest received from the bank deposits of the fund, as well as any surplus remaining in any local improvement fund guaranteed hereunder after the payment of all outstanding bonds or warrants payable primarily out of such local improvement fund. Warrants drawing interest at a rate not to exceed six percent, shall be issued as other warrants are issued by the city against such guaranty fund to meet any liability accruing against it; and at the time of making its annual budget and tax levy, the city shall provide for the levying of a sum sufficient, with the other resources of the fund, to pay warrants as issued during the preceding fiscal year; provided that no warrants shall be issued against the guaranty fund in excess of the cash therein and the tax credits pledged thereto, as provided in Section 3.04.020; provided further that no taxes shall be levied for the fund in excess of the tax credits so pledged by Section 3.04.020, and that the tax levies herein directed shall be additional to, and if need be, in excess of any law, statutory and charter limitations applicable to the tax levies of the city. (Ord. 834 §3, 1926)


3.04.040 PURCHASE OF CERTIFICATES OF DELINQUENCY.

So much of the money of such guaranty fund as is necessary may be used to purchase certificates of delinquency for general taxes on property subject to local improvement assessments underlying bonds or warrants guaranteed by the fund, or to purchase such property at county tax foreclosure, or from the county after foreclosure, for the purpose of protecting the guaranty fund. The fund shall be subrogated to the right of the city, and the city may foreclose the lien of general tax certificates of delinquency, and purchase the property of foreclosure sale. After so acquiring title to real property, the city may lease or sell and convey the same at public or private sale for such prices and on such terms as may be determined by resolution of the city or town council or other legislative body, any provisions of law, charter, or ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, and all proceeds resulting from such sales shall belong to and be paid into such guaranty fund. (Ord. 834 §4, 1926)


3.04.050 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.

Neither the holder or the owner of any bond issued under the provisions of this chapter shall file any claim therefor against the city, except for the payment from the special assessments made for the improvement for which said bond was issued, and except as against the local improvement guaranty fund of the city, and the city or town shall not be liable to any holder or owner of such bond or warrant for any loss to the guaranty fund occurring in the lawful operation thereof by the city. The remedy of the holder or owner of a bond in case of nonpayment shall be confined to the enforcement of the assessment and to the guaranty fund a copy of the foregoing part of this section shall be plainly written, printed or engraved on each bond issued and guaranteed hereunder, and the writing, printing or engraving shall be deemed sufficient compliance with the requirements of Section 9405 of Remington Compiled Statutes of the State of Washington. (Ord. 834 §5, 1926)


Chapter 3.06 PUBLIC ACCESS TELEVISION FUND

Sections:

3.06.100    ESTABLISHED.

3.06.200    TRANSFER OF FUNDS.

3.06.300    ADDITIONAL FUNDS.


3.06.100 ESTABLISHED.

The City Treasurer of the City of Bremerton is hereby authorized and directed to establish a special fund to be known as the "Public Access Television Fund" to be used for capital and operation of the public access program. (Ord. 4683, Added, 12/31/1999)


3.06.200 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.

The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to transfer to that fund any and all monies now held by the City for the benefit of Public Access Television. (Ord. 4683, Added, 12/31/1999)


3.06.300 ADDITIONAL FUNDS.

Any additional funds received by the City, which are committed to Public Access Television, shall be paid into the Public Access Television Fund. (Ord. 4683, Added, 12/31/1999)


Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS FUND

Sections:

3.08.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.08.020    WARRANTS - CERTIFICATION.

3.08.030    FORMS AND WARRANTS TO BE PREPARED.

3.08.040    PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.


3.08.010 ESTABLISHED.

The City Treasurer is directed to set up and establish a claims fund for the purpose of paying all claims for material furnished or services rendered to the City when such claims are payable from a fund of the City which is on a cash basis. The use of the claims fund shall not apply to payments from trust funds or payments from local improvement district funds or to other funds when the law requires that a separate series of warrants be issued. (Ord. 1742 §1, 1947)


3.08.020 WARRANTS - CERTIFICATION.

Upon issuance of warrants on the claims fund, the City Clerk shall weekly certify to the City Treasurer the total warrants issued and the amount chargeable to each fund, and thereupon the Treasurer shall make cash transfers of such amounts from each of said funds so chargeable to the claims fund. (Ord. 1742 §2, 1947)


3.08.030 FORMS AND WARRANTS TO BE PREPARED.

The City Clerk is directed to prepare and have printed such forms and warrants as shall be deemed necessary to facilitate the operation of the fund and the cash transfers referred to herein. (Ord. 1742 §3, 1947)


3.08.040 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.

Claims presented to the City for the payment of materials furnished or services rendered to the City may be paid by warrant or check prior to City Council approval if the following conditions are met:

(1) The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, the Director of Financial Services, and any designee authorized to sign the checks or warrants, shall each furnish an official bond for the faithful discharge of his or her duties in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). A blanket fidelity bond applicable to such officials and employees in addition to others in an amount not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) shall be sufficient to meet this requirement.

(2)    All claims paid prior to Council approval shall require the approval of the Director of Financial Services or his or her designee.

(3)    The City Council shall review all documentation supporting any claim paid and for approval of all checks or warrants issued in payment of any claim at its next regularly scheduled public meeting, subject to scheduling, but in no event, later than one (1) month from issuance.

(4)    If, upon review, the City Council disapproves a claim, the auditing officer, Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, Director of Financial Services, and any person signing the check shall jointly cause the disapproved claim to be recognized as a receivable of the City and shall direct the financial services department to pursue collection diligently until the amounts disapproved are collected or until the City Council is satisfied and approves the claim.

(5)    Notwithstanding the fact that all of the above conditions are met, the City Council may stipulate that certain kinds or amounts of claims shall not be paid before the City Council has reviewed the supporting documentation and approved the issue of checks or warrants in payment of those claims. (Ord. 4931 §1, 2005)


Chapter 3.12 ONE PERCENT FOR ARTS FUND

Sections:

3.12.010    DEFINITIONS.

3.12.020    ONE (1) PERCENT FOR ARTS FUND ESTABLISHED.

3.12.030    FUNDING BASIS.

3.12.040    SELECTION OF PUBLIC ART.

3.12.050    MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF PUBLIC ART.

3.12.060    AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES FROM ARTS FUND.


3.12.010 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Art Advisory Panel" means a committee consisting of a group of individuals, including artists, art and design professionals and nonartist citizen representatives appointed by the Chair of the Commission to advise and assist the Commission in selecting artists to provide works or services to the City under the Arts Program. The Commission is encouraged to appoint a broad range of citizen participation on the panel. An advisory panel may be directed by the Chair to consider a single project or multiple projects and more than one panel may be appointed and serve concurrently to consider separate projects.

(b)    "Arts Commission" or "Commission" means the commission established in Chapter 2.32 BMC.

(c)    "Arts fund" or "one (1) percent for arts fund" means the common pool for appropriated funds and donations that are accumulated pursuant to this chapter.

(d)    "Arts program" or "one (1) percent for arts program" means the policies and strategies that will identify opportunities and implement a program for creation and display of public art within the City as well as determine project budgets for public art. This task shall be implemented by the Arts Commission and staff working in partnership with project departments and citizens.

(e)    "Capital improvement project" means any City-funded project(s), or any City-funded portion thereof, including funds received from outside sources, as specifically identified in the City’s capital improvement program except that "capital improvement project" does not mean:

(1)    Capital improvement projects of municipal utilities as set forth in BMC Title 15;

(2)    Capital improvement projects identified in the arterial street fund as set forth in Chapter 3.24 BMC;

(3)    Capital improvement projects identified in street fund 102;

(4)    That portion of capital improvement projects funded by CDBG funds;

(5)    General maintenance of any project;

(6)    Capital equipment;

(7)    That portion of capital improvement projects funded from sources that precludes expenditures for public art; or

(8)    That portion of capital improvement projects already subjected to a dedicated art funding program.

(f)    "CDBG" means community development block grant.

(g)    "City" means the City of Bremerton.

(h)    "Commission" means the Arts Commission established in Chapter 2.32 BMC.

(i)    "Commissioner" means an individual appointed to serve as a member of the Arts Commission.

(j)     "Construction cost" is defined to include actual construction costs, architectural and engineering fees, project administration, site preparation, and contingency allowances. It does not include land acquisition, financing, sales tax, furnishings, fixtures or equipment. "Council" or "City Council" means the Bremerton City Council.

(k)     "Project Department" means the department or division of the City responsible for construction of a capital improvement project.

(l)    "Public art" means original visual creations which are sited in a manner accessible and visible to the public and shall include the production or arrangement of sounds, colors, forms, movements or other elements in a manner that enhances the sense of beauty and has aesthetic value. Public art may also include artist-made or artist-designed building parts that are structural or functional elements of a building, structure, park or other facility. Public art may include an area or space specifically designed, constructed and managed as a display area for other works of art. "Public art" shall also mean performing art.

(m)    "Public space" means any place or property within the City limits which is open to the general public for its use, or which is in public view, or is generally accessible and visible to the public.

(n)    "Site preparation" shall mean all work performed in, on, or around a project site in anticipation of subsequent construction work inclusive of, but not limited to, select demolition, rough grading, environmental assessment and remediation, erosion control and security fencing. (Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


3.12.020 ONE (1) PERCENT FOR ARTS FUND ESTABLISHED.

(a)    Project funds for capital improvement projects as calculated and established in BMC 3.12.030 as well as donations made to the arts program shall provide the revenue for purchase of public art. At the request of the donor, donations may be earmarked for particular projects.

(b)    The one (1) percent for arts fund is hereby established. If the one (1) percent amount authorized for a given project is not expended, or if a surplus is available due to the work of art costing less than one (1) percent of the total project cost, then the nonexpended amount shall be deposited and pooled into the "one (1) percent for arts fund" for use on projects approved by the Commission. (Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


3.12.030 FUNDING BASIS.

Beginning with the City’s fiscal year 2006 budget, all capital improvement projects as defined in this chapter will contribute to the one (1) percent for arts fund.

(a)    Calculation of Contribution to Fund. The amount of the annual appropriation for art shall be equal to one (1) percent of the total eligible funds of capital improvement projects as follows:

(1)    At a minimum, the amount budgeted for art in a capital improvement project shall be equal to one (1) percent of the total construction costs as bid and awarded.

(2)    In all cases where a capital improvement project has a scope of work that includes both eligible and ineligible elements and categories, the budget for art shall be calculated, at a minimum, in the eligible portions of the project. In all cases where a capital improvement project includes a source of funds which is eligible for a public art purpose but which may not be pooled with other funds and may not be used for another or different project, the budget for art in that capital improvement project shall include one (1) percent of such eligible funds.

(b)    Pooling of Funds. A policy is hereby established to direct the transfer to and pooling of all one (1) percent for arts fund program monies in the arts fund. Pooling affords the opportunity to look at the needs of the City as a whole and use the art monies only for those projects which may have the greatest value and impact on communities or offer the best opportunities for artist involvement. 

(c)    Appropriation of Funds. At the time a capital improvement project is proposed, the Project Department shall calculate and include a budgeted line item for the arts fund associated with each eligible project. The Finance Department shall confirm the calculations and include the appropriations for art in the proposed City budget. The amounts budgeted for the arts fund in particular projects may be adjusted to reflect Council changes to the budget for the capital improvement project. All amounts budgeted for the arts fund shall be transferred directly into the arts fund. Fund transfers to the arts fund will occur as soon as practicable after a bid has been awarded for the project. (Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


3.12.040 SELECTION OF PUBLIC ART.

(a)    Each project providing funds to the arts program may apply to the arts program for funding for any art proposed to be incorporated into the project.

(b)    The Arts Commission shall make selections of the artists and the public art to be funded through the arts program and maintenance and repair programs, as appropriate, for the selected public art, subject to confirmation by the City Council. The Arts Commission may empanel an Art Advisory Panel to assist in this selection. The contracts commissioning art shall address the issue of ownership. (Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


3.12.050 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF PUBLIC ART.

The Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all public art except as otherwise provided for under any maintenance and repair program established by the City Council pursuant to BMC 3.12.040. Funding sources for the maintenance and repair of public art may include the Parks and Recreation Department budget, other City department budgets, other sources approved by the City Council or the arts fund. (Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


3.12.060 AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES FROM ARTS FUND.

Subject to expenditures for the selection of public art and any maintenance and repair programs approved pursuant to BMC 3.12.040, budgeted expenditures may be made from the arts fund for any of the following purposes:

(a)    The selection, acquisition, and display of works of art which may be an integral part of a project or which may be placed in, on, or about a project or other public space.

(b)    Artist fees, design, planning, and pre-design service contracts and commissions.

(c)    Expenses for technical assistance provided by architects and/or engineers to artists in order to design, document, and/or certify the artwork.

(d)    Maintenance and repair of City public art benefited by the one (1) percent for arts fund.

(e)    Citizen forums and workshops to gather information and/or educate/inform the public about public art and the City’s public art collection.

(f)    Documentation and public information material for the one (1) percent for arts program and public art projects.

(g)    Performing art.

Budgeted expenditures exceeding equal to or greater than two thousand dollars ($2,000) require recommendation by the Arts Commission and approval of the City Council. Budgeted expenditures of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) require approval of the Arts Commission. (Ord. 5156 §1, 2011: Ord. 4940 §2 (part), 2005)


Chapter 3.24 ARTERIAL STREET FUND

Sections:

3.24.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.24.020    APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

3.24.030    WHEN WARRANTS MAY BE ISSUED.


3.24.010 ESTABLISHED.

The City Treasurer is authorized and directed to establish a fund to be known as the arterial street fund for the purpose of constructing, improving, and repairing major arterials, secondary arterials, and access streets within the City. (Ord. 2451 §1, 1961)


3.24.020 APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

There is hereby appropriated any funds to be received from the state treasurer under the provisions of Chapter 7, Laws of 1961 Extraordinary Session, to the arterial street fund, and the City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to place in said fund any and all money received from the state treasurer by virtue of that act of the legislature and any other funds which may be received by the City from other sources or specifically appropriated by the City. (Ord. 2451 §2, 1961)


3.24.030 WHEN WARRANTS MAY BE ISSUED.

No warrants shall be issued upon the above-described fund until a proposed project is approved by the state highway department, division of state aid, for the construction, improvement, and repair of arterial highways (previously classified and designated by the City under the provisions of RCW 35.78.010) and until the City has appropriated a sum to said fund equal to one-fourth or more of the costs of the proposed project. (Ord. 2451 §3, 1961)


Chapter 3.25 PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND

Sections:

3.25.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.25.020    APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

3.25.030    ADMINISTRATION.


3.25.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is hereby established a fund to be called the Park Development Fund for the acquisition, replacement, expansion and improvement of parks, recreation facilities and open spaces of the community. (Ord. 4744, Added, 12/31/2000)


3.25.020 APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

a.    All monies and other assets currently held by the Park and Recreation Facility Development and Roosevelt Capital Assets Funds together with all earnings thereon.

b.    Collections from the operation of the Gold Mountain Golf Course, in excess of the sums necessary to pay the golf course debt service, operation and maintenance expenses and capital renewals and replacements.

c.    Any additional funds received by the City which are committed to park and recreation facility development.

d.    Donations and bequests specifically dedicated to the fund. (Ord. 4744, Added, 12/31/2000)


3.25.030 ADMINISTRATION.

The Park Development Fund shall be administered by the City Treasurer and the Mayor. All monies received by the fund together with investment earnings thereon, may be expended only by authorization of the City Council. The City Council will normally consult with the Parks and Recreation Commission before commitment of these funds. Expenditures shall be limited to items which address the community’s park, recreational and open space needs. (Ord. 4744, Added, 12/31/2000)


Chapter 3.26 GIFT AND DONATION FUND

Sections:

3.26.100    ESTABLISHED.

3.26.200    ADMINISTRATION.

3.26.300    EXPENDITURES.

3.26.400    EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE DONATIONS.


3.26.100 ESTABLISHED.

There is hereby established a fund to be called the "GIFT AND DONATION FUND" for the purpose of accepting gifts and donations on behalf of all departments of the City as authorized by RCW 35.21.100. (Ord. 4742, Amended, 12/31/2000; Ord. 4505 §2 (in part), 1995)


3.26.200 ADMINISTRATION.

The Gift and Donation Fund shall be operated as an expendable trust fund. The fund shall receive all donations, memorials, bequests and other contributions made to the City by citizens or organizations. The City Treasurer shall provide detail accounts within the fund sufficient to allow for a discreet accounting of all monies received and expended by each department of the City, together with any interest earned on unexpended balances. (Ord. 4505 §2 (in part), 1995)


3.26.300 EXPENDITURES.

The department head of each department for whom monies may be received by the fund shall be responsible for the proper expenditure of their respective departments monies, subject to the prior approval of the Mayor and the budgetary authorization of the City Council. (Ord. 4505 §2 (in part), 1995)


3.26.400 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE DONATIONS.

In addition to BMC 3.26.300, monies received in support of the City’s Emergency Medical Service Program shall be administered by the Mayor and Fire Chief upon consultation with an advisory committee consisting of three representatives elected by the emergency medical services program employees. The Fire Chief shall address, in writing, all expenditure recommendations of the advisory committee. All monies received in support of the EMS program, together with interest earnings thereon, may be expended only for the following emergency medical service program purposes:

(a)    Capital expenditures for diagnostic, life support, medical, and rescue equipment, except for vehicle purchase unless expressly requested by a donor.

(b)    Medical supplies, including aids for responding to traumatized children.

(c)    Support of advanced emergency medical training for Fire Department staff and basic emergency aid instruction for the community, including instructor fees, materials and supplies.

(d)    For other emergency medical aid purposes recommended by the employee advisory committee and approved by the Fire Chief. (Ord. 4505 §2 (in part), 1995)


Chapter 3.28 ADMINISTRATIVE TRUST FUND

Sections:

3.28.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.28.020    TRANSFER OF FUNDS.

3.28.030    ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.


3.28.010 ESTABLISHED.

The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to establish a special fund to be known as the "Administrative Trust Fund". (Ord. 2470 §1, 1961)


3.28.020 TRANSFER OF FUNDS.

The City Treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to transfer to that fund any and all moneys now held by the City in trust or for the benefit of a third party and any funds hereinafter received by the City to be held in trust by the City or for the benefit of a third party. (Ord. 2470 §2, 1961)


3.28.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The City Council shall establish rules and regulations for the maintenance and operation of this fund and money shall be expended from this fund in accordance with the rules and regulations or upon motion or resolution duly passed by the City Council. (Ord. 2470 §3, 1961)


Chapter 3.30 RISK MANAGEMENT FUND

Sections:

3.30.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.30.020    PERMISSIBLE USES.

3.30.030    REVIEW.


3.30.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is created an intragovernmental service fund to be known as the risk management fund. (Ord. 4556, Added, 06/13/1996)


3.30.020 PERMISSIBLE USES.

Permissible uses of the risk management fund shall be limited to the following:

(a)    Payment of claims and related costs;

(b)    Payment of negotiated settlements and related costs;

(c)    Payment of judgments and related costs;

(d)    Payment of the costs of litigation, including, but not limited to, outside attorneys fees and costs of discovery and witnesses;

(e)    Payment of insurance premiums and related costs; and

(f)    Payment of administrative costs related to Office of Risk Management operations. (Ord. 4556, Added, 06/13/1996)


3.30.030 REVIEW.

The operation of the risk management fund shall be reported and reviewed quarterly with the council fiscal and budget committee. The report shall include the amounts of all expenditures made from the fund for claims, negotiated settlements, insurance settlements, judgments, litigations, and their related costs. An annual accounting of this fund shall be included in the Risk Manager’s annual report to the Council. (Ord. 4556, Added, 06/13/1996)


Chapter 3.32 SELF-INSURED HEALTH AND WELFARE RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.32.010    FUND ESTABLISHED.

3.32.020    AMOUNT AND SOURCE.

3.32.030    ADMINISTRATION AND EXPENDITURE.

3.32.040    ADJUSTMENTS TO RESERVES.


3.32.010 FUND ESTABLISHED.

There is established a fund to be called the "Self-Insured Health and Welfare Reserve Fund" ("reserve fund"). The reserve fund is established to fund the City of Bremerton’s Self-Insured Health and Welfare Program ("program"). (Ord. 5273 §1 (part), 2015)


3.32.020 AMOUNT AND SOURCE.

The minimum reserve fund balance shall be established in the amount equal to at least four (4) months of program expenses or at an amount recommended by an independent actuarial, whichever is greater ("minimum reserve"). The minimum reserve established herein includes the minimum reserve amount for program expenses as well as an additional contingency reserve required pursuant to WAC 200-110-040. All of the revenues from City and employee contributions to the program shall be deposited into the reserve fund. The reserve fund shall be fully funded to the minimum reserve amount by the end of the first three (3) years of the program, December 31, 2017. (Ord. 5273 §1 (part), 2015)


3.32.030 ADMINISTRATION AND EXPENDITURE.

The reserve fund shall be operated as a separate fund administered by the City Treasurer and the Human Resources Manager pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 200-110 WAC. All monies received by the fund, together with investment earnings thereon, shall be expended only to administer and operate the program including payment for services and payment of medical and prescription claims authorized under the program. The City shall obtain an audit on claims expenditures and fund balances of the reserve fund every three (3) years or as otherwise required by WAC 200-110-120, as currently enacted or hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5273 §1 (part), 2015)


3.32.040 ADJUSTMENTS TO RESERVES.

The reserve fund shall be adjusted as follows:

(a)    If at any time the cash reserve balance of the reserve fund is less than the minimum reserve, a repayment plan shall be established by the Mayor and approved by the City Council to replenish the reserve fund to its minimum level if deemed necessary to administer and operate the program.

(b)    Should the cash reserve balance of the reserve fund at any time exceed the minimum reserve, the excess cash reserve shall be used for reduction in premiums made by the City and employees to the program, used to add additional benefits and/or be maintained in the reserve fund if deemed appropriate. (Ord. 5273 §1 (part), 2015)


Chapter 3.36 CONTINGENCY RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.36.010    ESTABLISHED.

3.36.020    AMOUNT AND SOURCE.

3.36.030    ADMINISTRATION AND EXPENDITURE.


3.36.010 ESTABLISHED.

There is established a special revenue fund to be called the "Contingency Reserve Fund." The fund is established to protect the City’s General Fund in the event of unforeseen and unfunded expense or an emergency as set forth in RCW 35.33.145, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5280 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5021 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4524 §1, 1995)


3.36.020 AMOUNT AND SOURCE.

The minimum Contingency Reserve Fund balance shall be established in an amount equivalent to thirty-seven and one-half cents ($0.375) per thousand dollars ($1,000) of assessed valuation of property within the City at such time, or such other amount as established by RCW 35.33.145 ("minimum fund balance"). If at any time the cash balance of the fund is less than the minimum fund balance, a repayment plan shall be established by the Mayor and approved by the City Council to replenish the fund to its minimum level.

The proceeds of sale of all General Fund real property shall be deposited to the Contingency Reserve Fund. (Ord. 5280 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5021 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4524 §2, 1995)


3.36.030 ADMINISTRATION AND EXPENDITURE.

The Contingency Reserve Fund shall be operated as a special revenue fund administered by the Director of Financial Services and the Mayor. All monies received by the fund, together with investment earnings thereon, may be expended only in the following manner:

(a)    Emergency or Unfunded Unforeseen Expense. Funds may be expended from the Contingency Reserve Fund in the event of 1) a bona fide emergency as defined in and pursuant to RCW 35.33.081 and 35.33.091, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended, or 2) for an unforeseen and unfunded expense. In either event, funds may be withdrawn from the Contingency Reserve Fund by transfer to the appropriate operating fund authorized by resolution or ordinance adopted by the City Council pursuant to RCW 35.33.147, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. A unanimous vote of all members of the City Council shall be required to authorize fund transfer.

(b)    Funds in Excess of Minimum Fund Balance. Should the balance of the Contingency Reserve Fund at any time exceed the minimum fund balance, the excess funds may be used for capital purchases upon City Council approval by simple majority vote. (Ord. 5280 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5021 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4524 §3, 1995)


Chapter 3.40 CURRENT WATER FUND

Sections:

3.40.010    FUND CREATED.


3.40.010 FUND CREATED.

There is hereby created, and the treasurer is hereby instructed to enter on his books a special fund to be known as the current water fund.

The treasurer shall hereafter credit to this fund the proceeds of the sale of certain water bonds authorized by the City under Ordinance 518, and all the current revenues that may accrue from time to time from the operation of the water works system referred to in Ordinance 518.

All disbursements in connection with the operation and maintenance of the water works system shall be made by warrant drawn against the said current water fund, except as may be hereafter specially provided for by the City Council. (Ord. 528 §§1-3, 1916)


Chapter 3.42 STORMWATER OPERATING FUND

Sections:

3.42.010    FUND CREATED.


3.42.010 FUND CREATED.

The Treasurer is hereby instructed to enter on the books a utility fund to be known as the Stormwater Operating Fund. These funds shall be maintained in a manner consistent with state statute and generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 4442 §2, 1993)


Chapter 3.46 SALES OR USE TAX

Sections:

3.46.010    IMPOSED.

3.46.020    RATE.

3.46.030    REPEAL OF SECTION 3.46.020(2) BY INITIATIVE.

3.46.040    CONTRACT WITH STATE.

3.46.050    ADMINISTRATION - COLLECTION.


3.46.010 IMPOSED.

Pursuant to RCW 82.14.030, as amended by Section 17 of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, Laws of 1982, a sales and use tax is hereby fixed and imposed by the city. The tax shall be collectible from those persons who are taxable by the state of Washington pursuant to RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.12, upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the city. (Ord. 3711 §2, 1982)


3.46.020 RATE.

The rate of such tax imposed shall be as follows:

(1)    Five-tenths of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, however, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Kitsap County pursuant to subsection 17(1) of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, amending RCW 82.14.030, the city tax shall be four hundred eighty-five one-thousandths of one percent; and in addition,

(2)    Five-tenths of one percent of the selling price (in the case of a sales tax) or value of the article used (in the case of a use tax); provided, that during such period as there is in effect a sales or use tax imposed by Kitsap County under subsection 17(2) of Engrossed Senate Bill No. 4972, adopting RCW 82.14.030(2), the county shall receive fifteen percent of the city tax or fifteen percent of the rate of tax imposed by the county, whichever is less. (Ord. 3711 §3, 1982)


3.46.030 REPEAL OF SECTION 3.46.020(2) BY INITIATIVE.

The fixing and imposition of tax, pursuant to Section 3.46.020(2), shall be subject to approval or rejection by the voters under Charter Article XIII, Sections 49 through 52. (Ord. 3711 §4, 1982)


3.46.040 CONTRACT WITH STATE.

The City through its council may enter into such contract or agreement with the State of Washington, Department of Revenue, for the collection of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 3711 §5, 1982)


3.46.050 ADMINISTRATION - COLLECTION.

All definitions, rules, forms, recording procedures, and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of RCW Chapters 82.08 and 82.32, are adopted for the purposes of administration and collection of the tax levied herein. The administrative provisions contained in said chapters shall apply with respect to the administration and collection of the tax by the Department of Revenue. The tax shall be imposed and collected beginning October 1, 1982. (Ord. 3711 §6, 1982)


Chapter 3.48 BUSINESS AND OCCUPATION TAXES

Sections:

3.48.020    EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER.

3.48.025    BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

3.48.028    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

3.48.030    DEFINITIONS.

3.48.040    AGENCY - SALES AND SERVICES BY AGENT, CONSIGNEE, BAILEE, FACTOR OR AUCTIONEER.

3.48.050    IMPOSITION OF THE TAX - TAX OR FEE LEVIED.

3.48.070    MULTIPLE ACTIVITIES CREDIT WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN ONE (1) OR MORE CITIES WITH ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPT TAXES.

3.48.075    DEDUCTIONS TO PREVENT MULTIPLE TAXATION OF MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES AND PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2008, TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING MORE THAN ONE (1) CITY WITH AN ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.

3.48.076    ASSIGNMENT OF GROSS INCOME DERIVED FROM INTANGIBLES.

3.48.077    ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF INCOME WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN MORE THAN ONE (1) JURISDICTION.

3.48.078    ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INCOME WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN MORE THAN ONE (1) JURISDICTION.

3.48.090    EXEMPTIONS.

3.48.100    DEDUCTIONS.

3.48.120    TAX PART OF OVERHEAD.

3.48.125    RULES AND REGULATIONS.

3.48.130    SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.


3.48.020 EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER.

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to license and/or tax for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the City code. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.025 BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in business in the City without having first obtained a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.028 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.030 DEFINITIONS.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied. Words in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 

(a)    Definitions "A":

"Advance," "reimbursement."

(1)    "Advance" means money or credits received by a taxpayer from a customer or client with which the taxpayer is to pay costs or fees on behalf of the customer or client.

(2)    "Reimbursement" means money or credits received from a customer or client to repay the taxpayer for money or credits expended by the taxpayer in payment of costs or fees of the customer or client.

"Agricultural product" means any product of plant cultivation or animal husbandry including, but not limited to: a product of horticulture, grain cultivation, vermiculture, viticulture, or aquaculture as defined in RCW 15.85.020; plantation Christmas trees; turf; or any animal including but not limited to an animal that is a private sector cultured aquatic product as defined in RCW 15.85.020, or a bird, or insect, or the substances obtained from such an animal. "Agricultural product" does not include animals intended to be pets.

"Artistic or cultural organization." As used in this chapter:

(1)    The term "artistic or cultural organization" means an organization which is organized and operated exclusively for the purpose of providing artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs, as defined in subsection (10) of this definition, for viewing or attendance by the general public.

(2)    The organization must be a not-for-profit corporation under Chapter 24.03 RCW.

(3)    The organization must be managed by a governing board of not less than eight (8) individuals none of whom is a paid employee of the organization or by a corporation sole under Chapter 24.12 RCW.

(4)    No part of its income may be paid directly or indirectly to its members, stockholders, officers, directors, or trustees except in the form of services rendered by the corporation in accordance with its purposes and bylaws.

(5)    Salary or compensation paid to its officers and executives must be only for actual services rendered, and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the state.

(6)    Assets of the corporation must be irrevocably dedicated to the activities for which the exemption is granted and, on the liquidation, dissolution, or abandonment by the corporation, may not inure directly or indirectly to the benefit of any member or individual except a nonprofit organization, association, or corporation which also would be entitled to the exemption.

(7)    The corporation must be duly licensed or certified when licensing or certification is required by law or regulation.

(8)    The amounts received that qualify for exemption must be used for the activities for which the exemption is granted.

(9)    Services must be available regardless of race, color, national origin, ancestry, religion, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, Vietnam or disabled veteran status, or the presence of any mental or physical disability.

(10)    The term "artistic or cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances or cultural or art education programs" is limited to:

(a)    An exhibition or presentation of works of art or objects of cultural or historical significance, such as those commonly displayed in art or history museums;

(b)    A musical or dramatic performance or series of performances; or

(c)    An educational seminar or program, or series of such programs, offered by the organization to the general public on an artistic, cultural, or historical subject.

(b)    Definitions "B":

"Business" includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage to the taxpayer or to another person or class, directly or indirectly.

"Business and occupation tax" or "gross receipts tax" means a tax imposed on or measured by the value of products, the gross income of the business, or the gross proceeds of sales, as the case may be, and that is the legal liability of the business.

(c)    Definitions "C":

"Cash discount" means a deduction from the invoiced amount allowed by the seller if the bill is paid within a certain time period or before a specified date.

"City" means City of Bremerton, Washington.

"Commercial or industrial use" means the following uses of products, including by-products, by the extractor or manufacturer thereof:

(1)    Any use as a consumer;

(2)    Any use in the manufacturing of products including articles, substances or commodities.

"Competitive telephone service" means the providing by any person of communications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as repair or maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons that are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80 and for which a separate charge is made.

"Consumer" means the following:

(1)    Any person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds, or uses any tangible or intangible personal property irrespective of the nature of the person’s business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for a consumer other than for the purpose of:

(a)    Resale as tangible or intangible personal property in the regular course of business;

(b)    Incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of real or personal property when installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, improving, constructing, or decorating such real or personal property of or for consumers;

(c)    Incorporating such property as an ingredient or component of a new product or as a chemical used in processing a new product when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new product; or

(d)    Consuming the property in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon;

(2)    Any person engaged in any business activity taxable under BMC 3.48.050(1)(g);

(3)    Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any competitive telephone service as herein defined, other than for resale in the regular course of business;

(4)    Any person who purchases, acquires, or uses any personal, business, or professional service defined as a retail sale or retail service in this section other than for resale in the regular course of business;

(5)    Any person who is an end user of software;

(6)    Any person engaged in the business of "public road construction" in respect to tangible personal property when that person incorporates the tangible personal property as an ingredient or component of a publicly owned street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle by installing, placing or spreading the property in or upon the right-of-way of a publicly owned street, place, road, highway, easement, bridge, tunnel, or trestle or in or upon the site of a publicly owned mass public transportation terminal or parking facility;

(7)    Any person who is an owner, lessee or has the right of possession to or an easement in real property which is being constructed, repaired, decorated, improved, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;

(8)    Any person who is an owner, lessee, or has the right of possession to personal property which is being constructed, repaired, improved, cleaned, imprinted, or otherwise altered by a person engaged in business;

(9)    Any person engaged in government contracting. Any such person shall be a consumer within the meaning of this definition in respect to tangible personal property incorporated into, installed in, or attached to such building or other structure by such person. Nothing contained in this or any other subsection of this definition shall be construed to modify any other definition of "consumer."

(d)    Definitions "D":

"Deficiency" means the amount of tax imposed by law less any tax reported by the taxpayer on a tax return.

"Delivery" means the transfer of possession of tangible personal property between the seller and the buyer or the buyer’s representative. Delivery to an employee of a buyer is considered delivery to the buyer. Transfer of possession of tangible personal property occurs when the buyer or the buyer’s representative first takes physical control of the property or exercises dominion and control over the property. "Dominion and control" means the buyer has the ability to put the property to the buyer’s own purposes. It means the buyer or the buyer’s representative has made the final decision to accept or reject the property, and the seller has no further right to possession of the property and the buyer has no right to return the property to the seller, other than under a warranty contract. A buyer does not exercise dominion and control over tangible personal property merely by arranging for shipment of the property from the seller to itself. A buyer’s representative is a person, other than an employee of the buyer, who is authorized in writing by the buyer to receive tangible personal property and take dominion and control by making the final decision to accept or reject the property. Neither a shipping company nor a seller can serve as a buyer’s representative. It is immaterial where the contract of sale is negotiated or where the buyer obtains title to the property. Delivery terms and other provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (RCW Title 62A) do not determine when or where delivery of tangible personal property occurs for purposes of taxation.

"Department" means the Department of Community Development unless otherwise noted.

"Digital automated service," "digital code," and "digital goods" have the same meaning as in RCW 82.04.192.

"Digital products" means digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, and the services described in RCW 82.04.050(2)(g) and (6)(b).

"Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf.

(e)    Definitions "E":

"Eligible gross receipts tax" means a tax which:

(1)    Is imposed on the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within BMC 3.48.050; and

(2)    Is measured by the gross volume of business, in terms of gross receipts and is not an income tax or value added tax; and

(3)    Is not, pursuant to law or custom, separately stated from the sales price; and

(4)    Is not a sales or use tax, business license fee, franchise fee, royalty or severance tax measured by volume or weight, or concession charge, or payment for the use and enjoyment of property, property right or a privilege; and

(5)    Is a tax imposed by a local jurisdiction, whether within or without the State of Washington, and not by a country, state, province, or any other nonlocal jurisdiction above the county level.

"Engaging in business," "nexus."

(1)    The term "engaging in business" means commencing, conducting, or continuing in business and also the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, as well as liquidating a business when the liquidators thereof hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business.

(2)    This definition sets forth examples of activities that constitute engaging in business in the City and establishes safe harbors for certain of those activities so that a person who meets the criteria may engage in de minimis business activities in the City without having to register and obtain a business license or pay City business and occupation taxes. The activities listed in this definition are illustrative only and are not intended to narrow the definition of "engaging in business" in subsection (1) of this definition. If an activity is not listed, whether it constitutes engaging in business in the City shall be determined by considering all the facts and circumstances and applicable law.

(3)    Without being all-inclusive, any one (1) of the following activities conducted within the City by a person or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on its behalf constitutes engaging in business and requires a person to register and obtain a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC:

(a)    Owning, renting, leasing, maintaining, or having the right to use, or using, tangible personal property, intangible personal property, or real property permanently or temporarily located in the City.

(b)    Owning, renting, leasing, using, or maintaining an office, place of business, or other establishment in the City.

(c)    Soliciting sales.

(d)    Making repairs or providing maintenance on service to real or tangible personal property, including warranty work and property maintenance.

(e)    Providing technical assistance or service, including quality control, product inspections, warranty work, or similar services on or in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(f)    Installing, constructing, or supervising installation or construction of real or tangible personal property.

(g)    Soliciting, negotiating, or approving franchise, license, or other similar agreements.

(h)    Collecting current or delinquent accounts.

(i)    Picking up and transporting tangible personal property, solid waste, construction debris, or excavated materials.

(j)    Providing disinfecting and pest control services, employment and labor pool services, home nursing care, janitorial services, appraising, landscape architectural services, security system services, surveying, and real estate services, including the listing of homes and managing real property.

(k)    Rendering professional services such as those provided by accountants, architects, attorneys, auctioneers, consultants, engineers, professional athletes, barbers, baseball clubs and other sports organizations, chemists, psychologists, court reporters, dentists, doctors, detectives, laboratory operators, teachers, and veterinarians.

(l)    Meeting with customers or potential customers, even when no sales or orders are solicited at the meetings.

(m)    Training or recruiting employees, agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others, domiciled or operating on a job in the City, acting on its behalf, or for customers or potential customers.

(n)    Investigating, resolving, or otherwise assisting in resolving customer complaints.

(o)    In-store stocking or manipulating products or goods, sold to and owned by a customer, regardless of where sale and delivery of the goods took place.

(p)    Except as provided in subsection (5) of this definition, delivering goods in vehicles owned, rented, leased, used, or maintained by the person or another acting on its behalf.

(4)    Not Engaging in Business. If a person, or its employee, agent, representative, independent contractor, broker or another acting on the person’s behalf, engages in no other activities in or with the City but the following, that person is not engaging in business and therefore is not required to register and obtain a City business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC or pay City business and occupation taxes pursuant to this chapter:

(a)    Meeting with suppliers of goods and services as a customer.

(b)    Meeting with government representatives in their official capacity, other than those performing contracting or purchasing functions.

(c)    Attending meetings, such as board meetings, retreats, seminars, and conferences, or other meetings wherein the person does not provide training in connection with tangible personal property sold by the person or on its behalf.

(d)    Renting tangible or intangible property as a customer when the property is not used in the City.

(e)    Attending, but not participating in, a trade show or multiple vendor events. Persons participating at a trade show shall review the City’s trade show or multiple vendor event ordinances.

(f)    Conducting advertising through the mail.

(g)    Soliciting sales by phone from a location outside the City.

(h)    Providing language interpretive services to the Bremerton Municipal Court.

(5)    A business located outside the City merely delivering goods into the City by common carrier or other means, including use of its own vehicles, is not required to register and obtain a business license; provided, that it engages in no other business activities in the City. Such business activities do not include those in subsection (4) of this definition.

(6)    Threshold Exemption - Fee-Free License/Registration. To the extent set forth in this definition, the following persons and businesses shall be exempt from the registration, license and/or license fee requirements as follows:

(a)    Except as set forth in subsection (6)(b) of this definition, any person or business whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall be exempt from the general business license requirements of Chapter 5.02 BMC and this chapter.

(b)    Any person or business operating as a utility provider subject to utility taxes pursuant to Chapter 3.50 BMC whose annual value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business in the City is equal to or less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) and who does not maintain a place of business within the City shall submit a business license registration to the Tax and Licensing Division. No license fee shall be assessed for the business license registration.

(7)    Nexus. A person has created nexus with the City if, whether by itself or by its employees, agents, representatives, independent contractors, brokers or others acting on its behalf, it:

(a)    Is physically present in the City;

(b)    Endeavors to maintain a share of the market within the City; or

(c)    Avails itself of the economic benefits of the City.

The City expressly intends that engaging in business includes any activity sufficient to establish nexus for purposes of applying the tax under the law and the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Washington. Nexus is presumed to continue as long as the taxpayer benefits from the activity that constituted the original nexus-generating contact or subsequent contacts.

"Extracting" is the activity engaged in by an extractor and is reportable under the extracting classification.

"Extractor" means every person who from the person’s own land or from the land of another under a right or license granted by lease or contract, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, for sale or for commercial or industrial use, mines, quarries, takes or produces coal, oil, natural gas, ore, stone, sand, gravel, clay, mineral or other natural resource product; or fells, cuts or takes timber, Christmas trees, other than plantation Christmas trees, or other natural products; or takes fish, or takes, cultivates, or raises shellfish, or other sea or inland water foods or products. "Extractor" does not include persons performing under contract the necessary labor or mechanical services for others; persons cultivating or raising fish entirely within confined rearing areas on the person’s own land or on land in which the person has a present right of possession; or persons who fell, cut, or take plantation Christmas trees from the person’s own land or from land in which the person has a present right of possession; or persons meeting the definition of "farmer."

"Extractor for hire" means a person who performs under contract necessary labor or mechanical services for an extractor.

(f)    Definitions "F":

"Farmer" means any person engaged in the business of growing or producing, upon the person’s own lands or upon the lands in which the person has a present right of possession, any agricultural product whatsoever for sale. "Farmer" does not include a person using such products as ingredients in a manufacturing process, or a person growing or producing such products for the person’s own consumption. "Farmer" does not include a person selling any animal or substance obtained therefrom in connection with the person’s business of operating a stockyard or a slaughter or packing house. "Farmer" does not include any person in respect to the business of taking, cultivating, or raising timber.

(g)    Definitions "G":

"Gross income of the business" means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the business activity engaged in and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services, gains realized from trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, interest, discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and other emoluments however designated, all without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discounts, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

"Gross proceeds of sales" means the value proceeding or accruing from the sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services or for other services rendered, without any deduction on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discounts paid, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

(h)    Definitions "H": Reserved.

(i)    Definitions "I":

"In this City" or "within this City" includes all federal areas lying within the corporate City limits of the City.

(j)    Definitions "J":

"Janitorial services" shall mean those cleaning and caretaking services ordinarily performed by commercial janitor service businesses including, but not limited to, wall and window washing, floor cleaning and waxing, and the cleaning in place of rugs, drapes and upholstery. The term does not include painting, papering, repairing, furnace or septic tank cleaning, snow removal, sandblasting, or cleanup related to construction activities.

(k)    Definitions "K": Reserved.

(l)    Definitions "L": Reserved.

(m)    Definitions "M":

"Manufacturer," "to manufacture."

(1)    "Manufacturer" means every person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from the person’s own materials or ingredients any products. When the owner of equipment or facilities furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to less than twenty (20) percent of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product, the owner of the equipment or facilities will be deemed to be a processor for hire and not a manufacturer. A business not located in this City that is the owner of materials or ingredients processed for it in this City by a processor for hire shall be deemed to be engaged in business as a manufacturer in this City.

(2)    "To manufacture" means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials or ingredients so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful product is produced for sale or commercial or industrial use, and shall include:

(a)    The production of special-made or custom-made articles;

(b)    The production of dental appliances, devices, restorations, substitutes, or other dental laboratory products by a dental laboratory or dental technician;

(c)    Crushing and/or blending of rock, sand, stone, gravel, or ore; and

(d)    The producing of articles for sale, or for commercial or industrial use from raw materials or prepared materials by giving such materials, articles, and substances of trade or commerce new forms, qualities, properties or combinations including, but not limited to, such activities as making, fabricating, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, mild curing, preserving, canning, and the preparing and freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables.

"To manufacture" shall not include the production of digital goods or the production of computer software if the computer software is delivered from the seller to the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media, including the delivery by use of a tangible storage media where the tangible storage media is not physically transferred to the purchaser.

"Manufacturing" means the activity conducted by a manufacturer and is reported under the manufacturing classification.

(n)    Definitions "N":

"Newspaper," "magazine," "periodical."

(1)    "Newspaper" means a publication offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once a week and printed on newsprint in tabloid or broadsheet format folded loosely together without stapling, glue, or any other binding of any kind.

(2)    "Magazine" or "periodical" means any printed publication, other than a newspaper, issued and offered for sale regularly at stated intervals at least once every three (3) months, including any supplement or special edition of the publication. Any publication meeting this definition qualifies regardless of its content.

"Nonprofit corporation or nonprofit organization" means a corporation or organization in which no part of the income can be distributed to its members, directors, or officers and that holds a current tax exempt status as provided under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, or is specifically exempted from the requirement to apply for its tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended. Where the term "nonprofit organization" is used, it is meant to include a nonprofit corporation.

(o)    Definitions "O":

"Office" or "place of business" means a fixed location or permanent facility where the regular business of the person is conducted and which is either owned by the person or over which the person exercises legal dominion and control. The regular business of the person is presumed conducted at a location:

(1)    Whose address the person uses as its business mailing address;

(2)    Containing a telephone line listed in a public telephone directory or other similar publication under the business name;

(3)    Where the person holds itself out to the general public as conducting its regular business through signage or other means; and

(4)    Where the person is required to obtain any appropriate State and local business license or registration unless they are exempted by law from such requirement.

A vehicle such as a pick-up, van, truck, boat or other motor vehicle is not an office or place of business. A post office box is not an office or place of business.

If a person has an office or place of business, the person’s home is not an office or place of business unless it meets the criteria for office or place of business above. If a person has no office or place of business, the person’s home or apartment within the City will be deemed the place of business.

(p)    Definitions "P":

"Person" means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise and the United States or any instrumentality thereof.

"Port District" means a port district as defined in Chapter 53.04 RCW.

"Precious metal bullion," "monetized bullion." "Precious metal bullion" means any precious metal which has been put through a process of smelting or refining, including, but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, rhodium, and palladium, and which is in such state or condition that its value depends upon its contents and not upon its form. For purposes of this section, "monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, or other metals and heretofore, now, or hereafter used as a medium of exchange under the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign nation, but does not include coins or money sold to be manufactured into jewelry or works of art.

"Processing for hire" means the performance of labor and mechanical services upon materials or ingredients belonging to others so that as a result a new, different or useful product is produced for sale, or commercial or industrial use. A processor for hire is any person who would be a manufacturer if that person were performing the labor and mechanical services upon that person’s own materials or ingredients. If a person furnishes, or sells to the customer prior to manufacture, materials or ingredients equal to twenty (20) percent or more of the total value of all materials or ingredients that become a part of the finished product the person will be deemed to be a manufacturer and not a processor for hire.

"Product," "by-product."

(1)    "Product" means tangible personal property, including articles, substances, or commodities created, brought forth, extracted, or manufactured by human or mechanical effort.

(2)    "By-product" means any additional product, other than the principal or intended product, which results from extracting or manufacturing activities and which has a market value, without regard to whether or not such additional product was an expected or intended result of the extracting or manufacturing activities.

(q)    Definitions "Q": Reserved.

(r)    Definitions "R":

"Reporting period" means:

(1)    A one (1) month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or

(2)    A three (3) month period beginning the first day of January, April, July or October of each year (quarterly); or

(3)    A twelve (12) month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual).

"Retail service" shall include the sale of or charge made for personal, business, or professional services including amounts designated as interest, rents, fees, admission, and other service emoluments however designated, received by persons engaging in the following business activities:

(1)    Amusement and recreation services including but not limited to golf, pool, billiards, skating, bowling, swimming, bungee jumping, ski lifts and tows, basketball, racquetball, handball, squash, tennis, batting cages, day trips for sightseeing purposes, and others, when provided to consumers. Amusement and recreation services also include the provision of related facilities such as basketball courts, tennis courts, handball courts, swimming pools, and charges made for providing the opportunity to dance. The term "amusement and recreation services" does not include instructional lessons to learn a particular activity such as tennis lessons, swimming lessons, or archery lessons;

(2)    Abstract, title insurance, and escrow services;

(3)    Credit bureau services;

(4)    Automobile parking and storage garage services;

(5)    Landscape maintenance and horticultural services but excluding (a) horticultural services provided to farmers and (b) pruning, trimming, repairing, removing, and clearing of trees and brush near electric transmission or distribution lines or equipment, if performed by or at the direction of an electric utility;

(6)    Service charges associated with tickets to professional sporting events;

(7)    The following personal services: physical fitness services, tanning salon services, tattoo parlor services, steam bath services, Turkish bath services, escort services, and dating services; and

(8)    The term shall also include the renting or leasing of tangible personal property to consumers and the rental of equipment with an operator.

"Retailing" means the activity of engaging in making sales at retail and is reported under the retailing classification.

"Return" means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City and that has a statutorily defined due date.

"Royalties" means compensation for the use of intangible property, such as copyrights, patents, licenses, franchises, trademarks, tradenames, and similar items.

(s)    Definitions "S":

"Sale," "casual or isolated sale."

(1)    "Sale" means any transfer of the ownership of, title to, or possession of, property for a valuable consideration and includes any activity classified as a "sale at retail," "retail sale," or "retail service." It includes renting or leasing, conditional sale contracts, leases with option to purchase, and any contract under which possession of the property is given to the purchaser but title is retained by the vendor as security for the payment of the purchase price. It also includes the furnishing of food, drink, or meals for compensation whether consumed upon the premises or not.

(2)    "Casual or isolated sale" means a sale made by a person who is not engaged in the business of selling the type of property involved on a routine or continuous basis.

"Sale at retail," "retail sale."

(1)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers, other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470 and who:

(a)    Purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business without intervening use by such person; or

(b)    Installs, repairs, cleans, alters, imprints, improves, constructs, or decorates real or personal property of or for consumers, if such tangible personal property becomes an ingredient or component of such real or personal property without intervening use by such person; or

(c)    Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component or is a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale; or

(d)    Purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing ferrosilicon which is subsequently used in producing magnesium for sale, if the primary purpose of such property is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of ferrosilicon; or

(e)    Purchases for the purpose of providing the property to consumers as part of competitive telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065. The term shall include every sale of tangible personal property which is used or consumed or to be used or consumed in the performance of any activity classified as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even though such property is resold or utilized as provided in subsection (1)(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of this definition following such use; or

(f)    Purchases for the purpose of satisfying the person’s obligations under an extended warranty as defined in subsection (8) of this definition, if such tangible personal property replaces or becomes an ingredient or component of property covered by the extended warranty without intervening use by such person.

(2)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" also means every sale of tangible personal property to persons engaged in any business activity which is taxable under BMC 3.48.050(1)(g).

(3)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall include the sale of or charge made for tangible personal property consumed and/or for labor and services rendered in respect to the following:

(a)    The installing, repairing, cleaning, altering, imprinting, or improving of tangible personal property of or for consumers, including charges made for the mere use of facilities in respect thereto, but excluding charges made for the use of coin-operated laundry facilities when such facilities are situated in an apartment house, rooming house, or mobile home park for the exclusive use of the tenants thereof, and also excluding sales of laundry service to nonprofit health care facilities, and excluding services rendered in respect to live animals, birds and insects;

(b)    The constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for consumers, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation, and shall also include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth excepting the mere leveling of land used in commercial farming or agriculture;

(c)    The charge for labor and services rendered in respect to constructing, repairing, or improving any structure upon, above, or under any real property owned by an owner who conveys the property by title, possession, or any other means to the person performing such construction, repair, or improvement for the purpose of performing such construction, repair, or improvement and the property is then reconveyed by title, possession, or any other means to the original owner;

(d)    The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the cleaning, fumigating, razing or moving of existing buildings or structures, but shall not include the charge made for janitorial services, which is taxed as a service in this chapter;

(e)    The sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to automobile towing and similar automotive transportation services, but not in respect to those required to report and pay taxes under Chapter 82.16 RCW;

(f)    The sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging and all other services, except telephone business and cable service, by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property, as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property, and it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one (1) month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or enjoy the same. For the purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that the sale of and charge made for the furnishing of lodging for a continuous period of one (1) month or more to a person is a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to enjoy the same;

(g)    The installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers;

(h)    The sale of or charge made for tangible personal property, labor and services to persons taxable under subsections (3)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of this definition when such sales or charges are for property, labor and services which are used or consumed in whole or in part by such persons in the performance of any activity defined as a "sale at retail" or "retail sale" even though such property, labor and services may be resold after such use or consumption. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to modify subsection (1) of this definition and nothing contained in subsection (1) of this definition shall be construed to modify this subsection.

(4)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the providing of competitive telephone service to consumers.

(5)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include:

(a)    The sale of prewritten software other than a sale to a person who presents a resale certificate under RCW 82.04.470, regardless of the method of delivery to the end user. For purposes of this subsection, the sale of prewritten computer software includes the sale of or charge made for a key or an enabling or activation code, where the key or code is required to activate prewritten computer software and put the software into use. There is no separate sale of the key or code from the prewritten computer software, regardless of how the sale may be characterized by the vendor or by the purchaser. For purposes of this subsection, the term "sale at retail" or "retail sale" does not include the sale of or charge made for:

(i)    Custom software; or

(ii)    The customization of prewritten software.

(b)    The charge made to consumers for the right to access and use prewritten computer software, where possession of the software is maintained by the seller or a third party, regardless of whether the charge for the service is on a per use, per user, per license, subscription, or some other basis. This also includes the right to access and use prewritten software to perform data processing.

For purposes of this subsection (5)(b), "data processing" means the systematic performance of operations on data to extract the required information in an appropriate form or to convert the data to usable information. Data processing includes check processing, image processing, form processing, survey processing, payroll processing, claim processing, and similar activities.

(6)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the building, repairing, or improving of any street, place, road, highway, easement, right-of-way, mass public transportation terminal or parking facility, bridge, tunnel, or trestle which is owned by a municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, the State of Washington, or by the United States and which is used or to be used primarily for foot or vehicular traffic including mass transportation vehicles of any kind (public road construction).

(7)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered in respect to the constructing, repairing, decorating, or improving of new or existing buildings or other structures under, upon, or above real property of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority created pursuant to Chapter 35.82 RCW, including the installing or attaching of any article of tangible personal property therein or thereto, whether or not such personal property becomes a part of the realty by virtue of installation (government contracting).

(8)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the sale of or charge made for an extended warranty to a consumer. For purposes of this subsection, "extended warranty" means an agreement for a specified duration to perform the replacement or repair of tangible personal property at no additional charge or a reduced charge for tangible personal property, labor, or both, or to provide indemnification for the replacement or repair of tangible personal property, based on the occurrence of specified events. The term "extended warranty" does not include an agreement, otherwise meeting the definition of extended warranty in this subsection, if no separate charge is made for the agreement and the value of the agreement is included in the sales price of the tangible personal property covered by the agreement.

(9)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall not include the sale of services or charges made for the clearing of land and the moving of earth of or for the United States, any instrumentality thereof, or a county or city housing authority. Nor shall the term include the sale of services or charges made for cleaning up for the United States, or its instrumentalities, radioactive waste and other by-products of weapons production and nuclear research and development. (This is reported under the service or other classification.)

(10)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall not include the sale of or charge made for labor and services rendered for environmental remedial action. (This is reported under the service and other classification.)

(11)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the following sales to consumers of digital goods, digital codes, and digital automated services:

(a)    Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser the right of permanent use;

(b)    Sales in which the seller has granted the purchaser a right of use that is less than permanent;

(c)    Sales in which the purchaser is not obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale; and

(d)    Sales in which the purchaser is obligated to make continued payment as a condition of the sale.

A retail sale of digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services under this subsection (s)(11), includes any services provided by the seller exclusively in connection with the digital goods, digital codes, or digital automated services, whether or not a separate charge is made for such services.

For purposes of this subsection (11), "permanent" means perpetual or for an indefinite or unspecified length of time. A right of permanent use is presumed to have been granted unless the agreement between the seller and the purchaser specifies or the circumstances surrounding the transaction suggest or indicate that the right to use terminates on the occurrence of a condition subsequent.

(12)    "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" shall also include the installing, repairing, altering, or improving of digital goods for consumers.

"Sale at wholesale" or "wholesale sale" means any sale of tangible personal property, digital goods, digital codes, digital automated services, prewritten computer software, or the services described in subsection (s)(5)(b) of this section which is not a retail sale, and any charge made for labor and services rendered for persons who are not consumers, in respect to real or personal property, if such charge is expressly defined as a retail sale when rendered to or for consumers. "Sale at wholesale" also includes the sale of telephone business to another communications company as defined in RCW 80.04.010 for the purpose of resale, as contemplated by RCW 35.21.715.

"Services" means any business activity other than or in addition to those defined in this section.

"Software," "canned software," "custom software," "customization of canned software," "master copies," "retained rights."

(1)    "Canned software" means software that is created for sale to more than one (1) person. For purposes of this chapter, canned software is deemed to be tangible personal property regardless of the method of delivery: tangible media (e.g., disk or installed on hardware) or intangible (e.g., electronically over communications paths).

(2)    "Custom software" means software created for a single person.

(3)    "Customization of canned software" means any alteration, modification, or development of applications using or incorporating canned software to specific individualized requirements of a single person. Customization of canned software includes individualized configuration of software to work with other software and computer hardware but does not include routine installation. Customization of canned software does not change the underlying character or taxability of the original canned software.

(4)    "Master copies" of software means copies of software from which a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor makes copies for sale or license. The software encoded on a master copy and the media upon which the software resides are both ingredients of the master copy.

(5)    "Retained rights" means any and all rights, including intellectual property rights such as those rights arising from copyrights, patents, and trade secret laws, that are owned or are held under contract or license by a software developer, author, inventor, publisher, licensor, sublicensor, or distributor.

(6)    "Software" means any information, program, or routine, or any set of one (1) or more programs, routines, or collections of information used, or intended for use, to convey information that causes one (1) or more computers or pieces of computer-related peripheral equipment, or any combination thereof, to perform a task or set of tasks. "Software" includes the associated documentation, materials, or ingredients regardless of the media upon which that documentation is provided, that describes the code and its use, operation, and maintenance and that typically is delivered with the code to the consumer. All software is classified as either canned or custom.

"Successor" means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.

(t)    Definitions "T":

"Tax and Licensing Division" means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development.

"Tax year" or "taxable year" means the calendar year.

"Taxpayer" means any person, as herein defined, required to have a business license under this chapter or liable for the collection of any tax or fee under this chapter, or who engages in any business or who performs any act for which a tax or fee is imposed by this chapter.

"Tuition fee" includes library, laboratory, health service and other special fees, and amounts charged for room and board by an educational institution when the property or service for which such charges are made is furnished exclusively to the students or faculty of such institution. "Educational institution," as used in this section, means only those institutions created or generally accredited as such by the state and includes educational programs that such educational institution cosponsors with a nonprofit organization, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3), as hereafter amended, if such educational institution grants college credit for course work successfully completed through the educational program, or an approved branch campus of a foreign degree-granting institution in compliance with Chapter 28B.90 RCW, and in accordance with RCW 82.04.4332 or defined as a degree-granting institution under RCW 28B.85.010(3) and accredited by an accrediting association recognized by the United States Secretary of Education, and offering to students an educational program of a general academic nature or those institutions which are not operated for profit and which are privately endowed under a deed of trust to offer instruction in trade, industry, and agriculture, but not including specialty schools, business colleges, other trade schools, or similar institutions.

(u)    Definitions "U": Reserved.

(v)    Definitions "V":

"Value of products."

(1)    The value of products, including by-products, extracted or manufactured, shall be determined by the gross proceeds derived from the sale thereof whether such sale is at wholesale or at retail, to which shall be added all subsidies and bonuses received from the purchaser or from any other person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products or by-products by the seller.

(2)    Where such products, including by-products, are extracted or manufactured for commercial or industrial use; and where such products, including by-products, are shipped, transported or transferred out of the City, or to another person, without prior sale or are sold under circumstances such that the gross proceeds from the sale are not indicative of the true value of the subject matter of the sale; the value shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross proceeds from sales in this state of similar products of like quality and character, and in similar quantities by other taxpayers, plus the amount of subsidies or bonuses ordinarily payable by the purchaser or by any third person with respect to the extraction, manufacture, or sale of such products. In the absence of sales of similar products as a guide to value, such value may be determined upon a cost basis. In such cases, there shall be included every item of cost attributable to the particular article or articles extracted or manufactured, including direct and indirect overhead costs. The Director may prescribe rules for the purpose of ascertaining such values.

(3)    Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this definition, the value of a product manufactured or produced for purposes of serving as a prototype for the development of a new or improved product shall correspond to (a) the retail selling price of such new or improved product when first offered for sale; or (b) the value of materials incorporated into the prototype in cases in which the new or improved product is not offered for sale.

"Value proceeding or accruing" means the consideration, whether money, credits, rights, or other property expressed in terms of money, a person is entitled to receive or which is actually received or accrued. The term shall be applied, in each case, on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the taxpayer.

(w)    Definitions "W":

"Wholesaling" means engaging in the activity of making sales at wholesale, and is reported under the wholesaling classification.

(x)    Definitions "X": Reserved.

(y)    Definitions "Y": Reserved.

(z)    Definitions "Z": Reserved. (Ord. 5355 §1, 2018; Ord. 5344 §1, 2017: Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5139 §1, 2011: Ord. 5044 §1, 2008: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4988 §1, 2006; Ord. 4924 §1, 2004; Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.040 AGENCY - SALES AND SERVICES BY AGENT, CONSIGNEE, BAILEE, FACTOR OR AUCTIONEER.

(1)    Sales in Own Name - Sales or Purchases as Agent. Every person, including agents, consignees, bailees, factors or auctioneers having either actual or constructive possession of tangible personal property or having possession of the documents of title thereto, with power to sell such tangible personal property in the person’s own name and actually so selling shall be deemed the seller of such tangible personal property within the meaning of this chapter.

The burden shall be upon the taxpayer in every case to establish the fact that such taxpayer is not engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property but is acting merely as broker or agent in promoting sales or making purchases for a principal. Such claim will be recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:

(a)    The books and records of the broker or agent show the transactions were made in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the name of the actual owner of the property for whom the sale was made, or the actual buyer for whom the purchase was made.

(b)    The books and records show the amount of the principal’s gross sales, the amount of commissions and any other incidental income derived by the broker or agent from such sales. The principal’s gross sales must not be reflected as the agent’s income on any of the agent’s books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement.

(c)    No ownership rights may be conferred to the agent unless the principal refuses to pay, or refuses to abide by the agency agreement. Sales or purchases of any goods by a person who has any ownership rights in such goods shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.

(d)    Bulk goods sold or purchased on behalf of a principal must not be co-mingled with goods belonging to another principal or lose their identity as belonging to the particular principal. Sales or purchases of any goods which have been co-mingled or lost their identity as belonging to the principal shall be taxed as retail or wholesale sales.

(2)    If the above requirements are not met, the consignor, bailor, principal or other shall be deemed a seller of such property to the agent, consignee, bailee, factor or auctioneer.

(3)    Services in Own Name - Procuring Services as Agent. For purposes of this subsection, an agent is a person who acts under the direction and control of the principal in procuring services on behalf of the principal that the person could not itself render or supply. Amounts received by an agent for the account of its principal as advances or reimbursements are exempted from the measure of the tax only when the agent is not primarily or secondarily liable to pay for the services procured.

Any person who claims to be acting merely as agent in obtaining services for a principal will have such claim recognized only when the contract or agreement between such persons clearly establishes the relationship of principal and agent and when the following conditions are complied with:

(a)    The books and records of the agent show that the services were obtained in the name and for the account of the principal, and show the actual principal for whom the purchase was made.

(b)    The books and records show the amount of the service that was obtained for the principal, the amount of commissions and any other income derived by the agent for acting as such. Amounts received from the principal as advances and reimbursements must not be reflected as the agent’s income on any of the agent’s books and records. Commissions must be computed according to a set percentage or amount, which is agreed upon in the agency agreement. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.050 IMPOSITION OF THE TAX - TAX OR FEE LEVIED.

(1)    Imposition of the Tax - Tax or Fee Levied. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, there is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person a tax for the act or privilege of engaging in business activities within the City, whether the person’s office or place of business be within or without the City. The tax shall be in amounts to be determined by application of rates against gross proceeds of sale, gross income of business, or value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, as follows:

(a)    Extractor. Upon every person engaging within the City in business as an extractor; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including by-products, extracted for sale or for commercial or industrial use, multiplied by the rate of one and six-tenths of one percent (0.0016). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including by-products, so extracted, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the City.

(b)    Manufacturer. Upon every person engaging within the City in business as a manufacturer; as to such persons the amount of the tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the value of the products, including by-products, manufactured, multiplied by the rate of one and six-tenths of one percent (0.0016). The measure of the tax is the value of the products, including by-products, so manufactured, regardless of the place of sale or the fact that deliveries may be made to points outside the City.

(c)    Wholesale. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales at wholesale; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of one and six-tenths of one percent (0.0016).

(d)    Retail. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales at retail; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of such sales of the business without regard to the place of delivery of articles, commodities or merchandise sold, multiplied by the rate of one and one-quarter of one percent (0.00125).

(e)    Printing and Publishing. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of (i) printing, (ii) both printing and publishing newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, music, and other printed items, (iii) publishing newspapers, magazines and periodicals, (iv) extracting for hire, and (v) processing for hire; as to such persons, the amount of tax on such business shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of one and nine-tenths of one percent (0.0019).

(f)    Retail Service. Upon every person engaging within the City in the business of making sales of retail services; as to such persons, the amount of tax with respect to such business shall be equal to the gross proceeds of sales multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (0.002).

(g)    Service. Upon every other person engaging within the City in any business activity other than or in addition to those enumerated in the above subsections; as to such persons, the amount of tax on account of such activities shall be equal to the gross income of the business multiplied by the rate of two-tenths of one percent (0.002). This subsection includes, among others, and without limiting the scope hereof (whether or not title to material used in the performance of such business passes to another by accession, merger or other than by outright sale), persons engaged in the business of developing, or producing custom software or of customizing canned software, producing royalties or commissions, and persons engaged in the business of rendering any type of service which does not constitute a sale at retail or a sale at wholesale or a retail service.

(2)    Tax Exemption.

(a)    The gross receipts tax imposed in this section shall not apply to any person whose gross proceeds of sales, gross income of the business, and value of products, including by-products, as the case may be, from all activities conducted within the City during any calendar year is equal to or less than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) ("tax exemption"). Persons with gross income exceeding sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) per year shall be taxed only on the amount of gross income exceeding sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) per year.

(b)    Beginning on January 1, 2013, and each year thereafter, the tax exemption set forth in subsection (2)(a) of this section shall be increased by an additional twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for each year as follows:

	Year 2013 - the tax exemption shall be $80,000

	Year 2014 - the tax exemption shall be $100,000

	Year 2015 - the tax exemption shall be $120,000

	Year 2016 - the tax exemption shall be $140,000

This formula for the tax exemption shall continue until no taxes are due to be received by the City in any tax year at which time the business and occupation tax shall terminate, unless the formula is modified as set forth in subsection (2)(c) of this section.

(c)    The tax reduction formula in subsection (2)(b) of this section may be:

(i)    Accelerated at any time;

(ii)    Stayed for a period of time as determined by the City Council upon findings by the City Council that fiscal and budget conditions of the City necessitate a stay of the tax reduction; or

(iii)    The business and occupation tax is terminated by ordinance adopted by the City Council.

The actions by City Council to accelerate or stay implementation of the tax reduction in subsections 

 

(2)(b)(i) and (2)(b)(ii) of this section may be made by motion or other action of the City Council.

(3)    Job Credits. It is the intent of the City Council to encourage growth and attract new business to the City. To that end, the City Council finds that an incentive measured by a business’s growth in jobs is a meaningful method of attracting and retaining such businesses. Therefore, the incentive in this section is specifically targeted at new full-time positions. A basic credit is made available to all businesses located in the City.

(a)    Subject to the limits in this section, an eligible person is allowed a credit against the tax due under this chapter. The credit is based on a qualified employment position located within the City.

(i)    The credit shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each qualified employment position within the City, which positions were created on or after January 1, 2007, the "effective date." A credit is earned for the calendar year in which the employee is hired to fill the position, plus the four (4) subsequent consecutive years, if the position, along with the company’s increased workforce of eligible persons, is maintained during the entire period.

a.    Credit may not be taken for hiring persons into positions existing on the effective date. Credit is authorized for new employees hired for new positions created on or after the effective date, which result in an increase in the total workforce of the business located in the City. New positions filled by existing employees are eligible for the credit under this section only if the position vacated by the existing employee is filled by a new hire.

b.    If filled before July 1st of any given year, a newly created position is eligible for a full yearly credit. If filled after June 30th, the position is eligible for only a half credit for the first calendar year.

c.    Credit may not be accrued and carried forward or back. No refunds may be granted for unused portion of credits under this section. If the position is filled during the calendar year, after the filing of a quarterly tax period, an amended first or third quarter tax return will be allowed, if appropriate, to qualify all the credit to which the employer is entitled for that year.

(ii)    For the purposes of this section:

a.    "Eligible person" means a person or company who resides in the City and is engaging in a business activity within the City.

b.    "Qualified employment position" means a permanent, full-time position with compensation of at least a "family wage" within twelve (12) months after the date of hire (allowing for training time and a probation period). If an employee is either voluntarily or involuntarily separated from employment, the employment position is considered filled on a full-time basis during a period not to exceed three (3) months if the employer is actively recruiting a replacement employee.

c.    "Family wage," beginning January 1, 2007, is seventeen dollars and eleven cents ($17.11) an hour. This is the annual average wage in Kitsap County for 2004, developed by the Washington State Employment Security Department, Labor Market and Economic Development Division ("ES202"). This amount will be adjusted annually beginning on January 1, 2008, by an amount equal to the increase in the Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for Urban Wage Earners, Tacoma-Seattle-Bremerton area, of the prior year. If the CPI increase is more than five (5) percent, a five (5) percent increase will be used in computing the basis.

d.    The purchase of an existing business does not create an allowance of the credit for existing positions.

(iii)    No application is necessary for the tax credit; however, information must be submitted for each new employee position for which credit is requested, and included with the first tax return in which the credit is claimed. The person must keep records necessary for the City to verify eligibility under this section. This information includes:

a.    Employment records, including Washington State and federal tax returns, for the current year and previous five (5) years; and

b.    Information relating to description of business activity engaged in at the eligible location by the employee.

(b)    If at any time the Director finds that an employer is not eligible or has lost eligibility for a tax credit under this section, the total amount of taxes for which a credit has been claimed for current and prior periods shall be immediately due.

(4)    The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be in addition to any other tax or fee that may be imposed or levied by the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5195 §1, 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4988 §2, 2006: Ord. 4924 §2, 2004; Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.070 MULTIPLE ACTIVITIES CREDIT WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN ONE (1) OR MORE CITIES WITH ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPT TAXES.

This section provides a tax credit for taxpayers engaged in multiple taxable activities. This section provides a credit against eligible selling or manufacturing taxes imposed by the City for extracting or manufacturing taxes paid to the City or to any other local jurisdiction with respect to the same products. The tax credit does not depend upon whether a person that sells in the City extracts or manufactures in the City or in another jurisdiction to which it has paid an eligible gross receipts tax. The tax credit does not depend on whether a person that manufactures in the City extracts in the City or in another jurisdiction to which it has paid an eligible gross receipts tax. The credit is available to any person that pays an eligible gross receipts tax on the applicable activities, regardless of where it conducts business. The result of this section is that a city in which selling takes place gives up the tax to the manufacturing jurisdiction and the manufacturing jurisdiction gives up the tax to the extracting jurisdiction, whether those jurisdictions are inside or outside the State of Washington.

(1)    Persons who engage in business activities that are within the purview of two (2) or more subsections of BMC 3.48.050 shall be taxable under each applicable subsection.

(2)    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if imposition of the City’s tax would place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate constitutional requirements, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit to the extent necessary to preserve the validity of the City’s tax, and still apply the City tax to as much of the taxpayer’s activities as may be subject to the City’s taxing authority.

(3)    To take the credit authorized by this section, a taxpayer must be able to document that the amount of tax sought to be credited was paid upon the same gross receipts used in computing the tax against which the credit is applied and that the taxpayer paid the amount of tax sought to be credited.

(4)    Credit for Persons That Sell in the City Products That They Extract or Manufacture. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid: (a) with respect to the manufacturing of the products sold in the City, and (b) with respect to the extracting of the products, or the ingredients used in the products, sold in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products.

(5)    Credit for Persons That Manufacture Products in the City Using Ingredients They Extract. Persons taxable under the manufacturing classification with respect to manufacturing products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts tax paid with respect to extracting the ingredients of the products manufactured in the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the manufacturing of those products.

(6)    Credit for Persons That Sell Within the City Products That They Print, or Publish and Print. Persons taxable under the retailing or wholesaling classification with respect to selling products in this City shall be allowed a credit against those taxes for any eligible gross receipts taxes paid with respect to the printing, or the printing and publishing, of the products sold within the City. The amount of the credit shall not exceed the tax liability arising under this chapter with respect to the sale of those products. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.075 DEDUCTIONS TO PREVENT MULTIPLE TAXATION OF MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES AND PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2008, TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING MORE THAN ONE (1) CITY WITH AN ELIGIBLE GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.

This section establishes deductions to be applied when a single taxable activity is taxable by more than one (1) jurisdiction that imposes an eligible gross receipts tax. To eliminate the possibility of the same sale or service being taxed more than once by cities that maintain nexus and an eligible gross receipts tax, the cities’ deductions set forth in this section shall apply as follows:

(1)    Manufacturing - Person Manufacturing Products Within and Without. A person manufacturing products within the City using products manufactured by the same person outside the City may deduct from the measure of the manufacturing tax the value of products manufactured outside the City and included in the measure of an eligible gross receipts tax paid with respect to manufacturing such products.

(2)    Goods and Services - Amounts Subject to an Eligible Gross Receipts Tax in Another City That Also Maintains Nexus Over the Same Activity. For taxes due prior to January 1, 2008, a taxpayer that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax on the same activity in more than one (1) jurisdiction may be entitled to a deduction as follows:

(a)    A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax with respect to a sale of goods or services to a jurisdiction in which the goods are delivered or the services are provided may deduct an amount equal to the gross receipts used to measure that tax from the measure of the tax owed to the City.

(b)    If a taxpayer has not paid tax to the jurisdiction where the product is delivered or the service is provided, then no deduction is allowed. The sale shall be taxed by the city where the office or place of business that generated the sale is located. For both sales and services, the order of taxing rights is delivery city, first; and business office location, second.

(c)    Notwithstanding the above, a person that is subject to an eligible gross receipts tax in more than one (1) jurisdiction on the gross income derived from intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill may deduct from the measure of the tax on those amounts the gross income used in measuring the eligible gross receipts tax paid to the other jurisdiction where the headquarters is located.

(d)    A taxpayer that has paid an eligible gross receipts tax on the privilege of accepting or executing a contract with another city may deduct an amount equal to the contract price used to measure the tax due to the other city from the measure of the tax owed to the City.

(e)    For taxes due under this subsection (2) after January 1, 2008, see BMC 3.48.077. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.076 ASSIGNMENT OF GROSS INCOME DERIVED FROM INTANGIBLES.

Gross income derived from the sale of intangibles such as royalties, trademarks, patents, or goodwill shall be assigned to the jurisdiction where the person is domiciled (its headquarters is located). (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4924 §3, 2004)


3.48.077 ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF INCOME WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN MORE THAN ONE (1) JURISDICTION.

RCW 35.102.130 entitled "Allocation and apportionment of income" is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5355 §2, 2018: Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007)


3.48.078 ALLOCATION AND APPORTIONMENT OF PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INCOME WHEN ACTIVITIES TAKE PLACE IN MORE THAN ONE (1) JURISDICTION. 

Notwithstanding RCW 35.102.130, effective January 1, 2008, gross income from the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, shall be allocated to the principal place in this State from which the taxpayer’s business is directed or managed. As used in this section, the activities of printing, and of publishing newspapers, periodicals, or magazines, have the same meanings as attributed to those terms in RCW 82.04.280(1) by the Department of Revenue. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007)


3.48.090 EXEMPTIONS.

(1)    Nonprofit Corporations or Nonprofit Organizations. This section shall not apply to nonprofit organizations exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended, except with respect to retail sales of such persons.

(2)    Health Maintenance Organization, Health Care Service Contractor, Certified Health Plan. Beginning on January 1, 2000, this chapter does not apply to any health maintenance organization, health care service contractor, or certified health plan in respect to premiums or prepayments that are taxable under RCW 48.14.0201.

(3)    Public Utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to a business activity with respect to which tax liability is specifically imposed under the provisions of Chapter 3.50 BMC.

(4)    Investments - Dividends from Subsidiary Corporations. This chapter shall not apply to amounts derived by persons, other than those engaging in banking, loan, security, or other financial businesses, from investments or the use of money as such, and also amounts derived as dividends by a parent from its subsidiary corporations.

(5)    International Banking Facilities. This chapter shall not apply to the gross receipts of an international banking facility. As used in this subsection, an "international banking facility" means a facility represented by a set of asset and liability accounts segregated on the books and records of a commercial bank, the principal office of which is located in this state, and which is incorporated and doing business under the laws of the United States or of this state, a United States branch or agency of a foreign bank, an Edge corporation organized under Section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 United States Code 611 through 631, or an agreement corporation having an agreement or undertaking with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under Section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 United States Code 601 through 604(a), that includes only international banking facility time deposits (as defined in subsection (a)(2) of Section 2.4.8 of Regulation D (12 CFR Part 204), as promulgated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System), and international banking facility extensions of credit (as defined in subsection (a)(3) of Section 2.4.8 of Regulation D).

(6)    Insurance Business. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received by any person or agent who is an insurer or their appointed insurance producer upon which a tax based on gross premiums is paid to the state pursuant to RCW 48.14.020; and provided further, that the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any bonding company from tax with respect to gross income derived from the completion of any contract as to which it is a surety, or as to any liability as successor to the liability of the defaulting contractor.

(7)    Farmers - Agriculture. This chapter shall not apply to any farmer in respect to amounts received from selling fruits, vegetables, berries, butter, eggs, fish, milk, poultry, meats or any other agricultural product that is raised, caught, produced, or manufactured by such persons.

(8)    Athletic Exhibitions. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting boxing contests and sparring or wrestling matches and exhibitions for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the State Boxing Commission.

(9)    Racing. This chapter shall not apply to any person in respect to the business of conducting race meets for the conduct of which a license must be secured from the Washington State Horse Racing Commission.

(10)    Ride Sharing. This chapter does not apply to any funds received in the course of commuter ride sharing or ride sharing for persons with special transportation needs in accordance with RCW 46.74.010.

(11)    Employees. This chapter shall not apply to:

(a)    Any person in respect to the person’s employment in the capacity as an employee or servant as distinguished from that of an independent contractor. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of employee shall include those persons that are defined in the Internal Revenue Code, as hereafter amended.

(b)    A booth renter, as defined by RCW 18.16.020, is an independent contractor for purposes of this chapter.

(12)    Amounts Derived from Sale of Real Estate. This chapter shall not apply to gross proceeds derived from the sale of real estate. This, however, shall not be construed to allow an exemption of amounts received as commissions from the sale of real estate, nor as fees, handling charges, discounts, interest or similar financial charges resulting from, or relating to, real estate transactions. This chapter shall also not apply to amounts received for the rental of real estate if the rental income is derived from a contract to rent for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or longer.

(13)    Mortgage Brokers’ Third-Party Provider Services Trust Accounts. This chapter shall not apply to amounts received from trust accounts to mortgage brokers for the payment of third-party costs if the accounts are operated in a manner consistent with RCW 19.146.050 and any rules adopted by the director of financial institutions.

(14)    Amounts Derived from Manufacturing, Selling or Distributing Motor Vehicle Fuel. This chapter shall not apply to the manufacturing, selling, or distributing motor vehicle fuel, as the term "motor vehicle fuel" is defined in RCW 82.38.020 and exempt under RCW 82.38.280; provided, that any fuel not subjected to the state fuel excise tax, or any other applicable deduction or exemption, will be taxable under this chapter.

(15)    Amounts Derived from Liquor, and the Sale or Distribution of Liquor. This chapter shall not apply to liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010 and exempt in RCW 66.08.120.

(16)    Casual and Isolated Sales. This chapter shall not apply to the gross proceeds derived from casual or isolated sales.

(17)    Accommodation Sales. This chapter shall not apply to sales for resale by persons regularly engaged in the business of making retail sales of the type of property so sold to other persons similarly engaged in the business of selling such property where (a) the amount paid by the buyer does not exceed the amount paid by the seller to the vendor in the acquisition of the article; and (b) the sale is made as an accommodation to the buyer to enable the buyer to fill a bona fide existing order of a customer or is made within fourteen (14) days to reimburse in kind a previous accommodation sale by the buyer to the seller.

(18)    Taxes Collected as Trust Funds. This chapter shall not apply to amounts collected by the taxpayer from third parties to satisfy third-party obligations to pay taxes such as the retail sales tax, use tax, and admission tax.

(19)    Port District Business Activity. For the purpose of the tax imposed by BMC 3.48.050(1)(a) through (g), persons engaged in business on Port District owned property located within and zoned by the City with an industrial classification ("Port Property") shall be treated in the same manner as if the Port Property were located in unincorporated Kitsap County and therefore exempt from the tax; however, the apportionment and allocation, place of delivery and the appropriate tax provisions of this chapter shall apply for business activity occurring off the Port Property but within the City, also in the same manner as if the Port Property were located in unincorporated Kitsap County.

(20)    Three (3) Year Exemption for Annexed Businesses. This chapter shall not apply to any person with respect to a business activity conducted in an area that has become part of the City by annexation; provided, however, that the business premises of such person be located in the said area on the date of annexation; and provided further, that the exemption provided herein shall cease at the expiration of twelve (12) full calendar quarters following the date of such annexation. (Ord. 5384 §1, 2019: Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5044 §2, 2008: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4988 §3, 2006: Ord. 4924 §4, 2004; Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.100 DEDUCTIONS.

In computing the license fee or tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the following items:

(1)    Compensation from Public Entities for Health or Social Welfare Services - Exception. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts received from the United States or any instrumentality thereof or from the State of Washington or any municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof as compensation for, or to support, health or social welfare services rendered by a health or social welfare organization (as defined in RCW 82.04.431) or by a municipal corporation or political subdivision, except deductions are not allowed under this subsection for amounts that are received under an employee benefit plan. For purposes of this subsection, "employee benefit plan" includes the military benefits program authorized in 10 U.S.C. Section 1071 et seq., as amended, or amounts payable pursuant thereto.

(2)    Interest on Investments or Loans Secured by Mortgages or Deeds of Trust. In computing tax, to the extent permitted by Chapter 82.14A RCW, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest received on investments or loans primarily secured by first mortgages or trust deeds on non-transient residential properties.

(3)    Interest on Obligations of the State, Its Political Subdivisions, and Municipal Corporations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by those engaged in banking, loan, security or other financial businesses, amounts derived from interest paid on all obligations of the State of Washington, its political subdivisions, and municipal corporations organized pursuant to the laws thereof.

(4)    Interest on Loans to Farmers and Ranchers, Producers or Harvesters of Aquatic Products, or Their Cooperatives. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts derived as interest on loans to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, or their cooperatives by a lending institution which is owned exclusively by its borrowers or members and which is engaged solely in the business of making loans and providing finance-related services to bona fide farmers and ranchers, producers or harvesters of aquatic products, their cooperatives, rural residents for housing, or persons engaged in furnishing farm-related or aquatic-related services to these individuals or entities.

(5)    Receipts from Tangible Personal Property Delivered Outside the State. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax under retailing or wholesaling amounts derived from the sale of tangible personal property that is delivered by the seller to the buyer or the buyer’s representative at a location outside the State of Washington.

(6)    Cash Discount Taken by Purchaser. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the cash discount amounts actually taken by the purchaser. This deduction is not allowed in arriving at the taxable amount under the extracting or manufacturing classifications with respect to articles produced or manufactured, the reported values of which, for the purposes of this tax, have been computed according to the "value of product" provisions.

(7)    Credit Losses of Accrual Basis Taxpayers. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax the amount of credit losses actually sustained by taxpayers whose regular books of account are kept upon an accrual basis.

(8)    Repair, Maintenance, Replacement, Etc., of Residential Structures and Commonly Held Property - Eligible Organizations.

(a)    In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts used solely for repair, maintenance, replacement, management, or improvement of the residential structures and commonly held property, but excluding property where fees or charges are made for use by the public who are not guests accompanied by a member, which are derived by:

(i)    A cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership from a person who resides in a structure owned by the cooperative housing association, corporation, or partnership;

(ii)    An association of owners of property as defined in RCW 64.32.010, as now or hereafter amended, from a person who is an apartment owner as defined in RCW 64.32.010; or

(iii)    An association of owners of residential property from a person who is a member of the association. "Association of owners of residential property" means any organization of all the owners of residential property in a defined area who all hold the same property in common within the area.

(b)    For the purposes of this subsection "commonly held property" includes areas required for common access such as reception areas, halls, stairways, parking, etc., and may include recreation rooms, swimming pools and small parks or recreation areas; but is not intended to include more grounds than are normally required in a residential area, or to include such extensive areas as required for golf courses, campgrounds, hiking and riding areas, boating areas, etc.

(c)    To qualify for the deductions under this subsection:

(i)    The salary or compensation paid to officers, managers, or employees must be only for actual services rendered and at levels comparable to the salary or compensation of like positions within the county wherein the property is located;

(ii)    Dues, fees, or assessments in excess of amounts needed for the purposes for which the deduction is allowed must be rebated to the members of the association;

(iii)    Assets of the association or organization must be distributable to all members and must not inure to the benefit of any single member or group of members.

(9)    Sales at Wholesale or Retail of Precious Metal Bullion and Monetized Bullion. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from the sale at wholesale or retail of precious metal bullion and monetized bullion. However, no deduction is allowed on amounts received as commissions upon transactions for the accounts of customers over and above the amount paid to other dealers associated in such transactions, and no deduction or offset is allowed against such commissions on account of salaries or commissions paid to salesmen or other employees.

(10)    Amounts Representing Rental of Real Estate for Boarding Homes. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax amounts representing the value of the rental of real estate for "boarding homes." To qualify for the deduction, the boarding home must meet the definition of "boarding home," and be licensed by the State of Washington under Chapter 18.20 RCW. The deduction shall be in the amount of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross monthly billing when the boarder has resided within the boarding home for longer than thirty (30) days.

(11)    Radio and Television Broadcasting - Advertising Agency Fees - National, Regional, and Network Advertising - Interstate Allocations. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of tax by radio and television broadcasters amounts representing the following:

(a)    Advertising agencies’ fees when such fees or allowances are shown as a discount or price reduction in the billing or that the billing is on a net basis, i.e., less the discount;

(b)    Actual gross receipts from national, network, and regional advertising or a "standard deduction" as provided by RCW 82.04.280; and

(c)    Local advertising revenue that represents advertising which is intended to reach potential customers of the advertiser who are located outside the State of Washington. The Director may issue a rule that provides detailed guidance as to how these deductions are to be calculated.

(12)    Constitutional Prohibitions. In computing tax, there may be deducted from the measure of the tax amounts derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of the State of Washington or the Constitution of the United States.

(13)    Receipts from the Sale of Tangible Personal Property and Retail Service Delivered Outside the City but Within Washington. Effective January 1, 2008, amounts included in the gross receipts reported on the tax return derived from the sale of tangible personal property and retail service delivered to the buyer or the buyer’s representative outside the City but within the State of Washington may be deducted from the measure of tax under the retailing, retail services, or wholesaling classification.

(14)    Professional Employer Services. In computing the tax, a professional employer organization may deduct from the calculation of gross income the gross income of the business derived from performing professional employer services that is equal to the portion of the fee charged to a client that represents the actual cost of wages and salaries, benefits, workers’ compensation, payroll taxes, withholding, or other assessments paid to or on behalf of a covered employee by the professional employer organization under a professional employer agreement. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.120 TAX PART OF OVERHEAD.

It is not the intention of this chapter that the taxes or fees herein levied upon persons engaging in business be construed as taxes or fees upon the purchasers or customer, but that such taxes or fees shall be levied upon, and collectible from, the person engaging in the business activities herein designated and that such taxes or fees shall constitute a part of the cost of doing business of such persons. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.125 RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The Director may establish administrative rules and regulations as deemed appropriate, consistent with this chapter for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out its provisions. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.48.130 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 5201 §2 (part), 2012: Ord. 5028 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4843, Added, 01/03/2003)


Chapter 3.49 USE TAX - NATURAL OR MANUFACTURED GAS

Sections:

3.49.010    EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER. 

3.49.020    BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

3.49.030    IMPOSITION OF USE TAX.

3.49.040    EXCEPTIONS AND DEDUCTIONS.

3.49.050    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

3.49.060    RULES AND REGULATIONS. 


3.49.010 EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER. 

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to license and/or tax for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the City Code. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


3.49.020 BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in business in the City without having first obtained a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


3.49.030 IMPOSITION OF USE TAX.

Pursuant to RCW 82.14.230, there is hereby fixed and imposed upon every person for the privilege of using natural gas or manufactured gas in the City as a consumer a tax at the rate of six (6) percent of the value of the gas used. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


3.49.040 EXCEPTIONS AND DEDUCTIONS.

(a)    The tax under this chapter shall not apply to the use of natural or manufactured gas if the person who sold the gas to the consumer has paid a tax imposed under BMC 3.50.050.

(b)    The "value of the gas used" shall have the meaning set forth in RCW 82.12.010(2)(a), and does not include any amounts that are paid for the hire or use of a natural gas business in transporting the gas subject to this chapter if those amounts are subject to a tax which is imposed and paid under BMC 3.50.050.

(c)    There shall be allowed a deduction against the value of the gas used when: (1) the person who sold the gas to the consumer has paid a gross receipts tax similar to that imposed under this section to another state; or (2) the person consuming the gas has paid a gross receipt tax similar to that imposed under this section to another state. The deduction shall be with respect to and in the amount of the value of the gas for which the gross receipts tax was paid. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


3.49.050 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

The administrative provisions for taxes contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein or by State law. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


3.49.060 RULES AND REGULATIONS. 

The Director of Financial Services, or designee, may establish administrative rules and regulations as deemed appropriate, consistent with this chapter for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out its provisions. (Ord. 5141 §1 (part), 2011)


Chapter 3.50 UTILITY TAXES

Sections:

3.50.010    EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER.

3.50.020    BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

3.50.030    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

3.50.040    DEFINITIONS.

3.50.050    PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX - AMOUNT.

3.50.060    DEDUCTIONS.

3.50.070    TAX - WHEN DUE.

3.50.080    RULES AND REGULATIONS.

3.50.090    SEVERABILITY.


3.50.010 EXERCISE OF REVENUE LICENSE POWER. 

The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the power of the City to license and/or tax for revenue. The provisions of this chapter are subject to periodic statutory or administrative rule changes or judicial interpretations of the ordinances or rules. The responsibility rests with the licensee or taxpayer to reconfirm tax computation procedures and remain in compliance with the City Code. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.020 BUSINESS LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in business in the City, as defined in BMC 3.48.030(e), without having first obtained a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. Applications for business licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division. (Ord. 5355 §4, 2018: Ord. 5343 §2, 2017: Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.030 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.040 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter as applicable unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

"Cellular telephone service" is a voice or data telephone/communications system based in whole or substantial part on wireless radio communications, whether or not the communications are subject to regulation by the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission (WUTC). This includes cellular mobile service. Cellular mobile service includes other wireless radio communications services such as specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications services (PCS), and any other evolving wireless radio communications technology which accomplishes the same purpose as cellular mobile service.

"Competitive telephone service" means the providing by any person of telephone communications equipment or apparatus, or service related to that equipment or apparatus such as a repair and maintenance service, if the equipment or apparatus is of a type which can be provided by persons who are not subject to regulation as telephone companies under RCW Title 80, and for which a separate charge is made.

"Gross income" means the value proceeding or accruing by reason of the business activity engaged in and operations incidental thereto, and includes gross proceeds of sales, compensation for the rendition of services and other emoluments, but without any deduction on account of the cost of the commodity furnished or sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount, delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

"Gross income from timber sales" means "stumpage value of timber" as defined in Chapter 84.33 RCW minus the costs of production including, but not limited to, logging and trucking costs, fees and excise taxes.

"Page service" means service provided by means of an electronic device that has the ability to send or receive voice or digital messages transmitted through the local telephone network, via satellite or any other form of voice or data transmission.

"Reporting period" means a one (1) month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly).

"Solid waste collection service" means receiving solid waste from any facility or location within the City for transfer, processing, treatment, storage, or disposal, including, but not limited to, all collection services, public or private dumps or landfills, transfer stations, and other similar operations.

"Solid waste," for purposes of this chapter, means garbage, trash, rubbish, or other material discarded as worthless or not economically viable for further use, infectious, hazardous, or toxic wastes, and recyclable or reusable materials collected, in whole or part, for recycling or salvage.

"Telephone business" means the providing by any person of access to a local telephone network, local telephone network switching service, toll service, cellular or mobile telephone service, coin telephone service, page service, or the providing of telephonic, video, data, or similar communication, or transmission for hire, via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communications or transmission system. The term includes cooperative or farmer line telephone companies or associations operating exchanges. The term also includes the provision of transmission to and from the site of an internet provider via a local telephone network, toll line or channel, cable, microwave, or similar communicationsor transmission system. "Telephone business" does not include the providing of competitive telephone service, or providing of cable television service, or other providing of broadcast services by radio or television stations. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.050 PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX - AMOUNT.

In addition to other taxes or fees that may be imposed or levied by the City, there is hereby levied upon all persons (including the City) engaging in business within the City a fee or tax to be collected as follows:

(a)    Gas. Upon every person engaging in the business of transmitting, distributing or the selling of manufactured or natural gas, a fee or tax equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City.

(b)    Water. Upon every person engaging in the business of providing water utility service, a fee or tax equal to fifteen and one-half percent (15.5%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City. The total gross income from the business of providing water utility service includes the "gross income from timber sales" of the utility as that term is defined in this chapter.

(c)    Wastewater. Upon every person engaging in the business of providing wastewater utility service, a fee or tax equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City.

(d)    Stormwater. Upon every person engaging in the business of providing stormwater utility service, a fee or tax equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City. All of the fees or taxes collected under this subsection shall be dedicated for street improvements with fifty percent (50%) allocated and transferred to the Transportation Capital Fund and fifty percent (50%) allocated and transferred to the Residential Street and Sidewalk Fund, unless otherwise allocated by the City Council.

(e)    Cable. Upon every person engaging in the business of transmitting television signals by means of a cable distribution system commonly known as television cable service, a fee or tax equal to seven percent (7%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City.

(f)    Solid Waste. Upon every person engaging in the business of providing solid waste collection service, a fee or tax equal to nine and one-half percent (9.5%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City.

(g)    Electricity. Upon every person engaging in the business of producing, transmitting, distributing or selling electricity, a fee or tax equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income from such business conducted within the City.

(h)    Telephone. Upon every person engaged in carrying on a telephone business for hire or for sale of a commodity or a service within or partly within the corporate limits of the City, a tax for the privilege of so doing business equal to six percent (6%) of the total gross income rendered within the City.

(1)    Deductions. In computing the telephone tax, there shall be deducted from the gross operating revenues the following items:

(i)    Amounts derived from transactions in interstate or foreign commerce or from any business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitutions of the United States or the State of Washington.

(ii)    Amounts derived from that portion of network telephone service, as defined in RCW 82.04.065, which represents charges to another communications company, as defined in RCW 80.04.010, for connecting fees, switching charges or carrier access charges relating to intrastate toll telephone services, or for access to, or charges for, interstate services or charges for network telephone service that is purchased for the purpose of resale.

(iii)    Adjustments made to a billing or to a customer account or to a communications company accrual account in order to reverse a billing or charge that had been made as a result of third-party fraud or other crime and was not properly a debt of a customer.

(iv)    A complete deduction from gross income shall be allowed for credit losses, only to cellular telephone service companies which keep their regular books of account on an accrual basis, for cash discounts and credit losses actually sustained by a taxpayer as a result of telephone service business.

(2)    Allocation of Income - Cellular Telephone Service.

(i)    Service Address. Payments by a customer for the telephone service from telephones without a fixed location shall be allocated among taxing jurisdictions to the location of the customer’s principal service address during the period for which the tax applies.

(ii)    Roaming Phones. When the service is provided while a subscriber is roaming outside the subscriber’s normal cellular network area, the gross income shall be assigned consistent with the taxpayer’s accounting system to the location of the originating cell site of the call, or to the location of the main cellular switching office that switched the call. (Ord. 5359 §1, 2018: Ord. 5355 §5, 2018: Ord. 5336 §1, 2017: Ord. 5307 §1, 2016: Ord. 5289 §2, 2015: Ord. 5170 §1, 2011: Ord. 5096 §1, 2009: Ord. 5078 §1, 2009: Ord. 5065 §1, 2008: Ord. 4988 §4, 2006; Ord. 4918 §1, 2004; Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4882 §1, 2003; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.060 DEDUCTIONS.

(a)    There may be deducted from the total gross income, upon which the license fee or tax is computed, revenues derived from business which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitutions or laws of the State of Washington or the United States or the Charter of the City. 

(b)    There may be deducted from the total gross income, upon which the license fee or tax is computed, the amount of State excise taxes, pursuant to Chapter 82.18 RCW, imposed directly upon persons using the service of a solid waste collection business and collected for payment to the State by the solid waste collection business.

(c)    There may be deducted from the total gross income, upon which the license fee or tax is imposed under BMC 3.50.050, revenues derived from providing the service of collecting recyclable materials, as follows:

(1)    Commercial Recycling. Revenues derived from the service of collecting commercial recyclable materials. This exemption is limited to materials actually resold and computed in proportion to weight, as follows:

(i)    Any weight added by processing or treatment after collection is subtracted from the weight as sold to obtain the allowable weight as sold; and 

(ii)    Revenues are multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the allowable weight as sold and the denominator of which is the weight as collected.

(2)    This deduction does not apply to any energy recovery or fuel-use process, nor in any case where materials collected have not been sold for commercial reuse within one hundred (100) days from the date of collection. This period may be extended when a taxpayer shows to the Department’s satisfaction that market conditions necessitate a longer period for sale. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.50.070 TAX - WHEN DUE.

The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in monthly installments. If full payment of any tax due under this chapter is not received by the Tax and License Division on or before the date due, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee pursuant to BMC 3.86.110. (Ord. 5343 §3, 2017: Ord. 4895 §2, 2004)


3.50.080 RULES AND REGULATIONS. 

The Director may establish administrative rules and regulations as deemed appropriate, consistent with this chapter for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out its provisions. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003. Formerly 3.50.070)


3.50.090 SEVERABILITY. 

If any provision or section of this chapter shall be held void or unconstitutional, all other parts, provisions, and sections of this chapter not expressly so held to be void or unconstitutional shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 4895 §2, 2004; Ord. 4844, Added, 01/03/2003. Formerly 3.50.080)


Chapter 3.52 MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.52.010    TAX LEVIED.

3.52.020    EXEMPTION.

3.52.030    SCHEDULE - BASIS.

3.52.040    PAYMENT - COLLECTION.

3.52.050    FUND.

3.52.060    EFFECTIVE DATE.


3.52.010 TAX LEVIED.

As of July 1, 1971, pursuant to the authority of RCW 35.58.273, there is levied a special excise tax in the annual amount of one percent on the fair market value of every motor vehicle as defined in RCW 35.58.272 owned by a resident of the city for the privilege of using such motor vehicle; provided that in no event shall the tax be less than one dollar and subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of RCW 82.44.150, the amount of such tax shall be credited against the amount of the excise tax levied by the state under RCW 82.44.020. (Ord. 2959 §1, 1971)


3.52.020 EXEMPTION.

Any vehicle for which an excise tax is payable under RCW 82.44.030 and RCW 82.44.070 shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2959 §2, 1971)


3.52.030 SCHEDULE - BASIS.

The schedule and basis for the excise tax imposed by this chapter shall be as provided in RCW 82.44.040 and by this chapter shall be as provided in RCW 82.44.050, and penalties, receipts, abatements, refunds and all other similar matters relating to the tax shall be as provided in RCW 82.44. (Ord. 2959 §3, 1971)


3.52.040 PAYMENT - COLLECTION.

The excise tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable as set forth in RCW 82.44.060 and shall be collected and paid to the city as provided in RCW 35.58.276 through 35.58.279. (Ord. 2959 §4, 1971)


3.52.050 FUND.

The city treasurer is directed to establish a special fund in the city treasury to be designated "special motor vehicle excise tax fund for transit purposes." All taxes levied and collected under this chapter shall be credited to such fund and shall be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquiring, constructing, equipping, or operating a publicly owned mass transportation system, or contracting for the services thereof, or to pay or secure the payment of all or part of the principal of or interest on any general obligation bonds or revenue bonds issued for public transportation capital purposes. (Ord. 2959 §5, 1971)


3.52.060 EFFECTIVE DATE.

The effective date of the tax herein imposed shall be July 1, 1971, and such tax shall be due and payable on such date and all days following, to be collected as heretofore provided. (Ord. 2959 §8, 1971)


Chapter 3.64 LODGING TAX FUND

Sections:

3.64.010    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

3.64.020    TAX - GENERALLY.

3.64.030    TAX - IMPOSITION.

3.64.040    DEFINITIONS.

3.64.050    TAX - ADDITIONAL TO OTHERS.

3.64.060    FUND CREATED - USE OF FUNDS.

3.64.070    TAX - ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION.


3.64.010 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS. 

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC entitled "Administrative Provisions for Taxes" shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007)


3.64.020 TAX - GENERALLY.

There is levied a two (2) percent special excise tax to be reimbursed to the City from the State sales tax as provided in RCW 67.28.180 and there is levied an additional two (2) percent special excise tax as provided in RCW 67.28.181. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4633, Amended, 08/08/1998; Ord. 3119 §1 (in part), 1974. Formerly 3.64.010)


3.64.030 TAX - IMPOSITION.

As provided above there is levied a special excise tax of four (4) percent on the sale of or charge made for the furnishing of lodging by a hotel, rooming house, tourist court, motel, trailer camp, and the granting of any similar license to use real property as distinguished from the renting or leasing of real property; provided, that it shall be presumed that the occupancy of real property for a continuous period of one (1) month or more constitutes a rental or lease of real property and not a mere license to use or to enjoy the same. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4633, Amended, 08/08/1998; Ord. 3119 §1(a), 1974. Formerly 3.64.020)


3.64.040 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions set forth in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply to this chapter as applicable. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

(a)    The definitions of "selling price," "seller," "buyer," "consumer" and all other definitions as are now contained in RCW 82.08.010, as currently enacted or hereinafter amended are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.

(b)    The definitions of the terms "acquisition," "municipality," "operation," "person," "tourism," "tourism promotion," "tourism-related facility" and "tourist" set forth in RCW 67.28.080, as currently enacted or hereinafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 3119 §1(b), 1974. Formerly 3.64.030)


3.64.050 TAX - ADDITIONAL TO OTHERS.

The tax levied in this chapter shall be in addition to any license fee or any tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 3119 §1(c), 1974. Formerly 3.64.040)


3.64.060 FUND CREATED - USE OF FUNDS.

Pursuant to RCW 67.28.1815, there is created a special fund in the treasury of the City and all taxes collected under this chapter shall be placed in this special fund to be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of tourism promotion, or acquisition of or operation of tourism-related facilities or to pay for other uses as authorized in Chapter 67.28 RCW, as now permitted or hereafter amended. Until withdrawn for use, the monies accumulated in such fund may be invested by the City in any manner authorized by law. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4633, Amended, 08/08/1998; Ord. 3630 §1, 1981; Ord. 3119 §1(D), 1974. Formerly 3.64.050)


3.64.070 TAX - ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION.

For the purposes of the tax levied in this chapter:

(a)    The Department of Revenue of the State is designated as the agent of the City for the purpose of collection and administration.

(b)    The administrative provisions contained in RCW 82.08.050 through 82.08.070 and in Chapter 82.32 RCW shall apply with respect to administration and collection by the Department.

(c)    All rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue for the administration of Chapter 82.08 RCW are adopted.

(d)    The Department is empowered, on behalf of the City, to prescribe such special forms and reporting procedures as the Department may deem necessary. (Ord. 5001 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4633, Amended, 08/08/1998; Ord. 3119 §1(E), 1974. Formerly 3.64.060)


Chapter 3.65 REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND

Sections:

3.65.010    GENERAL.

3.65.020    MAINTENANCE OF FUND.


3.65.010 GENERAL.

A special revolving fund designated for the purpose of repair and/or demolition of structures which are under abatement under the uniform codes as adopted in 17.04.030 and 17.16 of the Bremerton Municipal Code. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon the demand of the authority having jurisdiction to defray the cost and expenses which may be incurred by this jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings and/or conditions. (Ord. 4388, 1992)


3.65.020 MAINTENANCE OF FUND.

The legislative body may at any time transfer to the repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund of this jurisdiction, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of repair or demolition. All funds collected under the proceedings as outlined in the Uniform Codes as adopted shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund. (Ord. 4388, 1992)


Chapter 3.68 EQUIPMENT RENTAL RESERVE FUND

Sections:

3.68.010    CREATED.

3.68.020    ADMINISTRATION.

3.68.030    EQUIPMENT.

3.68.040    EQUIPMENT USE CHARGES.

3.68.050    PURCHASES.

3.68.060    DEPOSITS.


3.68.010 CREATED.

There is created an equipment rental reserve fund which shall be used as a revolving fund or funds to be expended for salaries, wages, and operations required for the repair, replacement, purchase, and operation of equipment, and for the purchase of equipment, materials, and supplies to be used in the administration and operation of the fund in accordance with RCW 35.21.088. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §1, 1986)


3.68.020 ADMINISTRATION.

The equipment rental reserve fund shall be administered by the Director of Public Works and Utilities or his/her designee in accordance with RCW 35.21.088 and directives of the Washington State Auditor. The Director of Public Works and Utilities or his/her designee, with approval of the Mayor, is authorized to establish policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §2, 1986)


3.68.030 EQUIPMENT.

(a)    All trucks, passenger cars and construction equipment currently in the equipment rental fund shall be in the fund established by this chapter.

All vehicles and equipment currently owned by the various city departments may be transferred to the equipment rental reserve fund at the direction of the City Council.

(b)    All vehicles and equipment within the equipment rental fund shall be the property of the fund.

(c)    Certain specialized items of equipment may, at the direction of the City Council, be expressly excluded from or included in the equipment rental reserve fund. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §3, 1986)


3.68.040 EQUIPMENT USE CHARGES.

Each department, using equipment which is part of the equipment pool, shall pay into the equipment rental reserve fund a monthly rental payment which shall cover operation, maintenance for and replacement costs of each vehicle it uses. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §5, 1986. Formerly 3.68.050)


3.68.050 PURCHASES.

All purchases made from the fund shall be in accordance with the charter and ordinances of the City. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §7, 1986. Formerly 3.68.070)


3.68.060 DEPOSITS.

All moneys deposited in the equipment rental reserve fund, including amounts included therefor in the annual budget of the City and not expended as in this chapter provided, shall remain in the fund from year to year and shall not be transferred to any other fund or expended for any purpose unless authorized by the City Council. (Ord. 5120 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4084 §9, 1986. Formerly 3.68.090)


Chapter 3.72 GAMBLING TAX

Sections:

3.72.010    DEFINITIONS.

3.72.020    PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX - TAX RATES.

3.72.030    TAX TO BE COMPUTED AND PAID QUARTERLY - EXCEPTIONS.

3.72.040    ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX.

3.72.050    METHOD OF PAYMENT.

3.72.060    PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.

3.72.070    NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ENGAGE IN ACTIVITY TO BE FILED.

3.72.080    RECORDS REQUIRED.

3.72.090    OVERPAYMENT OR UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX.

3.72.100    FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN.

3.72.110    TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHERS.

3.72.120    RULEMAKING.

3.72.130    TAXES, PENALTIES AND FEES CONSTITUTE DEBT TO MUNICIPALITY.

3.72.140    LIMITATION ON RIGHT TO RECOVERY.

3.72.150    EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX.

3.72.160    VIOLATION - PENALTIES.


3.72.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates otherwise:

"Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf; and

“Tax and Licensing Division” means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development.

In addition, for the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used shall have the same meaning as each has under Chapter 218, Laws of 1973, First Extraordinary Session and Chapter 9.46 RCW, each amended, and under the rules of the Washington State Gambling Commission, Chapter 230, WAC, unless otherwise specifically provided or the context in which they are used herein clearly indicates that they may be given some other meaning. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §1, 1974)


3.72.020 PERSONS SUBJECT TO TAX - TAX RATES.

There is levied upon all persons, associations, and organizations conducting or operating within this jurisdiction any of the activities listed below a tax in the following amount to be paid to the City:

(a)    Bingo, in the amount of the gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of money paid in cash and amounts paid for merchandise which are actually awarded as prizes during the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of five (5) percent;

(b)    Raffles, in the amount of the gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of money paid in cash and amounts paid for merchandise which are actually awarded as prizes during the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of five (5) percent. No tax shall be imposed on the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000) gross receipts less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes from raffles conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW;

(c)    Amusement games, in the amount sufficient to pay the actual costs of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, which shall not exceed the amount of the gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of money paid in cash and amounts paid for merchandise, which are actually awarded as prizes during the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of two (2) percent;

(d)    Charitable organizations. No tax shall be imposed under the authority of this chapter on bingo, raffles or amusement games when such activities or any combination thereof are conducted by any bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization, as defined in Chapter 9.46 RCW, which organization has not paid operating or management personnel and has gross income from bingo, raffles or amusement games, or any combination thereof, not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000) per year less the amount paid as prizes;

(e)    Fishing derbies, in the amount of the gross receipts therefrom, less the amount of money paid in cash and amounts paid for merchandise which are actually awarded for prizes during the taxable period, multiplied by the rate of ten (10) percent;

(f)    Punchboards or pull-tabs.

(1)    Any organization qualifying as a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.46 RCW and any person, association or organization who desires to utilize punchboards or pull-tabs as a commercial stimulant pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW shall make such intention known to the Director;

(2)    Any organization pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.46 RCW and any person, association or organization who desires to utilize punchboards or pull-tabs as a commercial stimulant pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW shall remit to the City of Bremerton and there is hereby levied a tax computed at the rate of three (3) percent based upon the gross income received in the conduct of such activity, computed by multiplying the number of chances played on said punchboard or pull-tab times the price or value of each individual chance for play;

(3)    Any organization qualifying as a bona fide charitable or nonprofit organization pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 9.46 RCW, who desires to utilize punchboards or pull-tabs pursuant to Chapter 9.46 RCW, shall remit to the City of Bremerton and there is hereby levied a tax computed at the rate of ten (10) percent based on gross receipts from the operation of the games less the amount awarded as cash or merchandise prizes. Gross income received in the conduct of such activity is computed by multiplying the number of chances played on said punchboard or pull-tab times the price or value of each individual chance or play. Cash or merchandise awarded is computed by the amount of cash paid or cost of merchandise awarded;

(g)    Social card games.

(1)    Social card games (player funded), in the amount of ten (10) percent of the gross receipts received as fees charged persons for the privilege of playing in card games;

(2)    Social card games (house banked) in the amount of two (2) percent of the gross receipts received by the house from such social card games;

(h)    Fund-raising events, as defined by RCW 9.46.0233, in the amount of ten (10) percent of the net receipts derived from the fund-raising event. For the purpose of this section, "net receipts" means all money received by an organization during a given period of time, less the amount of money paid out as cash prizes during the same period of time. No additional expenditures which arise from the conducting of the fund-raising event shall be deducted for purposes of reducing the gross receipts to arrive at the net receipt. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 5238 §1, 2013: Ord. 5116 §1, Amended, 07/07/2010: Ord. 4764, Amended, 07/06/2001; Ord. 3924 §1, 1984; Ord. 3187 §2, 1974)


3.72.030 TAX TO BE COMPUTED AND PAID QUARTERLY - EXCEPTIONS.

Each of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be computed on the basis of activity during each calendar quarter year, shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, and remittance therefor, together with return forms, shall be made to the City, on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the quarterly period in which the tax accrued, that is, on January 31st, April 30th, July 31st, and October 31st of each year; provided, that the following exceptions to this payment schedule shall be allowed, or required:

(1)    Except as provided in (2) below, whenever any person, association or organization taxable hereunder conducting or operating a taxable activity on a regular basis discontinues operation of that taxable activity for a period of more than three consecutive weeks, or quits business, sells out, or otherwise disposes of its business or terminates the business, any tax due hereunder shall become due and payable, and such taxpayer shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due.

(2)    Whenever it appears to the Director that the collection of taxes from any person, association or organization may be in jeopardy, the Director, after not less than thirty (30) days’ notice to the taxpayer, is authorized to require that taxpayer to remit taxes and returns at such shorter intervals than quarterly or annually, as the Director shall deem appropriate under the circumstances.

(3)    There shall be allowed as a deduction for the various taxes imposed by this chapter an amount equal to the amount of bad debts suffered by any such person, association or organization engaged in such activity as a result of their being unable to collect gambling debts. Such deduction shall be allowed to be computed and taken on the tax return for the fourth quarter of each calendar year. Such deduction shall not be allowed unless the person, association or organization engaging in such activities shall first cause to be prepared and filed with said fourth quarter tax return an affidavit, in form satisfactory to the Director, setting forth the amount of bad debts suffered by such person, association or organization. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3377 §1, 1977; Ord. 3187 §3 1974)


3.72.040 ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION OF TAX.

Administration and collection of the various taxes imposed by this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Tax and License Division. Remittance of the amount due shall be accompanied by a completed return form prescribed and provided by the Director. The taxpayer shall be required to swear and affirm that the information given in the return is true, accurate, and complete.

The Director is authorized, but not required, to mail to taxpayers forms for returns. Failure of the taxpayer to receive such a form shall not excuse a taxpayer from making the return and timely paying all taxes due. The Director shall make forms available to the public in reasonable numbers in the office of the Director during regular business hours.

In addition to the return form, a copy of the taxpayer’s quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission required by WAC 230-08 for the period in which the tax accrued shall accompany remittance of the tax amount due. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §4, 1974)


3.72.050 METHOD OF PAYMENT.

Taxes payable hereunder shall be remitted to the Director on or before the time required by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, or in cash. If payment is made by draft or check, the tax shall not be deemed paid until the draft or check is honored in the usual course of business, nor shall the acceptance of any sum by the Director be an acquittance or discharge of the tax unless the amount paid is the full amount due. The return, and copy of quarterly report to the Washington State Gambling Commission, shall be filed in the office of the Director after notation by that office upon the return of the amount actually received from the taxpayer. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §5, 1974)


3.72.060 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.

If full payment of any tax due under this chapter is not received by the Tax and Licensing Division on or before the date due, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee pursuant to BMC 3.86.110. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3894 §1, 1984; Ord. 3187 §6, 1974)


3.72.070 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ENGAGE IN ACTIVITY TO BE FILED.

In order that the City may identify those persons who are subject to taxation under this chapter, each person, association or organization shall file with the Director a sworn declaration of intent to conduct an activity taxable under this chapter upon a form to be prescribed by the Director, together with a copy of the license issued therefor by the Washington State Gambling Commission. The filing shall be made not later than ten (10) days prior to conducting or operating the taxable activity. No fee shall be charged for such filing, which is not for the purpose of regulation of this activity but for the purposes of administration of this taxing ordinance only.

Failure to timely file shall not excuse any person, association or organization from any tax liability. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §7, 1974)


3.72.080 RECORDS REQUIRED.

(a)    Each person, association, or organization engaging in an activity under this chapter shall maintain records respecting that activity which truly, completely and accurately disclose all information necessary to determine the taxpayer’s tax liability hereunder during each base tax period. Such records shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than three (3) years. In addition, all information and items required by the Washington State Gambling Commission under WAC 230-08, and the United States Internal Revenue Service respecting taxation, shall be kept and maintained for the periods required by those agencies.

(b)    All books, records, and other items required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be subject to, and immediately made available for, inspection and audit at any time, with or without notice, at the place where such records are kept, upon demand by the Director or his designees, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this taxing ordinance.

(c)    Where a taxpayer does not keep all of the books, records or items required to be kept or maintained under this section in this jurisdiction so that the Director may examine them conveniently, the taxpayer shall either:

(1)    Produce all of the required books, records, or items within this jurisdiction for such inspection within seven (7) days following a request of the local official that he do so; or

(2)    Bear the actual cost of inspection by the Director or his designee, at the location at which such books, records or items are located; provided, that a taxpayer choosing to bear these costs shall pay in advance to the Director the estimated cost thereof, including, but not limited to round-trip fare by the most rapid means, lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. The actual amount due or to be refunded for expenses shall be determined following said examination of the records.

(d)    A taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to produce such books and records either within or without this jurisdiction, in addition to being subject to other civil and criminal penalties provided by this chapter, shall be subject to a jeopardy fee or tax assessment by the Director.

(e)    This penalty fee or jeopardy assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of fee or tax owing the Director by the taxpayer unless he can prove otherwise by competent evidence. The taxpayer shall be notified by mail by the Director of the amount of tax so determined by jeopardy assessment, together with any penalty and/or interest, and the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §8, 1974)


3.72.090 OVERPAYMENT OR UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX.

If, upon application by a taxpayer for a refund or for an audit of his records, or upon any examination of the returns or records of any taxpayer, it is determined by the Director that within three (3) years immediately preceding receipt by the Director of the application by the taxpayer for a refund, or an audit, or, in the absence of such an application, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the commencement by the Director of such examination:

(1)    A tax or other fee has been paid in excess of that properly due, the total excess paid over all amounts due to the City within such period of three (3) years shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be credited to the taxpayer at the taxpayer’s option. No refund or credit shall be allowed with respect to the Director more than three (3) years before the date of such application or examination;

(2)    A tax or other fee has been paid which is less than that properly due, or no tax or other fee has been paid, the Director shall mail a statement to the taxpayer showing the balance due, including the tax amount or penalty assessments and fees, and it shall be a separate, additional violation of this chapter, both civil and criminal, if the taxpayer fails to make payment in full within ten (10) calendar days of such mailing. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §9, 1974)


3.72.100 FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN.

If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make and file his return as and when required under this chapter, the Director is authorized to determine the amount of tax payable, together with any penalty and/or interest assessed under the provisions of this chapter, and by mail to notify such taxpayer of the amount so determined, which amount shall thereupon become the tax and penalty and/or interest and shall become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §10, 1974)


3.72.110 TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHERS.

The tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of Bremerton, except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §11, 1974)


3.72.120 RULEMAKING.

The Director shall have the authority to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with superior law, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions hereof, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §12, 1974)


3.72.130 TAXES, PENALTIES AND FEES CONSTITUTE DEBT TO MUNICIPALITY.

Any tax due and unpaid under this chapter and all penalties or fees shall constitute a debt to the City, a municipal corporation, and may be collected by court proceedings the same as any other debt in like amount which shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §13, 1974)


3.72.140 LIMITATION ON RIGHT TO RECOVERY.

The right of recovery by the City from the taxpayer for any tax provided hereunder shall be outlawed after the expiration of five (5) calendar years from the date said tax became due. The right of recovery against the City because of overpayment of tax by any taxpayer shall be outlawed after the expiration of five (5) calendar years from the date such payment was made. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3670 §3, 1981; Ord. 3187 §14, 1974)


3.72.150 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX.

This chapter shall provide for the gambling taxes mentioned herein, to be retroactive to January 1, 1975. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 3187 §17, 1974)


3.72.160 VIOLATION - PENALTIES.

Anyone who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a civil infraction subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 BMC, and each day any person shall continue to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed and considered a separate offense. (Ord. 5343 §4 (part), 2017: Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed; 11/30/2002; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3894 §2, 1984; Ord. 3625 §28, 1980; Ord. 3187 §15, 1974)


Chapter 3.74 AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:

3.74.010    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

3.74.020    DEFINITIONS.

3.74.030    SHOOTING GALLERIES UNLAWFUL.

3.74.040    LICENSE - REQUIRED.

3.74.050    AMUSEMENT DEVICE TAX.

3.74.060    DISPLAY OF OWNER’S NAME AND ADDRESS ON AMUSEMENT DEVICE REQUIRED.


3.74.010 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003)


3.74.020 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply to the provisions of this chapter as applicable unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

(a)    "Amusement device" means a game or device which is primarily a game of skill, including, but not limited to, games or devices requiring hand-eye coordination and/or intellectual processes, wherein achieving high scores in playing the game is determined by the skill of the players and not as a result of chance or an element of chance as a part of the game. Amusement devices may confer only an immediate and unrecorded right of replay to the players. This includes, but is not limited to, pool and billiard tables, shuffleboards, music machines, video games, pinball games, riding devices, televisions and devices for display of pictures or views on film; provided, that it does not mean or include any machine or twice used exclusively for the vending of merchandise.

(b)    "Amusement device owner" means a person, corporation or firm who has legal title to an amusement device, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, or who as a purchaser is entitled to possession under a retained title contract, conditional sales agreement, vendor’s lien agreement or other purchase agreement of an amusement device, as defined in subsection (c) of this section.

(c)    "Penny arcade" means a place of business established chiefly for the amusement of its customers by the use of amusement devices and/or other types of coin-operated devices.

(d)    "Shooting gallery" means a place of public amusements where bullets, arrows or projectiles of any kind may be shot, thrown in any manner or by the use of any type of force or power, projected at targets, upon payment of a fee or charge, or for other consideration. Exempted from this definition are establishments that provide electronic dart games. (Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4047 §1, 1986. Formerly 5.80.010)


3.74.030 SHOOTING GALLERIES UNLAWFUL.

Because of the hazard to the public and in the interest of public peace, health and safety, it is unlawful to operate a shooting gallery or galleries in the city. (Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4047 §2, 1986. Formerly 5.80.020)


3.74.040 LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own and/or operate any amusement device for commercial purposes without having first obtained and being the holder of a valid city business license pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in Chapter 5.02 of this code. (Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4047 §3(a), 1986. Formerly 5.80.030)


3.74.050 AMUSEMENT DEVICE TAX.

(a)    Any person, firm or corporation which owns any amusement device for commercial purposes shall be required to remit to the city a tax which shall be equal to the gross receipts derived therefrom multiplied by the rate of two percent (2%).

(b)    The tax shall be payable in quarterly installments on or before the thirtieth day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter.

(c)    The tax remittance, as herein provided, shall be accompanied by an amusement device location schedule every calendar quarter.

(d)    In the event that the amusement device tax is not paid on or before the due date, there shall be added to the amount due a penalty fee pursuant to BMC 3.86.110.

(e)    In addition to this penalty, the city treasurer may charge the taxpayer interest of one percent (1%) of all taxes and fees due for each thirty (30) day period or portion thereof that such amounts are past due.

(f)    Failure to make payment in full of all tax amounts and penalties within sixty (60) days following the day the tax amount initially became due shall be both a civil and criminal violation of this section. (Ord. 5343 §5, 2017; Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4047 §3(b), 1986. Formerly 5.80.040)


3.74.060 DISPLAY OF OWNER’S NAME AND ADDRESS ON AMUSEMENT DEVICE REQUIRED.

(a)    It is a violation of this chapter for the owner of any amusement device to fail to display his/her name and current address on each amusement device when in use or available for use or play.

(b)    It is unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or other person in charge of any place or location to permit or allow to be used or played in such place any amusement device not having attached thereto the name and current address of the owner of the amusement device. (Ord. 4859 §5 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4047 §4, 1986. Formerly 5.80.050)


Chapter 3.76 MOTOR VEHICLE INTOXICATION FUND

Sections:

3.76.010    PENALTY ASSESSMENT.

3.76.020    FUND CREATED.

3.76.030    TRANSMISSION TO STATE TREASURER’S OFFICE.


3.76.010 PENALTY ASSESSMENT.

There shall be levied and collected a penalty assessment in the minimum amount of twenty-five percent which shall be in addition to any fine, bail forfeiture or cost on all offenses involving a violation of any state statute or city ordinance relating to driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor in accordance with RCW 46.61.515(2). (Ord. 3219 §1, 1975)


3.76.020 FUND CREATED.

All such penalties assessed under Section 3.76.010 hereof shall be separately accounted for and transmitted to the city treasurer’s office by the Bremerton Municipal Court in the same manner and at the time that the fines and bail forfeitures are transmitted to such treasurer’s office. The separate funds so created shall be titled the "Motor Vehicle Intoxication Fund". (Ord. 3219 §2, 1975)


3.76.030 TRANSMISSION TO STATE TREASURER’S OFFICE.

The Bremerton city treasurer’s office shall also separately account for such moneys and shall place them in a separate account to be titled the "Motor Vehicle Intoxication Fund" and shall transmit to the State Treasurer’s Office monthly and without deduction the gross amount of such penalty assessments received, to be credited forthwith to the Highway Safety Fund of the State Treasury in accordance with RCW 46.61.518. (Ord. 3219 §3, 1975)


Chapter 3.78 MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION

Sections:

3.78.010    PURPOSE.

3.78.020    DEFINITIONS.

3.78.030    APPLICABILITY.

3.78.040    TERMS OF THE TAX EXEMPTION.

3.78.050    PROJECT ELIGIBILITY.

3.78.060    APPLICATION PROCEDURE.

3.78.070    APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE.

3.78.080    EXTENSION OF CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE.

3.78.090    APPLICATION FOR FINAL CERTIFICATE.

3.78.100    ISSUANCE OF FINAL CERTIFICATE.

3.78.105    AFFORDABLE HOUSING CAPITAL FUND.

3.78.110    ANNUAL COMPLIANCE REVIEW.

3.78.120    CANCELLATION OF TAX EXEMPTION.

3.78.130    CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.


3.78.010 PURPOSE.

As provided for in Chapter 84.14 RCW, the purpose of this chapter is to provide limited exemptions from ad valorem property taxation for multifamily housing in designated residential targeted areas to:

(a)    Encourage increased residential opportunities, including affordable housing units, within areas of the City designated by the City Council as residential targeted areas; and/or

(b)    Stimulate new construction or rehabilitation of existing vacant and underutilized buildings for multifamily housing in designated residential targeted areas to increase and improve housing opportunities, including affordable housing; and

(c)    Assist in directing future population growth to designated residential targeted areas, thereby reducing development pressure on single-family residential neighborhoods; and

(d)    Achieve development densities which are more conducive to transit use in designated residential targeted areas. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.020 DEFINITIONS.

When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(a)    "Affordable housing" means residential housing that is rented by a person or household whose monthly housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed thirty (30) percent of the household’s monthly income. For the purposes of housing intended for owner occupancy, "affordable housing" means residential housing that is within the means of low- or moderate-income households.

(b)    "Building codes" means the City and state building and fire codes as set forth in Chapters 17.04, 18.02 and 18.03 BMC.

(c)    "City" means the City of Bremerton.

(d)    "Department" means the City Department of Community Development.

(e)    "Director" means the Director of the Department of Community Development, or designee.

(f)    "High-cost area" means a county where the third quarter median house price for the previous year as reported by the Washington Center for Real Estate Research at Washington State University is equal to or greater than one hundred thirty (130) percent of the statewide median house price published during the same time period.

(g)    "Household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together.

(h)    "Low-income household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below eighty (80) percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For cities located in high-cost areas, "low-income household" means a household that has an income at or below one hundred (100) percent of the median family income, adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located.

(i)    "Moderate-income household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is more than eighty (80) percent but is at or below one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located, as reported by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. For cities located in high-cost areas, "moderate-income household" means a household that has an income that is more than one hundred (100) percent, but at or below one hundred fifty (150) percent, of the median family income adjusted for family size, for the county where the project is located.

(j)    "Multifamily housing" means a building having ten (10) or more dwelling units not designed or used as transient accommodations and not including hotels and motels. Multifamily units may result from new construction or rehabilitated or conversion of vacant, underutilized, or substandard buildings to multifamily housing.

(k)    "Multifamily property tax exemption" means an exemption from ad valorem property taxation for multifamily housing.

(l)    "Owner" means the property owner of record.

(m)    "Permanent residential occupancy" means multiunit housing that provides either rental or owner occupancy on a nontransient basis. This includes owner-occupied or rental accommodation that is leased for a period of at least one (1) month. This excludes hotels and motels that predominantly offer rental accommodation on a daily or weekly basis.

(n)    "Rehabilitation improvements" means modifications to existing structures that are vacant for twelve (12) months or longer that are made to achieve a condition of substantial compliance with existing building, fire, and zoning codes, or modification to existing occupied structures which increase the number of multifamily housing units.

(o)    "Residential targeted area," also "residential target area," means the geographic area located within the areas set forth in Figures 3.78(a) through 3.78(g).

(p)    "Substantial compliance" means compliance with all local building, fire and zoning code requirements, which are typically required for rehabilitation as opposed to new construction. (Ord. 5302 §4, 2016: Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.030 APPLICABILITY.

Multifamily housing projects in designated residential targeted areas resulting from new construction or rehabilitation or conversion of vacant, underutilized, or substandard buildings may be entitled to a limited exemption from ad valorem property taxation as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.040 TERMS OF THE TAX EXEMPTION.

(a)    Duration of Exemption. The value of new housing construction, conversion, and rehabilitation improvements qualifying under this chapter is exempt from ad valorem property taxation, as follows:

(1)    For properties for which applications for certificates of tax exemption eligibility are submitted under this chapter before July 22, 2007, the value is exempt for ten (10) successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate; and

(2)    For properties for which applications for certificates of tax exemption eligibility are submitted under this chapter on or after July 22, 2007, the value is exempt:

(i)    For eight (8) successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate; or

(ii)    For twelve (12) successive years beginning January 1st of the year immediately following the calendar year of issuance of the certificate, if the property otherwise qualifies for the exemption under this chapter and meets the conditions in this subsection (a)(2)(ii). For the property to qualify for the twelve (12) year exemption under this subsection, the applicant must commit to renting or selling at least twenty (20) percent of the multifamily housing units as affordable housing units to low- and moderate-income households, and the property must satisfy that commitment and any additional affordability and income eligibility conditions adopted by the local government under this chapter. In the case of projects intended exclusively for owner occupancy, the minimum requirement of this subsection (a)(2)(ii) may be satisfied solely through housing affordable to moderate-income households. 

(b)    Limits on Exemption. The exemption does not apply:

(1)    To the value of land or to the value of nonhousing-related improvements not qualifying under this chapter.

(2)    In the case of rehabilitation of existing buildings, to the value of improvements constructed prior to submission of the completed application required under this chapter.

(3)    To increases in assessed valuation made by the Kitsap County Assessor on nonqualifying portions of building or other improvements and value of land nor to increases made by lawful order of a County board of equalization, the Department of Revenue, or Kitsap County, to a class of property throughout the County or specific area of the County to achieve the uniformity of assessment or appraisal required by law.

(c)    Conclusion of Exemption. At the conclusion of the exemption period, the new or rehabilitated housing cost shall be considered as new construction for the purposes of Chapter 84.55 RCW. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.050 PROJECT ELIGIBILITY.

A proposed multifamily housing project must meet the following requirements for consideration for a property tax exemption:

(a)    Location. The project must be located within a residential targeted area as defined in BMC 3.78.020 and as set forth in Figures 3.78(a) through 3.78(g).

(b)    Tenant Displacement Prohibited. The project must not displace existing residential tenants of structures that are proposed for redevelopment. If the property proposed to be rehabilitated is not vacant, an applicant shall provide each existing tenant housing of comparable size, quality, and price and a reasonable opportunity to relocate.

 (c)    Noncompliance with Building Codes. Existing dwelling units proposed for rehabilitation must fail to comply with one or more standards of the applicable State or City building codes.

(d)    Size of Project. The new, converted, or rehabilitated multiple-unit housing must provide for a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the space for permanent residential occupancy. The project, whether new, converted, or rehabilitated multiple-unit housing, must include at least ten (10) units of multifamily housing within a residential structure or as part of an urban development. In the case of existing multifamily housing that is occupied or which has not been vacant for twelve (12) months or more, the multifamily housing project must also provide for a minimum of four (4) additional multifamily units for a total project of at least ten (10) units including the four (4) additional units. Existing multifamily housing that has been vacant for twelve (12) months or more does not have to provide additional units.

(e)    Proposed Completion Date. New construction of multifamily housing and rehabilitation improvements must be completed within three (3) years from the date of approval of the application.

(f)    Compliance with Guidelines and Standards. The project must be designed to comply with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, building, housing, and zoning codes, and any other applicable regulations. The project must also comply with any other standards and guidelines adopted by the City Council for the residential targeted area. (Ord. 5302 §5, 2016: Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.060 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.

A property owner who wishes to propose a project for a tax exemption shall complete the following procedures:

(a)    The application provided by the City shall be filed with the Department along with the required fees as established pursuant to RCW 84.14.080.

(b)    A complete application shall include:

(1)    A completed City of Bremerton application form setting forth the grounds for the exemption.

(2)    Preliminary floor and site plans of the proposed project.

(3)    A statement acknowledging the potential tax liability when the project ceases to be eligible under this chapter.

(4)    An affidavit stating the occupancy record of the property for a period of twelve (12) months prior to filing the application.

(5)    Verification by oath or affirmation of the information submitted.

(6)    For rehabilitation projects, the applicant shall provide a report prepared by a registered architect identifying property noncompliance with the building codes. This report shall identify specific code violations and must include supporting data that satisfactorily explains and proves the presence of a violation. Supporting data must include a narrative and such graphic materials as needed to support this application. Graphic materials may include, but are not limited to, building plans, building details, and photographs. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.070 APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE.

The Director may certify as eligible an application which is determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter. A decision to approve or deny an application shall be made within ninety (90) calendar days of receipt of a complete application.

(a)    Application. The Director may approve the application if he/she finds that:

(1)    A minimum of ten (10) new units are being constructed or in the case of occupied rehabilitation or conversion within twelve (12) months of occupancy, a minimum of four (4) additional multifamily units for a total project of at least ten (10) units including the four (4) additional multifamily units are being developed.

(2)    The proposed project is or will be, at the time of completion, in conformance with all applicable local plans and regulations.

(3)    The owner has complied with all standards and guidelines adopted by the City under this chapter.

(4)    The site is located in the residential targeted area.

(5)    If applicable, the proposed multiunit housing project meets the affordable housing requirements as described in BMC 3.78.040.

(b)    Approval of Application. If an application is approved, the applicant shall enter into a contract with the City, regarding the terms and conditions of implementation of the project, and the Director shall issue a conditional certificate of acceptance of tax exemption. The conditional certificate shall expire three (3) years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted as provided in this chapter.

(c)    Denial of Application. If an application is denied, the Director shall state in writing the reasons for denial and shall send notice to the applicant at the applicant’s last known address within ten (10) calendar days of the denial.

(d)    Appeal. Per RCW 84.14.070, an applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and fee with the Director. The appeal before the City Council will be based on the record made before the Director. The Director’s decision will be upheld unless the applicant can show that there is no substantial evidence on the record to support the Director’s decision. The City Council’s decision on appeal will be final. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.080 EXTENSION OF CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE.

(a)    Extension. The conditional certificate and time for completion of the project may be extended by the Director for a period not to exceed a total of twenty-four (24) consecutive months. To obtain an extension, the applicant must submit a written request with a fee stating the grounds for the extension. An extension may be granted if the Director determines that:

(1)    The anticipated failure to complete construction or rehabilitation within the required time period is due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner;

(2)    The owner has been acting and could reasonably be expected to continue to act in good faith and with due diligence; and

(3)    All the conditions of the original contract between the applicant and the City will be satisfied upon completion of the project.

(b)    Denial of Extension. If an extension is denied, the Director shall state in writing the reason for denial and shall send notice to the applicant’s last known address within ten (10) calendar days of the denial.

(c)    Appeal. Pursuant to RCW 84.14.090(6), an applicant may appeal the denial of an extension to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the denial by filing a complete appeal application and fee with the Director. The appeal before the Hearing Examiner shall be processed as a Type I Director decision pursuant to Chapter 20.02 BMC. No appeal to the City Council is provided from the Hearing Examiner’s decision. The applicant may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the Kitsap County Superior Court, under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598, if the appeal is filed within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving notice of that decision. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.090 APPLICATION FOR FINAL CERTIFICATE.

Upon completion of the improvements agreed upon in the contract between the applicant and the City and upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant may request a final certificate of tax exemption by filing with the Director the following:

(a)    A statement of expenditures made with respect to each multifamily housing unit and the total expenditures made with respect to the entire property;

(b)    A description of the completed work and a statement of qualification for the exemption;

(c)    A statement that the work was completed within the required three (3) year period or any authorized extension; and

(d)    If applicable, that the project meets the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.100 ISSUANCE OF FINAL CERTIFICATE.

Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of all materials required for a final certificate, the Director shall determine whether the specific improvements satisfy the requirements of the contract, application, and this chapter.

(a)    Granting of Final Certificate. If the Director determines that the project has been completed in accordance with this chapter and the contract between the applicant and the City, and has been completed within the authorized time period, the City shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the expiration of the thirty (30) day review period above, file a final certificate of tax exemption with the Kitsap County Assessor.

(b)    Denial of Final Certificate. The Director shall notify the applicant in writing that a final certificate will not be filed if the Director determines that:

(1)    The improvements were not completed within the authorized time period;

(2)    The improvements were not completed in accordance with the contract between the applicant and the City; or

(3)    The owner’s property is otherwise not qualified under this chapter.

(c)    Appeal. Pursuant to RCW 84.14.090(6), an applicant may appeal a denial to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC within fourteen (14) calendar days of issuance of the denial of a final certificate by filing a complete appeal application and fee with the Director. The appeal before the Hearing Examiner shall be processed as a Type I Director decision pursuant to Chapter 20.02 BMC. No appeal to the City Council is provided from the Hearing Examiner’s decision. The applicant may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the Kitsap County Superior Court, under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598, if the appeal is filed within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving notice of that decision. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.105 AFFORDABLE HOUSING CAPITAL FUND.

If an application for the multifamily tax exemption is approved, the project has completed construction, and a final certificate of property tax exemption has been issued as set forth in BMC 3.78.100, the Director of Financial Services, or designee, shall transfer to the affordable housing capital fund revenues based on the anticipated sales tax received or to be received by the City for the construction of the project. The Director shall determine the value of the sales tax revenues to be transferred to the fund based on (1) the City’s portion of the current sales tax rate for the construction, and (2) the estimated cost of construction as established in the building permit application and other relevant information as the Director deems appropriate. Once established, the funds will be transferred to the affordable housing capital fund at the beginning of the next fiscal year. The funds shall be used for affordable housing projects approved by the City Council, unless the funds are otherwise allocated by the City Council. (Ord. 5353 §2, 2018)


3.78.110 ANNUAL COMPLIANCE REVIEW.

(a)    Within thirty (30) calendar days after the first anniversary of the date of filing the final certificate of tax exemption and each year for the tax exemption period, the property owner shall be required to file a notarized declaration with the Director indicating the following:

(1)    A statement of occupancy and vacancy of the multifamily units during the previous twelve (12) months;

(2)    A certification by the owner that the property has not changed use and, if applicable, that the property has been in compliance with the affordable housing requirements as described in RCW 84.14.020 since the date of the certificate approved by the City;

(3)    A description of changes or improvements constructed after issuance of the certificate of tax exemption; and

(4)    Any information needed by the City to file its report pursuant to subsection (b) of this section and any additional information requested by the City in regards to the units receiving a tax exemption. 

(b)    The City shall report annually by December 31st of each year, beginning in 2007, to the Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development. The report must include the following information:

(1)     The number of tax exemption certificates granted;

(2)    The total number and type of units produced or to be produced;

(3)    The number and type of units produced or to be produced meeting affordable housing requirements;

(4)    The actual development cost of each unit produced;

(5)    The total monthly rent or total sale amount of each unit produced;

(6)    The income of each renter household at the time of initial occupancy and the income of each initial purchaser of owner-occupied units at the time of purchase for each of the units receiving a tax exemption and a summary of these figures for the City; and

(7)    The value of the tax exemption for each project receiving a tax exemption and the total value of tax exemptions granted.

(c)    City staff may also conduct on-site verification of the declaration. Failure to submit the annual declaration shall result in a review of the exemption per RCW 84.14.110. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.120 CANCELLATION OF TAX EXEMPTION.

If the Director determines the owner is not complying with the terms of the contract or this chapter, the tax exemption shall be canceled. This cancellation may occur in conjunction with the annual review or at any other time when noncompliance has been determined. If the owner intends to convert the multifamily housing to another use, the owner shall notify the Director and the Kitsap County Assessor in writing within sixty (60) calendar days of the change in use.

(a)    Effect of Cancellation. If a tax exemption is canceled due to a change in use or other noncompliance, the following taxes and penalties will apply:

(1)    Additional real property tax, plus interest, shall be imposed based upon the value of the nonqualifying improvements. This additional tax is calculated based upon the difference between the property tax paid and the property tax that would have been paid if it had included the value of the nonqualifying improvements dated back to the date that the improvements were converted to a nonqualifying use.

(2)    A penalty shall be imposed amounting to twenty (20) percent of the value of the additional property tax plus interest.

(3)    The interest is calculated at the same statutory rate charged on delinquent property taxes from the dates on which the additional property tax could have been paid without penalty if the improvements had been assessed at full value without regard to this tax exemption program.

(4)    The additional taxes, interest and penalties will become a lien on the land and attach at the time the property or portion of the property is removed from multifamily use or the amenities no longer meet applicable requirements. The lien has priority over and must be fully paid and satisfied before a recognizance, mortgage, judgment, debt, obligation, or responsibility to or with which the land may become charged or liable. The lien may be foreclosed upon expiration of the same period after delinquency and in the same manner provided by law for foreclosure of liens for delinquent real property taxes. An additional tax unpaid on its due date is delinquent. From the date of delinquency until paid, interest must be charged at the same rate applied by law to delinquent ad valorem property taxes.

(b)    Notice of Cancellation. Pursuant to RCW 84.14.110(2), upon determining that a tax exemption is to be canceled, the Director shall notify the owner by mail, return receipt requested. 

(c)    Appeal. The property owner may appeal the determination of cancellation of the tax exemption to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days, specifying the factual and legal basis for the appeal. The Hearing Examiner will conduct a hearing under Chapter 20.02 BMC for a Process I action. An aggrieved party may appeal the Hearing Examiner’s decision to the Kitsap County Superior Court under RCW 34.05.510 through 34.05.598. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


3.78.130 CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.

If any provision of this chapter is in legal conflict with the provisions of Chapter 84.14 RCW, the provisions of Chapter 84.14 RCW shall apply as if set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 5036 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4968 §1 (part), 2006)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5302 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


Chapter 3.80 LEASEHOLD EXCISE TAX

Sections:

3.80.010    LEVIED WHEN - PAYMENT.

3.80.020    RATE - ALLOWED CREDITS DESIGNATED.

3.80.030    EXEMPTIONS.

3.80.040    ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.

3.80.050    ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION - MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO CONTRACT WITH STATE.

3.80.060    CITY CONSENT TO INSPECTION OF RECORDS.


3.80.010 LEVIED WHEN - PAYMENT.

There is levied collected a leasehold excise tax on and after January 1, 1976, upon the act or privilege of occupying or using publicly owned real or personal property within the city of Bremerton through a "leasehold interest" as defined by Section 2, Chapter 61, Laws of 1975-76, Second Extraordinary Session (hereafter "the state act"). The tax shall be paid, collected, and remitted to the Department of Revenue of the state of Washington at the time and in the manner prescribed by Section 5 of the state act. (Ord. 3288 §1, 1976)


3.80.020 RATE - ALLOWED CREDITS DESIGNATED.

The rate of the tax imposed by Section 3.80.010 shall be four percent of the taxable rent (as defined by Section 2 of the state act); provided, that the following credits shall be allowed in determining the tax payable:

(1)    With respect to a leasehold interest arising out of any lease or agreement, the terms of which were binding on the lessee prior to July 1, 1970, where such lease or agreement has not been renegotiated (as defined by Section 2 of the state act) since that date, and excluding from such credit:

(A)    Any leasehold interest arising out of any lease of property covered by the provisions of RCW 28B.20.394; and

(B)    Any lease or agreement including options to renew which extends beyond January 1, 1985, as follows:

(i)    With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1976, a credit equal to eighty percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

(ii)    With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1977, a credit equal to sixty percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

(iii)    With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1978, a credit equal to forty percent of the tax produced by the above rate,

(iv)    With respect to taxes due in calendar year 1979, a credit equal to twenty percent of the tax produced by the above rate;

(2)    With respect to a product lease (as defined by Section 2 of the state act), a credit of thirty-three percent of the tax produced by the above rate. (Ord. 3288 §2, 1976)


3.80.030 EXEMPTIONS.

Leasehold interests exempted by Section 13 of the state act as it now exists or may hereafter be amended shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.80.010. (Ord. 3288 §4, 1976)


3.80.040 ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE.

The administration and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of the state act. (Ord. 3288 §3, 1976)


3.80.050 ADMINISTRATION AND COLLECTION - MAYOR AUTHORIZED TO CONTRACT WITH STATE.

The mayor is authorized to execute a contract with the Department of Revenue of the State of Washington for the administration and collection of the tax imposed by Section 3.80.010, Provided, That the City Attorney shall first approve the form and content of said contract. (Ord. 3288 §6, 1976)


3.80.060 CITY CONSENT TO INSPECTION OF RECORDS.

The City of Bremerton consents to the inspection of such records as are necessary to qualify the City of Bremerton for inspection of records of the Department of Revenue pursuant to RCW 82.32.330. (Ord. 3288 §5, 1976)


Chapter 3.82 COMMERCIAL PARKING TAX

Sections:

3.82.010    DEFINITIONS.

3.82.020    TAX RATE - WHO MUST PAY.

3.82.030    PAYMENT OF TAX.

3.82.040    TAX - COLLECTION.

3.82.050    OVER OR UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX.

3.82.060    PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.

3.82.070    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

3.82.080    APPEAL PROCEDURE.

3.82.090    CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX RETURNS.

3.82.100    DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.

3.82.110    USE OF PROCEEDS OF TAX.


3.82.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates otherwise:

A.    "Commercial parking business" means the ownership, lease, operation, or management of a commercial parking lot in which fees are charged.

B.    "Commercial parking lot" means a covered or uncovered area with stalls for the purpose of parking motor vehicles.

C.    "Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf.

D.    "Gross proceeds" means and includes the gross receipts collected or accruing by reason of the transaction of the commercial parking business, without any deduction on account of the cost of tangible property sold, labor costs, interest, discount, taxes, or any other costs or expenses whatsoever paid or accrued and without any deduction on account of losses.

E.    "Person" means any individual, association, corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, or other entity.

F.    “Tax and Licensing Division” means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.020 TAX RATE - WHO MUST PAY.

There is levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in a commercial parking business within the City a commercial parking tax in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross proceeds of the commercial parking business. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 5169 §1, 2011: Ord. 4879 §1, 2003; Ord. 4840, Amended, 01/03/2003; Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.030 PAYMENT OF TAX.

A.    The tax imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable in quarterly installments, on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the end of the quarterly period in which the tax accrued. The quarterly periods are as follows:

1.    First quarter: January, February, March;

2.    Second quarter: April, May, June;

3.    Third quarter: July, August, September;

4.    Fourth quarter: October, November, December;

Tax payments shall be filed with the Tax and Licensing Division.

B.    The Director may require payment of the tax to be accompanied by a written tax return, upon such form and setting forth such information as the Director may reasonably require in order to calculate the amount of tax due to the City.

C.    The Director shall have the right to require proof of the gross proceeds of the commercial parking business. Each person required to pay the tax imposed by this chapter shall retain records reflecting the gross proceeds of the commercial parking business and the records shall be open at all reasonable hours to inspection by the Director or the Director’s designee.

D.    If the payment of any tax due under this chapter is not received by the City by the last day of the month in which the tax becomes due, the tax shall be delinquent. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.040 TAX - COLLECTION.

The tax imposed by this chapter, and all penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. Any judgment entered in favor of the City shall include an award to the City of all court and collection costs, including attorneys’ fees. Amounts delinquent more than ninety (90) days may be assigned to a third party for collection, in which case the amount of any collection charges shall be in addition to all other amounts owed. Amounts due shall not be considered paid until the City has received good funds for the full amount due or has discharged the amount due and not paid. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.050 OVER OR UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX.

In the event that a person makes an overpayment, and within two (2) years of the date of such overpayment makes application for a refund or a credit, the person’s claim shall be allowed and a refund made by the City upon determination by the Director that no other sums are owed by the person to the City. If a person determines that the tax has been underpaid and without notice by any party pays the amount due to the City, the amount underpaid and corrected by the person shall not be subject to penalty. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.060 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.

If full payment of any tax due under this chapter is not received by the Director by the last day of the month in which the tax was due, there shall be added to such tax a penalty pursuant to BMC 3.86.110. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.070 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

A.    It shall be a violation of this chapter:

(1)    For a person required to pay a tax under this chapter to fail or refuse to pay the tax imposed;

(2)    For a person to evade payment of the tax, or any part thereof;

(3)    For a person to fail to appear and/or refuse to testify in response to a subpoena issued in any proceeding under this chapter;

(4)    For a person to testify falsely upon any investigation into the correctness of a return, or upon the hearing of any appeal; or

(5)    For a person to in any manner hinder or delay the City or any of its officers in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

B.    A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during the portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.080 APPEAL PROCEDURE.

Any person aggrieved by the amount of the tax determined to be due to the City by the Director under the provisions of this chapter may appeal from such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 3.86.140. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.090 CONFIDENTIALITY OF TAX RETURNS.

The tax returns made to the City pursuant to this chapter shall not be made public, nor shall they be subject to inspection by a person who is not an employee of or under contract to the City and who is not acting in an official capacity. It shall be unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any unauthorized person as to the contents of a tax return, or to permit inspection of a tax return, except as authorized in this section or as required by law. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the disclosure of information received under this chapter to the Federal Internal Revenue Service, State Department of Revenue, or to tax enforcement officials of any other city in the State of Washington for official purposes only, and this section shall not be construed to prohibit or make unlawful the disclosure of the name and address of any person licensed under this chapter, or of any person signing an application on behalf of an applicant. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.100 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.

A.    The Director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received under the provisions of this chapter. Upon receipt of any tax or penalty collected under the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall deposit the amounts collected into the street fund of the City.

B.    In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall have the power to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations consistent with this chapter.

C.    The Director for good cause shown may extend the time for making and filing any tax return required under this chapter; provided, that any extension in excess of thirty (30) days shall be conditioned upon payment of interest of one percent (1%) for each thirty (30) days or portion thereof on the amount of tax from the date upon which the tax became due. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


3.82.110 USE OF PROCEEDS OF TAX.

The proceeds of the tax imposed and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used strictly for transportation purposes in accordance with RCW 82.80.070. (Ord. 5343 §6 (part), 2017: Ord. 4732, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4679, Added, 12/16/1999)


Chapter 3.84 EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES

Sections:

3.84.010    ONE-QUARTER PERCENT EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES.

3.84.020    COUNTY TO COLLECT - PAYMENT.

3.84.030    TAX IS OBLIGATION OF SELLER.

3.84.040    TAX LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY.

3.84.050    DUTIES OF COUNTY TREASURER.

3.84.060    PAYMENT DUE.

3.84.070    REFUNDS.

3.84.080    CLERK TO NOTIFY COUNTIES.

3.84.090    STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

3.84.100    COLLECTION AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.


3.84.010 ONE-QUARTER PERCENT EXCISE TAX ON REAL ESTATE SALES.

(a)    Imposition. There is imposed an excise tax on each sale of real property constituting a taxable event as defined in RCW 82.45 and occurring within the corporate limits of the City of Bremerton. The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from persons who are taxable by the State under RCW 82.45 and such tax shall comply with all applicable rules, regulations, laws and court decisions regarding real estate excise taxes as imposed by the State under RCW 82.45.

(b)    Rate of Tax. The rate of tax imposed by Section 3.84.010 shall be one-quarter of one percent of the selling price of all real property upon which this tax is imposed by subsection (a).

(c)    Additional Excise Tax Imposed. The City of Bremerton hereby imposes on the selling price of sales of real property within the corporate limits of the City an additional one-quarter percent (1/4%) excise tax under Growth Management Act, SHB 2929 §38, 1990 1st Ex. Sess.

(d)    Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the tax imposed by this section shall be placed by the City Treasurer in a capital improvement fund and shall be used for capital improvements, including those listed in RCW 35.43.040. This section shall not limit the existing authority of this City to impose special assessments on property benefitted thereby in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 4330 §1, 1991; Ord. 3840 §2 (in part), 1983)


3.84.020 COUNTY TO COLLECT - PAYMENT.

The county treasurer shall place one percent of the proceeds of the taxes imposed herein in the county current expense fund to defray costs of collection. The remaining proceeds from City taxes imposed herein shall be distributed to the City monthly. (Ord. 3840 §2 (in part), 1983)


3.84.030 TAX IS OBLIGATION OF SELLER.

The taxes imposed herein are the obligation of the seller and may be enforced through the action of debt against the seller or in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. (Ord. 3840 §2 (in part), 1983)


3.84.040 TAX LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY.

The taxes imposed herein and any interest or penalties thereon are the specific lien upon each piece of real property sold from the time of sale or until the tax is paid, which lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed for the foreclosure of mortgages. Resort to one course of enforcement is not an election not to pursue the other. (Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.050 DUTIES OF COUNTY TREASURER.

The taxes imposed herein shall be paid to and collected by the treasurer of the county within which is located the real property which was sold. The county treasurer shall act as agent for the city within the county imposing the tax. The county treasurer shall cause a stamp evidencing satisfaction of the lien to be affixed to the instrument of sale or conveyance prior to its recording or to the real estate excise tax affidavit in the case of used mobile home sales. A receipt issued by the county treasurer for the payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidence of the satisfaction of the lien imposed in Section 3.84.040 of this chapter and may be recorded in the manner prescribed for recording satisfactions or mortgages. No instrument of sale or conveyance evidencing a sale subject to the tax may be accepted by the county auditor for filing or recording until the tax is paid and the stamp affixed thereto; in case the tax is not due on the transfer, the instrument shall not be accepted until suitable notation of this fact is made on the instrument by the county treasurer. (Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.060 PAYMENT DUE.

The tax imposed hereunder shall become due and payable immediately at the time of sale and, if not so paid within thirty days thereafter, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the time of sale until the date of payment.

(Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.070 REFUNDS.

If, upon written application by a taxpayer to the county treasurer for a refund, it appears a tax has been paid in excess of the amount actually due or upon a sale or other transfer declared to be exempt, such excess amount or improper payment shall be refunded by the county treasurer to the taxpayer; provided, that no refund shall be made unless the state has first authorized the refund of an excessive amount or an improper amount paid, unless such improper amount was paid as a result of a miscalculation. Any refund made shall be withheld from the next monthly distribution to the city. (Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.080 CLERK TO NOTIFY COUNTIES.

The city clerk is directed to transmit a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the Kitsap County treasurer and the Kitsap County auditor immediately upon passage and further notifying that department of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.090 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

RCW 82.45 and any and all subsequent amendments to said statute are adopted by this reference as if set forth in full herein. The city clerk is directed to maintain one copy of Chapter 82.45 as currently enacted or as subsequently amended on file for public use and examination during regular city business hours. Copies of said statute shall be attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and authenticated by the city clerk. (Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


3.84.100 COLLECTION AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.

Moneys collected from this tax shall be retained in a separate capital improvement fund. Moneys from this fund may be expended only after authorization from the city council under the direction and the approval of the mayor, council president or his council representative, and city treasurer. All claims against this fund may be paid upon obtaining the signatures of at least two of the above-mentioned persons, one of whom must be the council president or his council representative. (Ord. 3855, 1983; Ord. 3840 §2 (part), 1983)


Chapter 3.86 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS FOR TAXES

Sections:

3.86.015    APPLICATION OF CHAPTER STATED.

3.86.020    DEFINITIONS.

3.86.025    DEFINITIONS - REFERENCES TO CHAPTER 82.32 RCW.

3.86.030    BUSINESS LICENSES.

3.86.040    PAYMENT AND REPORTING PERIODS.

3.86.050    PAYMENT METHODS - MAILING RETURNS OR REMITTANCES - TIME EXTENSION - DEPOSITS - RECORDING PAYMENTS - PAYMENT MUST ACCOMPANY RETURN - NSF CHECKS.

3.86.060    RECORDS TO BE PRESERVED - EXAMINATION - ESTOPPEL TO QUESTION ASSESSMENT.

3.86.070    ACCCOUNTING METHODS.

3.86.080    PUBLIC WORK CONTRACTS - PAYMENT OF FEE AND TAX BEFORE FINAL PAYMENT FOR WORK.

3.86.090    UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX, INTEREST OR PENALTY - INTEREST.

3.86.095    TIME IN WHICH ASSESSMENT MAY BE MADE.

3.86.100    OVERPAYMENT OF TAX, PENALTY, OR INTEREST - CREDIT OR REFUND - INTEREST RATE - STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

3.86.110    LATE PAYMENT - DISREGARD OF WRITTEN INSTRUCTIONS - EVASION - PENALTIES.

3.86.120    CANCELLATION OF PENALTIES.

3.86.130    TAXPAYER QUITTING BUSINESS - LIABILITY OF SUCCESSOR.

3.86.140    ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.

3.86.160    DIRECTOR TO MAKE RULES.

3.86.170    ANCILLARY ALLOCATION AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR.

3.86.180    MAILING OF NOTICES.

3.86.190    TAX DECLARED ADDITIONAL.

3.86.200    PUBLIC DISCLOSURE - CONFIDENTIALITY - INFORMATION SHARING.

3.86.210    TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.

3.86.220    UNLAWFUL ACTIONS - VIOLATION - PENALTIES.

3.86.230    SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE. 

3.86.240    CLOSING AGREEMENT PROVISIONS.

3.86.250    CHARGE-OFF OF UNCOLLECTIBLE TAXES.

3.86.260    SEVERABILITY.


3.86.015 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER STATED. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply with respect to the licenses and taxes imposed under Chapter 5.02 BMC, "General Business Licenses," Chapter 3.48 BMC, "Business and Occupation Taxes," Chapter 3.50 BMC, "Utility Taxes," and under other titles, chapters, and sections in such manner and to such extent as indicated in each such title, chapter or section. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.020 DEFINITIONS. 

For purposes of this chapter:

The definitions contained in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

"Reporting period" means:

(1)    A one (1) month period beginning the first day of each calendar month (monthly); or

(2)    A three (3) month period beginning the first day of January, April, July or October of each year (quarterly); or

(3)    A twelve (12) month period beginning the first day of January of each year (annual). 

"Return" means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City and that has a statutorily defined due date.

"Successor" means any person to whom a taxpayer quitting, selling out, exchanging, or disposing of a business sells or otherwise conveys, directly or indirectly, in bulk and not in the ordinary course of the taxpayer’s business, any part of the materials, supplies, merchandise, inventory, fixtures, or equipment of the taxpayer. Any person obligated to fulfill the terms of a contract shall be deemed a successor to any contractor defaulting in the performance of any contract as to which such person is a surety or guarantor.

"Tax year" or "taxable year" means the calendar year. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.025 DEFINITIONS - REFERENCES TO CHAPTER 82.32 RCW. 

Where provisions of Chapter 82.32 RCW are incorporated in BMC 3.86.090, "Department" as used in the RCW shall refer to the "Director" as defined in BMC 3.48.030 and "warrant" as used in the RCW shall mean "citation or criminal complaint." (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007)


3.86.030 BUSINESS LICENSES. 

Business licenses shall be issued pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007)


3.86.040 PAYMENT AND REPORTING PERIODS.

(1)    Other than any annual license fee or registration fee assessed under Chapter 5.02 BMC, the tax imposed by those chapters set forth in BMC 3.86.015 shall be due and payable in quarterly installments unless otherwise specifically provided for therein. At the Director’s discretion, businesses may be assigned to a monthly or annual reporting period depending on the tax amount owing or type of tax. Until December 31, 2020, tax payments are due on or before the last day of the next month following the end of the assigned reporting period covered by the return. Effective January 1, 2021, tax payments are due on or before the time as provided in RCW 82.32.045(1), (2), and (3).

(2)    Taxes shall be paid as provided in this chapter and accompanied by a return on forms as prescribed by the Director. The return shall be signed by the taxpayer personally or by a responsible officer or agent of the taxpayer. The individual signing the return shall swear or affirm that the information in the return is complete and true.

(3)    Tax returns must be filed and returned by the due date whether or not any tax is owed.

(4)    For purposes of the tax imposed by Chapter 3.48 BMC, any person whose value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, subject to business and occupation tax after all allowable deductions, is equal to or less than the tax exemption amount set forth in BMC 3.48.050(2) in the current calendar year shall file a return, declare no tax due on their return, and submit the return to the Director. The gross receipts, deduction amounts and exemptions shall be entered on the tax return even though no tax may be due.

(5)    A taxpayer that commences to engage in business activity shall file a return and pay the tax or fee for the portion of the reporting period during which the taxpayer is engaged in business activity.

(6)    Except as otherwise specifically provided by any other provision of this chapter, in computing any period of days prescribed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time runs shall not be included. The last day of the period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or City or federal legal holiday, in which case the last day of such period shall be the next succeeding day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or City or federal legal holiday.

(7)    If any taxpayer fails, neglects or refuses to make a return as and when required in this chapter, the Director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the Director’s estimate of the tax or fees due. Such assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owed to the City by the taxpayer. The Director shall notify the taxpayer by mail of the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 5384 §2, 2019: Ord. 5355 §3, 2018: Ord. 5343 §7, 2017: Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.050 PAYMENT METHODS - MAILING RETURNS OR REMITTANCES - TIME EXTENSION - DEPOSITS - RECORDING PAYMENTS - PAYMENT MUST ACCOMPANY RETURN - NSF CHECKS.

(1)    Taxes shall be paid to the Director in United States currency by bank draft, certified check, cashier’s check, personal check, money order, cash, or by wire transfer or electronic payment if such wire transfer or electronic payment is authorized by the Director. If payment so received is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer, by whom such payment is tendered, shall remain liable for payment of the tax and for all legal penalties, the same as if such payment had not been tendered. Acceptance of any sum by the Director shall not discharge the tax or fee due unless the amount paid is the full amount due.

(2)    A return or remittance that which is transmitted to the City by United States mail shall be deemed filed or received on the date shown by the cancellation mark stamped by the Post Office upon the envelope containing it. The Director may allow electronic filing of returns or remittances from any taxpayer. A return or remittance which is transmitted to the City electronically shall be deemed filed or received according to procedures set forth by the Director.

(3)    If a written request is received prior to the due date, the Director, for good cause, may grant, in writing, additional time within which to make and file returns.

(4)    The Director shall keep full and accurate records of all funds received or refunded. The Director shall apply payments first against all penalties and interest owing, and then upon the tax, without regard to any direction of the taxpayer.

(5)    For any return not accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown to be due thereon, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have failed or refused to file a return and shall be subject to the penalties and interest provided in this chapter.

(6)    Any payment made that is returned for lack of sufficient funds or for any other reason will not be considered received until payment by certified check, money order, or cash of the original amount due, plus a "non-sufficient funds" (NSF) charge of forty dollars ($40.00) is received by the Director. Any license issued upon payment with a NSF check will be considered void, and shall be returned to the Director. No license shall be reissued until payment (including the forty dollars ($40.00) NSF fee) is received.

(7)    The Director is authorized, but not required, to mail tax return forms to taxpayers, but failure of the taxpayer to receive any such forms shall not excuse the taxpayer from filing returns and making payment of the taxes or fees, when and as due under this chapter. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.060 RECORDS TO BE PRESERVED - EXAMINATION - ESTOPPEL TO QUESTION ASSESSMENT.

Every person liable for any fee or tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of five (5) years after filing a tax return, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of any fee or tax for which the person may be liable; which records shall include copies of all federal income tax and State tax returns and reports made by the person. All books, records, papers, invoices, vendor lists, inventories, stocks of merchandise, and other data including federal income tax and State tax returns and reports shall be open for examination at any time by the Director or its duly authorized agent. Every person’s business premises shall be open for inspection or examination by the Director or a duly authorized agent.

(1)    If a person does not keep the necessary books and records within the City, it shall be sufficient if such person (a) produces within the City such books and records as may be required by the Director, or (b) bears the cost of examination by the Director’s agent at the place where such books and records are kept; provided, that the person electing to bear such cost shall pay in advance to the Director the estimated amount thereof including round-trip fare, lodging, meals and incidental expenses, subject to adjustment upon completion of the examination.

(2)    Any person who fails, or refuses a Department request, to provide or make available records, or to allow inspection or examination of the business premises, shall be forever barred from questioning in any court action, the correctness of any assessment of taxes made by the City for any period for which such records have not been provided, made available or kept and preserved, or in respect of which inspection or examination of the business premises has been denied. The Director is authorized to determine the amount of the tax or fees payable by obtaining facts and information upon which to base the estimate of the tax or fees due. Such fee or tax assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct and shall be the amount of tax owing the City by the taxpayer. The Director shall notify the taxpayer by mail the amount of tax so determined, together with any penalty, interest, and fees due; the total of such amounts shall thereupon become immediately due and payable. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.070 ACCOUNTING METHODS.

(1)    A taxpayer may file tax returns in each reporting period with amounts based upon cash receipts only if the taxpayer’s books of account are kept on a cash receipts basis. A taxpayer that does not regularly keep books of account on a cash receipts basis must file returns with amounts based on the accrual method.

(2)    The taxes imposed and the returns required, hereunder, shall be upon a calendar year basis. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.080 PUBLIC WORK CONTRACTS - PAYMENT OF FEE AND TAX BEFORE FINAL PAYMENT FOR WORK. 

The Director may, before issuing any final payment to any person performing any public work contract for the City, require such person to pay in full all license fees or taxes due under this title from such person on account of such contract or otherwise, and may require such taxpayer to file with the Director a verified list of all subcontractors supplying labor and/or materials to the person in connection with said public work. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.090 UNDERPAYMENT OF TAX, INTEREST, OR PENALTY - INTEREST.

(1)    If, upon examination of any returns, or from other information obtained by the Director, it appears that a tax or penalty less than that properly due has been paid, the Director shall assess the additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The Director shall notify the person by mail of the additional amount, which shall become due and shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or within such time as the Director may provide in writing.

(2)    Interest Calculation on Underpayments.

(a)    Interest on underpayments of taxes for periods prior to January 1, 2003, shall be computed from the date of underpayment until paid at a rate of one (1) percent for each month, or portion thereof, compounded monthly.

(b)    Interest imposed on or after January 1, 2003, shall be computed from the last day of the month following the end of the reporting period and will continue to accrue until payment is made. In case of an audit, the interest shall be computed from the first day of the month following each calendar year or portion thereof included in the audit period. The rate of interest to be charged to the taxpayer shall be an average of the federal short-term rate as defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 1274(d) plus two (2) percentage points. The rate shall be computed by taking an arithmetical average to the nearest percentage point of the federal short-term rate, compounded annually, for the months of January, April, July, and October of the year immediately preceding the calendar year as published by the United States Secretary of the Treasury. The rate shall be adjusted on the first day of January of each year for use in computing interest for that calendar year.

(c)    For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the Director shall compute interest in accordance with RCW 82.32.050 as it now exists or as it may be amended. If incorporation herein of future amendments to RCW 82.32.050 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.050 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection shall apply. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.095 TIME IN WHICH ASSESSMENT MAY BE MADE.

The Director shall not assess, or correct an assessment for, additional taxes, penalties, or interest due more than four (4) years after the close of the calendar year in which they were incurred, except that the Director may issue an assessment:

(1)    Against a person who is not currently registered or licensed or has not filed a tax return as required by this chapter for taxes due within the period commencing ten (10) years prior to the close of the calendar year in which the person was contacted in writing by the Director;

(2)    Against a person that has committed fraud or who misrepresented a material fact; or

(3)    Against a person that has executed a written waiver of such limitations. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003. Formerly 3.86.090(3))


3.86.100 OVERPAYMENT OF TAX, PENALTY, OR INTEREST - CREDIT OR REFUND - INTEREST RATE - STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

(1)    If, upon receipt of an application for a refund, or during an audit or examination of the taxpayer’s records and tax returns, the Director determines that the amount of tax, penalty, or interest paid is in excess of that properly due, the excess amount shall be credited to the taxpayer’s account or shall be refunded to the taxpayer. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, no refund or credit shall be made for taxes, penalties, or interest paid more than four (4) years prior to the beginning of the calendar year in which the refund application is made or examination of records is completed.

(2)    The execution of a written waiver shall extend the time for applying for, or making a refund or credit of any taxes paid during, or attributable to, the years covered by the waiver if, prior to the expiration of the waiver period, an application for refund of such taxes is made by the taxpayer or the Director discovers that a refund or credit is due.

(3)    Refunds shall be made by means of vouchers approved by the Director and by the issuance of a City check or warrants drawn upon and payable from such funds as the City may provide.

(4)    Any final judgment for which a recovery is granted by any court of competent jurisdiction for tax, penalties, interest, or costs paid by any person shall be paid in the same manner, as provided in subsection (3) of this section, upon the filing with the Director a certified copy of the order or judgment of the court.

(5)    Interest Calculation on Refunds or Overpayments.

(a)    Interest on overpayments of taxes for periods ending prior to January 1, 2003, shall be computed at three (3) percent per annum.

(b)    Interest on overpayments of taxes for periods beginning on or after January 1, 2003, shall be an average of the federal short-term rate as defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 1274(d) less two (2) percentage points. The rate shall be computed by taking an arithmetical average to the nearest percentage point of the federal short-term rate, compounded annually, for the months of January, April, July, and October of the year immediately preceding the calendar year as published by the United States Secretary of the Treasury. The rate shall be adjusted on the first day of January of each year for use in computing interest for that calendar year.

(c)    For tax periods after December 31, 2004, the Director shall compute interest on refunds or credits of amounts paid or other recovery allowed a taxpayer in accordance with RCW 82.32.060 as it now exists or as it may be amended. If incorporation herein of future amendments to RCW 82.32.060 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.060 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection shall apply. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.110 LATE PAYMENT - DISREGARD OF WRITTEN INSTRUCTIONS - EVASION - PENALTIES. 

(1)    If the Director does not receive a return or payment of any tax due on a return by the due date, the Director shall add a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(1), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(2)    If the Director determines that any tax has been substantially underpaid as defined in RCW 82.32.090(2), there shall be added a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(2), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(3)    If a citation or criminal complaint is issued by the Director for the collection of taxes, fees, assessments, interest or penalties, there shall be added thereto a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(3), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(4)    If the Director finds that a person has engaged in any business or performed any act upon which a tax is imposed under this title and that person has not obtained from the Director a business license as required by Chapter 5.02 BMC, the Director shall impose a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(4), as it now exists or as it may be amended. No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection (4) if the person who has engaged in business without a license obtains a license prior to being notified by the Director of the need to be licensed.

(5)    If the Director determines that all or any part of a deficiency resulted from the taxpayer’s failure to follow specific written tax reporting instructions, there shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(5), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(6)    If the Director finds that all or any part of the deficiency resulted from an intent to evade the tax payable, the Director shall assess a penalty in accordance with RCW 82.32.090(6), as it now exists or as it may be amended.

(7)    The penalties imposed under subsections (1) through (5) of this section can each be imposed on the same tax found to be due. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.

(8)    The Director shall not impose both the evasion penalty and the penalty for disregarding specific written instructions on the same tax found to be due. 

(9)    For the purposes of this section, "return" means any document a person is required by the City to file to satisfy or establish a tax or fee obligation that is administered or collected by the City, and that has a statutorily defined due date.

(10)    If incorporation herein of future amendments to RCW 82.32.090 is deemed invalid, then the provisions of RCW 82.32.090 existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection shall apply. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.120 CANCELLATION OF PENALTIES. 

(1)    The Director may cancel any penalties imposed under BMC 3.86.110(1) and (2) if the taxpayer shows that its failure to timely file or pay the tax was due to reasonable cause and not willful neglect. Willful neglect is presumed unless the taxpayer shows that it exercised ordinary business care and prudence in making arrangements to file the return and pay the tax but was, nevertheless, due to circumstances beyond the taxpayer’s control, unable to file or pay by the due date. The Director has no authority to cancel any other penalties or to cancel penalties for any other reason except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(2)    A request for cancellation of penalties must be received by the Director within thirty (30) days after the date the Department mails the notice that the penalties are due. The request must be in writing and contain competent proof of all pertinent facts supporting a reasonable cause determination. In all cases, the burden of proving the facts rests upon the taxpayer. 

(3)    The Director may cancel the penalties in BMC 3.86.110(1) and (2) one (1) time if a person:

(a)    Is not currently licensed, and filing returns;

(b)    Was unaware of its responsibility to file and pay tax; and

(c)    Obtained business licenses and filed past due tax returns within thirty (30) days after being notified by the Department.

(4)    The Director shall not cancel any interest charged upon amounts due. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.130 TAXPAYER QUITTING BUSINESS - LIABILITY OF SUCCESSOR.

(1)    Whenever any taxpayer quits business, sells out, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of his business or his stock of goods, any tax payable hereunder shall become immediately due and payable. Such taxpayer shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, make a return and pay the tax due. 

(2)    Any person who becomes a successor shall become liable for the full amount of any tax owing. The successor shall withhold from the purchase price a sum sufficient to pay any tax due to the City from the taxpayer until such time as: (a) the taxpayer shall produce a receipt from the City showing payment in full of any tax due or a certificate that no tax is due, or (b) more than six (6) months have passed since the successor notified the Director of the acquisition and the Director has not issued and notified the successor of an assessment. 

(3)    Payment of the tax by the successor shall, to the extent thereof, be deemed a payment upon the purchase price. If such payment is greater in amount than the purchase price, the amount of the difference shall become a debt due such successor from the taxpayer. 

(4)    Notwithstanding the above, if a successor gives written notice to the Director of the acquisition, and the Department does not within six (6) months of the date it received the notice issue an assessment against the taxpayer and mail a copy of that assessment to the successor, the successor shall not be liable for the tax. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.140 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL. 

Any person, except one who has failed to comply with BMC 3.86.060 relating to the maintenance of records, aggrieved by the amount of the fee or tax determined by the Director to be required under the provisions of this chapter may pay the amount due and appeal from such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the Administrative Hearing Examiner within thirty (30) calendar days from the date written notice of such amount was mailed to the taxpayer. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, as soon as practical, fix a time and place for the hearing of such appeal, and shall cause a notice of the time and place thereof to be delivered or mailed to the parties. The hearing shall be conducted in accord with the provisions of Chapter 2.13 BMC. The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall indicate the correct amount of the fee or tax owing. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.160 DIRECTOR TO MAKE RULES. 

The Director shall have the power, from time to time, to adopt, publish and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.170 ANCILLARY ALLOCATION AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR. 

The Director is authorized to enter into agreements with other Washington cities which impose an "eligible gross receipts tax":

(1)    To conduct an audit or joint audit of a taxpayer by using an auditor employed by the City of Bremerton, another city, or a contract auditor;

(2)    To allocate or apportion the gross proceeds of sales, gross receipts, or gross income of the business, or taxes due from any person that is required to pay an eligible gross receipts tax to more than one (1) Washington city in a manner that fairly reflects gross receipts earned from activities conducted within the respective cities;

(3)    To apply the City’s tax prospectively where a taxpayer has no office or place of business within the City and has paid tax on all gross income to another Washington city where the taxpayer is located; provided, that the other city maintains an eligible gross receipts tax, and the income was not derived from contracts with the City. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4895 §1, 2004; Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.180 MAILING OF NOTICES. 

Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed to any taxpayer or licensee shall be sent by ordinary mail, addressed to the address of the taxpayer or licensee as shown by the records of the Director. Failure of the taxpayer or licensee to receive any such mailed notice shall not release the taxpayer or licensee from any tax, fee, interest, or any penalties thereon, nor shall such failure operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the Director in writing about a change in the taxpayer’s address. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.190 TAX DECLARED ADDITIONAL.

The license fee and tax herein levied shall be additional to any license fee or tax imposed or levied under any law or any other ordinance of the City of Bremerton except as herein otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.200 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE - CONFIDENTIALITY - INFORMATION SHARING. 

(1)    For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

(a)    "Disclose" means to make known to any person in any manner whatever, a return or tax information.

(b)    "Tax information" means:

(i)    A taxpayer’s identity;

(ii)    The nature, source, or amount of the taxpayer’s income, payments, receipts, deductions, exemption, credits, assets, liability, net worth, tax liability deficiencies, over assessments, or tax payments, whether taken from the taxpayer’s books and records or any other source;

(iii)    Whether the taxpayer’s return was, is being, or will be examined or subject to other investigation or processing; or

(iv)    Other data received by, recorded by, prepared by, or provided to the City with respect to the determination or the existence, or possible existence, of liability, or the amount thereof, of a person under the City’s tax codes defined in BMC 3.86.015 for a tax, penalty, interest, fine, forfeiture, or other imposition, or offense. However, data, material, or documents that do not disclose information related to a specific or identifiable taxpayer do not constitute tax information under this section. Nothing in this chapter requires any person possessing data, material, or documents made confidential and privileged by this section to delete information from such data, material or documents so as to permit its disclosure.

(c)    "City agency" means every City office, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other City agency.

(d)    "Taxpayer identity" means the taxpayer’s name, address, telephone number, registration number, or any combination thereof, or any other information disclosing the identity of the taxpayer.

(2)    Returns and tax information are confidential and privileged, and except as authorized by this section, neither the Director nor any other person may disclose any return or tax information.

(3)    This section does not prohibit the Director from:

(a)    Disclosing such return or tax information in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or an administrative proceeding:

(i)    In respect of any tax imposed under City’s tax codes defined in BMC 3.86.015 if the taxpayer or its officer or other person liable under this title is a party in the proceeding; or

(ii)    In which the taxpayer about whom such return or tax information is sought and another state agency are adverse parties in the proceeding.

(b)    Disclosing, subject to such requirements and conditions as the Director prescribes by rules adopted pursuant to BMC 3.86.160, such return or tax information regarding a taxpayer to such taxpayer or to such person or persons as that taxpayer may designate in a request for, or consent to, such disclosure, or to any other person, at the taxpayer’s request, to the extent necessary to comply with a request for information or assistance made by the taxpayer to such other person. However, tax information not received from the taxpayer must not be so disclosed if the Director determines that such disclosure would compromise any investigation or litigation by any federal, state, or local government agency in connection with the civil or criminal liability of the taxpayer or another person, or that such disclosure would identify a confidential informant, or that such disclosure is contrary to any agreement entered into by the department that provides for the reciprocal exchange of information with other government agencies which agreement requires confidentiality with respect to such information unless such information is required to be disclosed to the taxpayer by the order of any court;

(c)    Publishing statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns or reports or items thereof;

(d)    Disclosing such return or tax information, for official purposes only, to the Mayor or City Attorney, or to any City agency, or to any member of the City Council or their authorized designees dealing with matters of taxation, revenue, trade, commerce, the control of industry or the professions;

(e)    Permitting the City’s records to be audited and examined by the proper state officer, his or her agents and employees;

(f)    Disclosing any such return or tax information to a peace officer as defined in RCW 9A.04.110 or prosecuting attorney, for official purposes. The disclosure may be made only in response to a search warrant, subpoena, or other court order, unless the disclosure is for the purpose of criminal tax enforcement. A peace officer or prosecuting attorney who receives the return or tax information may disclose that return or tax information only for use in the investigation and a related court proceeding, or in the court proceeding for which the return or tax information originally was sought or where otherwise allowed to be disclosed under this section;

(g)    Disclosing any such return or tax information to the proper officer of the Internal Revenue Service of the United States, the Canadian government or provincial governments of Canada, or to the proper officer of the tax department of any state or city or town or county, for official purposes, but only if the statutes of the United States, Canada or its provincial governments, or of such other state or city or town or county, as the case may be, grants substantially similar privileges to the proper officers of the City;

(h)    Disclosing any such return or tax information to the United States Department of Justice, including the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Department of Defense, the immigration and customs enforcement and the customs and border protection agencies of the United States Department of Homeland Security, the United States Coast Guard, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau of the United States Department of Treasury, and the United States Department of Transportation, or any authorized representative of these federal agencies or their successors, for official purposes;

(i)    Publishing or otherwise disclosing the text of a written determination designated by the Director as a precedent pursuant to RCW 82.32.410;

(j)    Disclosing, in a manner that is not associated with other tax information, the taxpayer name, entity type, business address, mailing address, revenue tax registration numbers and the active/closed status of such registrations, state or local business license registration identification and the active/closed status and effective dates of such licenses, reseller permit numbers and the expiration date and status of such permits, North American industry classification system or standard industrial classification code of a taxpayer, and the dates of opening and closing of business. Except that this subsection may not be construed as giving authority to the City or any recipient to give, sell, or provide access to any list of taxpayers for any commercial purpose;

(k)    Disclosing such return or tax information that is also maintained by another Washington State or local governmental agency as a public record available for inspection and copying under the provisions of Chapter 42.56 RCW or is a document maintained by a court of record and is not otherwise prohibited from disclosure;

(l)    Disclosing such return or tax information to the United States Department of Agriculture, or successor department or agency, for the limited purpose of investigating food stamp fraud by retailers;

(m)    Disclosing to a financial institution, escrow company, or title company, in connection with specific real property that is the subject of a real estate transaction, current amounts due the City for a filed tax warrant, judgment, or lien against the real property;

(n)    Disclosing to a person against whom the department has asserted liability as a successor under BMC 3.86.130 return or tax information pertaining to the specific business of the taxpayer to which the person has succeeded;

(o)    Disclosing real estate excise tax affidavit forms filed under Chapter 3.84 BMC in the possession of the City, including real estate excise tax affidavit forms for transactions exempt or otherwise not subject to tax;

(p)    Disclosing such return or tax information to the court or hearing examiner in respect to the City’s application for a subpoena if there is probable cause to believe that the records in possession of a third party will aid the Director in connection with its official duties under this title or a civil or criminal investigation.

(4)    (a)    The Director may disclose return or taxpayer information to a person under investigation or during any court or administrative proceeding against a person under investigation as provided in this subsection (4). The disclosure must be in connection with the department’s official duties under this chapter, or a civil or criminal investigation. The disclosure may occur only when the person under investigation and the person in possession of data, materials, or documents are parties to the return or tax information to be disclosed. The department may disclose return or tax information such as invoices, contracts, bills, statements, resale or exemption certificates, or checks. However, the department may not disclose general ledgers, sales or cash receipt journals, check registers, accounts receivable/payable ledgers, general journals, financial statements, expert’s workpapers, income tax returns, state tax returns, tax return workpapers, or other similar data, materials, or documents.

(b)    Before disclosure of any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4), the Director must, through written correspondence, inform the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The correspondence must clearly identify the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed. The Director may not disclose any tax return or tax information under this subsection (4), until the time period allowed in subsection (4)(c) of this section has expired or until the court has ruled on any challenge brought under subsection (4)(c) of this section.

(c)    The person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed by the department has twenty (20) days from the receipt of the written request required under subsection (4)(b) of this section to petition the superior court of the county in which the petitioner resides for injunctive relief. The court must limit or deny the request of the Director if the court determines that:

(i)    The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure are cumulative or duplicative, or are obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;

(ii)    The production of the data, materials, or documents sought would be unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the department, the amount in controversy, limitations on the petitioner’s resources, and the importance of the issues at stake; or

(iii)    The data, materials, or documents sought for disclosure contain trade secret information that, if disclosed, could harm the petitioner.

(d)    The Director must reimburse reasonable expenses for the production of data, materials, or documents incurred by the person in possession of the data, materials, or documents to be disclosed.

(e)    Requesting information under subsection (4)(b) of this section that may indicate that a taxpayer is under investigation does not constitute a disclosure of tax return or tax information under this section.

(5)    Service of a subpoena issued by the court does not constitute a disclosure of return or tax information under this section. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary in this section, a person served with a subpoena issued by the court may disclose the existence or content of the subpoena to that person’s legal counsel.

(6)    Any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information in the course of his or her employment with the City and any person acquiring knowledge of any return or tax information as provided under subsection (3)(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), or (k) of this section, who discloses any such return or tax information to another person not entitled to knowledge of such return or tax information under the provisions of this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor. If the person guilty of such violation is an officer or employee of the City, such person must forfeit such office or employment and is incapable of holding any public office or employment in the City for a period of two years thereafter. (Ord. 5201 §1, 2012: Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.210 TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT.

Any license fee or tax due and unpaid under this chapter, and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City of Bremerton and may be collected in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.220 UNLAWFUL ACTIONS - VIOLATION - PENALTIES.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person liable for amounts due under this chapter or under other chapters as referenced in BMC 3.86.015:

(a)    To violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this or the referenced chapters or any lawful rule or regulation adopted by the Director;

(b)    To intentionally defraud the City or intentionally evade the payment of any tax or part thereof;

(c)    For any person to make any false or fraudulent tax return or false statement in any tax return, with intent to defraud the City or evade the payment of any tax or part thereof;

(d)    To aid or abet any person in any attempt to intentionally defraud the City or intentionally evade payment of a license fee or tax or any part thereof;

(e)    To fail to appear or testify in response to a subpoena issued pursuant to law;

(f)    To testify falsely in any investigation, audit, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter;

(g)    To fail to keep and preserve books and records or for any person to fail or refuse to permit the examination of any book, paper, record or other data by the City in accordance with this chapter; and/or

(h)    To violate any of the provisions of this chapter.

(2)    Violations - Penalties. 

(a)    Civil Penalties. Any violation of subsection (1) of this section constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty and costs may be assessed and enforcement of this chapter may be required as provided for in this chapter and Chapter 1.04 BMC, including, but not limited to, enforcement of assessment of penalties pursuant to BMC 3.86.110. 

(b)    Criminal Penalties. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates or fails to comply with subsection (1) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as described in the general criminal penalty provisions of BMC 1.12.020(2). Such person will be guilty of this violation for each day, or portion thereof, during which the business is so engaged or carried on.

(c)    In lieu of and as an alternative to a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to subsection (2)(a) of this section, the City may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek enforcement of this chapter and assessment and collection of penalties, costs and enforcement as provided for in this chapter. Additionally, the City may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek enforcement of an order of the Administrative Hearing Examiner issued pursuant to subsection (2)(a) of this section.

(d)    Penalties or punishments provided in this section are not exclusive, and may be used in addition to or in conjunction with other enforcement and penalty provisions authorized by the Bremerton Municipal Code or State law. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.230 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE. 

The Director, or designee, shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke any business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007)


3.86.240 CLOSING AGREEMENT PROVISIONS. 

The Director may enter into an agreement in writing with any person relating to the liability of such person in respect of any tax imposed by any of the chapters within this title and administered by this chapter for any taxable period(s). Upon approval of such agreement, evidenced by execution thereof by the Director and the person so agreeing, the agreement shall be final and conclusive as to the tax liability or tax immunity covered thereby, and, except upon a showing of fraud or malfeasance, or misrepresentation of a material fact:

(1)    The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon, or the agreement modified, by the Director or the taxpayer; and 

(2)    In any suit, action or proceeding, such agreement, or any determination, assessment, collection, payment, abatement, refund, or credit made in accordance therewith shall not be annulled, modified, set aside, or disregarded. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.250 CHARGE-OFF OF UNCOLLECTIBLE TAXES. 

The Director may charge off any tax, penalty, or interest that is owed by a taxpayer if the Director reasonably ascertains that the cost of collecting such amounts would be greater than the total amount that is owed or likely to be collected from the taxpayer. Charge-offs in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) require City Council approval. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


3.86.260 SEVERABILITY. 

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 5028 §2 (part), 2007: Ord. 4845, Added, 01/03/2003)


Chapter 3.88 WASTEWATER OPERATING FUND

Sections:

3.88.010    CREATED.

3.88.020    RATIFICATION OF PRIOR ACTS.

3.88.030    WASTEWATER FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION RESERVE.


3.88.010 CREATED.

There is created a fund of the city known as the "Wastewater Operating Fund" which shall be under the direction and management of the mayor and the director of utilities and into which shall be placed all moneys held by the city as a result of the operation, maintenance, construction and other activities of the city’s wastewater utility as well as all moneys presently held in the wastewater operating fund No. 451 and such other moneys as shall from time to time be directed by the city council. Upon proper authorization, warrants shall be drawn on the fund for the payment of claims resulting from the administration, operation, maintenance, construction and other activities of the wastewater utility. (Ord. 4091 §1, 1986)


3.88.020 RATIFICATION OF PRIOR ACTS.

The city council does hereby ratify and confirm all prior acts of city officers, employees, and other representatives, consistent with this chapter as they relate to the activity and operation of the wastewater operating fund No. 451. (Ord. 4091 §2, 1986)


3.88.030 WASTEWATER FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION RESERVE.

The City Treasurer is authorized and directed to establish within the wastewater operating fund a reserve account to be known as the wastewater facilities construction reserve for the purpose of financing construction of sewerage collection, transmission and treatment facilities into which shall be transferred such moneys as are presently held in the wastewater facilities construction fund No. 309, such moneys as shall be received from the sources specified in Ordinance 3857, Section 2, and such other moneys as shall from time to time be directed by the City Council. (Ord. 4091 §3, 1986)


Chapter 3.96 DEFERRED COMPENSATION FUND

Sections:

3.96.010    CREATED.


3.96.010 CREATED.

There is created a fund of the City, known as the "Deferred Compensation Fund" which shall be under the direction of the Mayor and the City Treasurer and which shall be used for the sole purpose of providing for the proper accounting and financial reporting of the City deferred compensation plan, as adopted by Resolution No. 1649 and amended by Resolution Nos. 1871 and 1918. (Ord. 4089 §1, 1986)


Chapter 3.99 PENDERGAST REGIONAL PARK CONSTRUCTION FUND

Sections:

3.99.010    CREATED.

3.99.020    DEPOSITS.

3.99.030    DISBURSEMENTS.

3.99.040    TERMINATION.


3.99.010 CREATED.

A capital projects fund to be known as the "Pendergast Regional Park Construction Fund", is hereby created for the purpose of receiving and disbursing funds as necessary for the organization, design, and construction of the City’s regional athletic facilities. (Ord. 4360 §1, 1992)


3.99.020 DEPOSITS.

Monies to be deposited into this fund include all donations received relative to the regional athletic facilities project, all City and County funds allocated to the project together with interest earnings attributable to the unexpended balance of the fund. (Ord. 4360 §2, 1992)


3.99.030 DISBURSEMENTS.

Monies shall be disbursed from this fund in a manner consistent with State statute and City policies for the acquisition, design and construction of the City’s regional athletic facilities, together with any necessary ancillary improvements. (Ord. 4360 §3, 1992)


3.99.040 TERMINATION.

This fund shall be closed at the conclusion of the project with any remaining monies distributed to the Park Facilities Construction Fund (304). (Ord. 4360 §4, 1992)


Title 4 (Reserved)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.02    GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES

5.03    GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR REGULATORY LICENSES

5.06    RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION

5.08    STREET VENDORS

5.12    TAXICABS

5.14    MASSAGE AND REFLEXOLOGY BUSINESSES

5.16    TEMPORARY MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND MOBILE FOOD VENDORS

5.17    CHARITABLE SOLICITATION

5.22    PUBLIC DANCES

5.36    SPECIAL EVENTS

5.88    BURGLAR ALARMS

5.96    EROTIC DANCE STUDIOS


Chapter 5.02 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.02.010    TITLE.

5.02.020    POWER TO LICENSE FOR REGULATION AND/OR REVENUE.

5.02.030    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

5.02.040    DEFINITIONS.

5.02.050    ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.

5.02.060    GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.

5.02.070    SEPARATE GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.

5.02.080    LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE.

5.02.090    LICENSE TO BE POSTED.

5.02.100    DISCLAIMER OF CITY LIABILITY.

5.02.110    GENERAL QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEES.

5.02.120    APPLICATION PROCEDURE, LICENSE FEE.

5.02.130    APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE.

5.02.140    RENEWAL.

5.02.150    APPLICATION AS PUBLIC RECORD.

5.02.160    NONPAYMENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.

5.02.170    GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

5.02.180    DENIAL AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

5.02.190    UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


5.02.010 TITLE.

This chapter shall constitute the business license code of the city and may be cited as such. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.020 POWER TO LICENSE FOR REGULATION AND/OR REVENUE. 

This chapter is adopted by the city, exercising its power authorized under general law to license for the privilege of engaging in business in the City and revoke the license for cause, to regulate, make inspections and to impose excises for revenue or regulation in regard to all places and kinds of businesses, occupations, trades, professions and any other lawful activity, as such power is described in the RCW 35.22.280(32). The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of such purposes. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.030 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS. 

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.040 DEFINITIONS. 

For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions set forth in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply to this chapter as applicable. In addition, the following definitions will apply:

"Ancillary rental" means (1) the renting and/or leasing of real property by a person as secondary to the primary business use by said person for which a business license is issued pursuant to this chapter, or (2) the renting or leasing of a single portion of a residence that is within the structure of the primary residence of the landlord, such as the renting of a single bedroom; this does not include a separate or secondary dwelling unit which includes all accessory dwelling units.

"Casual rental" means the renting of the primary residence of the landlord for a period of four (4) months or less in any given calendar year.

"Engaging in business" shall also include the renting and/or leasing of real property except for casual rentals or ancillary rentals. 

"License to use" means a personal privilege to do some particular act or series of acts on real property without possessing any estate or interest therein.

"Possessory interest" means the right to exert control over specific real property, or a portion thereof, to the exclusion of others. 

"Renting and/or leasing of real property" means the creation of a possessory interest in residential, commercial and/or industrial real property of another party by lease, sublease, expressed or implied rental agreement, or tenancy from period to period, for the purpose of gain, and includes leases or rentals in mixed use structures. The renting and/or leasing of real property does not include the license to use real property. (Ord. 5333 §8, 2017: Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.050 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    The Director of Community Development, or designee, shall have general charge of, and supervision over, the administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall exercise such power and perform all the duties imposed upon him or her.

(b)    Applicant shall, upon reasonable request, provide or allow the Director to inspect relevant documentation of any licensee for verification of the information provided by applicant/licensee on the business license application.

(c)    The Director may establish administrative rules and regulations as deemed appropriate, consistent with this chapter for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out its provisions. (Ord. 5343 §8, 2017: Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.060 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED. 

Any person who "engages in business" activities in the City as this term is defined in Chapter 3.48 BMC and this chapter shall first obtain a general business license for the current calendar year or unexpired portion thereof, and pay the fees prescribed in this chapter. Applications for general business licenses shall be filed with the Tax and Licensing Division. (Ord. 5343 §9, 2017: Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003) 


5.02.070 SEPARATE GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.

A separate license shall be obtained for each branch, establishment or location at which the business related activity is carried on, and each license shall authorize the licensee to carry on, pursue or conduct only that business, or business enterprise at that location. A separate license shall not be required for a business activity determined by the Director to be an accessory activity to a branch, establishment or location for which a license is issued. A separate license shall not be required for the renting and/or leasing of real property in multiple locations which shall be considered a single business encompassing all rental or leased units in the city by a single owner. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.080 LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE. 

No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or assignable unless otherwise specifically provided for herein. A license may be transferred 1) when a business changes its structure which does not result in a substantial change of ownership or, 2) when there is no substantial change in the type of business operated. A new license shall be required when the place of a business location is changed, there is a substantial change of ownership of a business or there is a substantial change in the type of business operated. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.090 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.

All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at such location. No person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall allow any person for whom a separate license is required, to operate under or to display such license, nor shall such other person operate under or display such license. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.100 DISCLAIMER OF CITY LIABILITY.

Issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not constitute the creation of a duty by the city to indemnify the licensee for any wrongful acts against the public, or to guarantee the quality of goods, services or expertise of a licensee. The issuance of a license does not shift responsibility from the licensee to the city for proper training, conduct or equipment of the licensee or his agents, employees or representatives, even if specific regulations require standards of training, conduct or inspection. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.110 GENERAL QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEES.

(a)    No license shall be issued, nor shall any license be renewed, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to:

(1)    An applicant who is not eighteen (18) years of age at the time of application;

(2)    An applicant who has had a similar license denied or revoked pursuant to BMC 5.02.180;

(3)    An applicant who shall not first comply with the general laws of the state; or

(4)    An applicant who seeks such a license in order to practice some illegal act or some act injurious to the public health or safety. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.120 APPLICATION PROCEDURE, LICENSE FEE. 

(a)    The business owner shall make application for any business license required under this chapter to the Director on a form prepared by the department, which application shall be accompanied by a receipt from the department showing payment of the required fee. Business licenses shall be granted annually. The license application fee will be reduced by one-half of the fee for applications received for businesses which begin operation between July 1st to December 31st of the calendar year for which the license is to be issued and is nonrefundable whether or not the license application is later denied.

(b)    The fee for a business licensee shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5343 §10, 2017: Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.130 APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE. 

All licenses approved for issuance by the Director shall be conditioned upon compliance at all times with all applicable ordinances, regulations and statutes of the city and the state. Upon issuance, the license shall be valid as long as licensee continues in business and pays the license fee and occupation tax due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and chapters 3.48 BMC and 3.86 BMC and shall continue to be valid until the expiration date, which will be December 31st of any given year. The license shall be in addition to any license required under any law or ordinance of the City. Issuance of a business license does not imply compliance with other City codes. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.140 RENEWAL.

The Director shall mail the forms for business license renewals to business enterprises in the city to the last address provided to the Director by the licensee. Failure of the business enterprise to receive any such form shall not excuse the business enterprise from making application for and securing the required license or renewal, or for payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.150 APPLICATION AS PUBLIC RECORD. 

General business license applications made to the Director pursuant to this chapter shall be public information subject to inspection by all persons except to the extent those records may be deemed to be private or would result in unfair competitive disadvantage to such business enterprise if disclosed, all as more particularly described in Chapter 42.17 RCW. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.160 NONPAYMENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.

All license fees unpaid under this chapter when due and all interest and penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the City and may be collected with any taxes owed and in the same manner as unpaid taxes under chapters 3.48 BMC and 3.86 BMC. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.170 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

(a)    In addition to the other penalties provided by law, any business license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be denied or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any time, where:

(1)    The license was procured by fraud, false representation or material omission of fact, or for the violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by the person holding such license, or any of his servants, agents or employees, while acting within the scope of their employment; or

(2)    The licensee or employee of the licensee violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable city, state or federal law, including, but not limited to Chapters 3.48, 3.50 and 3.86 BMC, or the purpose for which the license was issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or such license is being used for a purpose different from that for which it was issued.

(3)    The licensee submits a false or fraudulent City tax return or makes a false statement on any City tax return.

(4)    The licensee fails to pay any license fee or tax to the city when due including, but not limited to any taxes pursuant to Title 3 BMC.

(5)    The licensee or employee has been convicted of a crime involving the business. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.180 DENIAL AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

(a)    Any application for the issuance or renewal of a license issued under this chapter may be denied, or any license issued under this chapter may be revoked based on one or more of the grounds set forth in BMC 5.02.170.

(b)    The Director shall have the power and authority to deny the issuance of or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall notify such licensee in writing by certified mail or personal service of the denial or revocation of his or her license application or license and the grounds therefore.

(c)    Any applicant or licensee may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date that the denial or revocation notice was mailed to the applicant or licensee, appeal from such denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefore with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the license, and may impose any terms thereupon.

(d)    No renewal or revocation of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect until fourteen (14) calendar days after service of the notice thereof by the Director, and if the appeal is timely filed, the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Administrative Hearing Examiner. All licenses which are revoked shall be surrendered to the City on the effective date of such revocation.

(e)    The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The applicant or licensee and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court.

(f)    When revoked, the license shall be canceled and immediately surrendered to the Director. Upon revocation of any license as provided in this chapter no portion of the license fee shall be returned to the licensee.

(g)    Upon denial or revocation, the person whose application was denied or license revoked shall not be granted a license for a business, upon any new application that may be made, for a period of ninety (90) calendar days from date of denial or revocation and further, no license shall be issued until such person cures any defaults that resulted in the denial or revocation. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


5.02.190 UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 

(a)    It shall be unlawful:

(1)    For any person to engage in business without having obtained a business license or for a person to engage in business after denial of a business license application or renewal or after revocation of a business license.

(2)    For the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, or other officer of any company to engage in business without having obtained a business license or for a person to engage in business after denial of a business license application or renewal or after revocation of a business license.

(3)    For any person to violate any provision of this chapter.

(b)    Non-payment penalty. Failure to pay the license fee within ninety (90) days after the date of expiration, pursuant to BMC 5.02.120, shall subject the licensee to a monetary penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50) to reinstate the license, in addition to the required license fee.

(c)    Civil penalties. In addition to any violation set forth in Chapter 3.86 relating to the administration of this chapter, any violation of BMC 5.02.190(a) constitutes a civil violation under chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and enforcement may be required as provided therein. 

(d)    Criminal penalties. In addition to the foregoing penalties or any violation set forth in Chapter 3.86 relating to the administration of this chapter, any person who violates or fails to comply with BMC 5.02.190(a) shall, upon conviction, be punished as described in the general criminal penalty provisions of BMC 1.12.020(2). Such person will be guilty of this violation for each day, or portion thereof, during which the business is so engaged or carried on. (Ord. 4842, Repealed & Replaced, 01/03/2003)


Chapter 5.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR REGULATORY LICENSES

Sections:

5.03.010    PURPOSE.

5.03.020    ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

5.03.030    DEFINITIONS.

5.03.040    LICENSE REQUIRED - APPLICATIONS.

5.03.050    LICENSE ISSUANCE - FEES.

5.03.060    GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

5.03.070    DENIAL AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

5.03.080    FACILITY STANDARDS.

5.03.090    OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.

5.03.100    SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.

5.03.110    APPLICABILITY.

5.03.120    RULEMAKING.

5.03.130    ADDITIONAL LICENSES.

5.03.140    UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


5.03.010 PURPOSE.

(a)    It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to regulate and license certain business activities which may be injurious to public health and safety and which may affect the social well-being of the City and its residents.

(b)    This chapter is not intended to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this chapter.

(c)    It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the license holder or applicant for a license. No provision of, nor term used in, this chapter is intended to impose any mandatory duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees.

(d)    Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the City, or its officers, employees or agents, for any damage resulting from the failure of the license holder or applicant for a license to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or by reason of or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter on the part of the City by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.020 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

The provisions contained in Chapter 3.86 BMC shall be fully applicable to the provisions of this chapter except as expressly stated to the contrary herein. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.030 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in Chapter 3.48 BMC shall apply equally to the provisions of this chapter as applicable unless the term is defined otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003)


5.03.040 LICENSE REQUIRED - APPLICATIONS.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply whenever a regulatory license is required by a chapter in this title. The licensee shall be the person or entity who owns the business. Where the license applicant is a corporation, the term "applicant" shall include principal officers and managers. Where the license applicant is a partnership, the term "applicant" shall include principal partners and managers. Applications shall be filed with the Tax and Licensing Division. Each applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the following information:

(a)    True name and any assumed names or aliases used.

(b)    Home address and telephone number.

(c)    Sex, weight, height, color of eyes and hair.

(d)    Date of birth.

(e)    A copy of applicant’s identification which must include some form of picture identification, i.e., a driver’s license or Washington State identification card.

(f)    The business occupation and/or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application.

(g)    Residence address(es) of the applicant for the five (5) years preceding the date of application.

(h)    The business name, business address, and telephone number of the proposed business.

(i)    A listing and explanation of all services to be provided.

(j)    A description of any other business activity to be conducted on the premises or adjoining premises owned and controlled by the applicant.

(k)    The principal enterprise of the business if different from the activity being licensed.

(l)    Whether the applicant has ever been convicted, forfeited bail, or pled guilty to any crime, excluding minor traffic offenses. If so, state the charge and the nature of the crime, the name and location of the convicting court and the disposition thereof.

(m)    Written declaration by the applicant under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly stated and signed.

(n)    Such other relevant identification and information necessary as the Director may reasonably require to discover the truth of statements made in the application.

(o)    Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. (Ord. 5343 §11, 2017: Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.050 LICENSE ISSUANCE - FEES.

(a)    Applications for regulatory licenses must be received by the Tax and Licensing Division at least three (3) weeks prior to issuance.

(b)    License fees will be due upon application. 

The City Council shall establish appropriate fees pursuant to Chapter 3.01 BMC. (Ord. 5343 §12, 2017: Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.060 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

In addition to the other penalties provided by law, any regulatory license issued under the provisions of this title may be denied or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter at any time, where:

(a)    The required information has not been provided or the correct license fee has not been tendered to the City and in the case of a check or bank draft, not honored with payment upon presentation.

(b)    The application is not in compliance with Federal, State or local laws.

(c)    The license was procured by fraud, false representation or material omission of fact, or for the violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this title by the person holding such license, or any of his servants, agents or employees, while acting within the scope of their employment.

(d)    The licensee or employee of the licensee violates any of the provisions of the applicable chapter under this title or any applicable City, State or Federal law, including, but not limited to, Chapters 3.48, 3.50, 3.86 and 5.02 BMC, or the purpose for which the license was issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or such license is being used for a purpose different from that for which it was issued. 

(e)    The licensee submits a false or fraudulent City tax return or makes a false statement on any City tax return.

(f)    The licensee fails to pay any license fee or tax to the City when due including, but not limited to, any taxes pursuant to BMC Title 3.

(g)    The licensee or employee has been convicted of a crime involving the business. 

(h)    The applicant is not eighteen (18) years of age or older. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.070 DENIAL AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

(a)    Any application for the issuance or renewal of a license issued under this title may be denied, or any license issued under this title may be revoked based on one or more of the grounds set forth in BMC 5.03.060.

(b)    The Director, or designee, ("Director") having the authority to issue said license shall have the power and authority to deny the issuance of or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this title. The Director shall notify such licensee in writing by certified mail or personal service of the denial or revocation of his or her license application or license and the grounds therefor.

(c)    Any applicant or licensee may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date that the denial or revocation notice was mailed to the applicant or licensee, appeal from such denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the license, and may impose any terms thereupon.

(d)    No renewal or revocation of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect until fourteen (14) calendar days after service of the notice thereof by the Director, and if the appeal is timely filed, the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Administrative Hearing Examiner. All licenses which are revoked shall be surrendered to the City on the effective date of such revocation.

(e)    The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The applicant or licensee and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court.

(f)    When revoked, the license shall be canceled and immediately surrendered to the Director. Upon revocation of any license as provided in this chapter, no portion of the license fee shall be returned to the licensee.

(g)    Upon denial or revocation, the person whose application was denied or license revoked shall not be granted a license for a business, upon any new application that may be made, for a period of ninety (90) calendar days from date of denial or revocation and further, no license shall be issued until such person cures any defaults that resulted in the denial or revocation. 

(h)    A denial or revocation of a general business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC shall constitute an automatic denial or revocation of a related regulatory license issued under this title to the business for which the general business license was issued, and the procedures set forth in this section shall not be applicable. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.080 FACILITY STANDARDS.

It shall be the duty of the licensee and its employees to comply with fire, building, land use, sanitation and health regulations. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.090 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.

It shall be the duty of the licensee and its employees to meet the following operating requirements:

(a)    The regulatory license shall be prominently posted in a location of public view in the licensee’s place of business at all times and such permit shall not be tampered with in any manner.

(b)    No establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize goods or services of the business.

(c)    No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the establishment under a name not specified on the license nor shall that person conduct business at any location not specified on the license. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.100 SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.

Upon sale, lease, transfer, or relocation of a business, the regulatory license thereof shall be null and void. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.110 APPLICABILITY.

All persons who are required to be licensed by this chapter shall be subject to all of the conditions and requirements of this chapter, whether they actually obtain the licenses required or not. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.120 RULEMAKING.

The Director shall have the authority to adopt, publish, and enforce rules not inconsistent with law for the purpose of carrying out the provisions hereof and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any such rule. (Ord. 5343 §13, 2017: Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.130 ADDITIONAL LICENSES.

The issuance of a license under this chapter shall not relieve the licensee from securing any other licensee from securing any other license(s) required by Federal, State or local law. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4162 §1, 1988)


5.03.140 UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 

(a)    It shall be unlawful:

(1)    For any person to engage in business without having obtained a regulatory license as required in this title or for a person to engage in business after denial of a license application or renewal or after revocation of a regulatory license.

(2)    For the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, or other officer of any company to engage in business without having obtained a regulatory license as required in this title or for a person to engage in business after denial of a regulatory license application or renewal or after revocation of a regulatory license.

(3)    For any person to violate any provision of this chapter.

(b)    Nonpayment penalty. Failure to pay the license fee within ninety (90) days after the date of expiration shall subject the licensee to a monetary penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to reinstate the license, in addition to the required license fee.

(c)    Civil penalties. In addition to any other violation set forth in this title, any violation of subsection (a) of this section constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and enforcement may be required as provided therein. 

(d)    Criminal penalties. In addition to the foregoing penalties or any violation set forth in Chapter 3.86 BMC relating to the administration of this chapter, any person who violates or fails to comply with subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as described in the general criminal penalty provisions of BMC 1.12.020(2). Such person will be guilty of this violation for each day, or portion thereof, during which the business is so engaged or carried on. (Ord. 4859 §3 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 5.06 RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION

Sections:

5.06.010    PURPOSE.

5.06.020    DEFINITIONS.

5.06.030    REGISTRATION AND DECLARATION REQUIRED.

5.06.040    VIOLATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.

5.06.050    INSPECTION FINDINGS - REVIEW AND APPEAL.

5.06.060    ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.

5.06.070    VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.


5.06.010 PURPOSE.

The City Council finds that rental housing is a valuable community asset, providing homes for all income levels. Additionally, the City Council finds that there exists rental housing in the City that is below the minimum building standards and appears to violate RCW 59.18.060 of the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act and that such substandard conditions constitute a public nuisance. As a result, to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and the maintenance of quality rental housing in the City, this code establishes a program to prevent and correct conditions in residential rental units that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that rental housing within the City is actively operated and maintained in compliance with RCW 59.18.060. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.020 DEFINITIONS.

"BMC" means Bremerton Municipal Code.

"Building Code" means the City Building Code set forth in Chapter 17.04 BMC.

"Certificate of inspection" means a certificate made in accordance with the requirements of RCW 9A.72.085 by a qualified inspector on forms provided by the City that states that the owner of rental property has not failed to fulfill any substantial obligation imposed under RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act, as defined in this section, that endangers or impairs the health or safety of a tenant.

"Code enforcement officer" means code enforcement officer as defined in Chapter 1.04 BMC.

"Declaration of compliance" means an unsworn statement, declaration, verification, or certificate made in accordance with the forms provided by the City that each dwelling unit complies with RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act as defined in this section, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended, and does not present conditions that endanger or impair the health or safety of the tenants.

"Director" means the Director of Community Development or designee as applicable and any other department director authorized by the Mayor to enforce this chapter, or their designee, including, but not limited to, code enforcement officer, Building Official and other designated City official.

"Dwelling unit" means any structure or part of a structure which is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one (1) or more persons maintaining a common household, including but not limited to single-family residences, a room, rooming units, units of multiplexes, condominiums, apartment buildings, mobile homes and other similar residential structures.

"Fire Code" means the City Fire Code set forth in Chapter 18.02 BMC.

"Landlord" means the owner of rental property.

"Landlord-Tenant Act" means the Residential Landlord-Tenant Act set forth in Chapter 59.18 RCW, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended.

"Owner" means one (1) or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested all or any part of the legal title to rental property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the property.

"Person" means an individual, group of individuals, corporation, government, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal or commercial entity.

"Qualified inspector" means a United States Department of Housing and Urban Development certified inspector, a Washington State licensed home inspector, an American Society of Home Inspectors certified inspector, a private inspector certified by the National Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials, the American Association of Code Enforcement, International Code Council certified inspector, or other comparable professional association as approved by the Director of Community Development, a Washington licensed structural engineer, or a Washington licensed architect. An "owner" as defined in this section is not eligible to act as a qualified inspector.

"RCW" means Revised Code of Washington.

"RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act" means, for the purpose of this chapter, RCW 59.18.060(1) through (10), as currently enacted or hereinafter amended, relating to the landlord’s duties, which provide as follows: (1) maintain the premises to substantially comply with any applicable code, statute, ordinance, or regulation governing their maintenance or operation, which the legislative body enacting the applicable code, statute, ordinance or regulation could enforce as to the premises rented if such condition endangers or impairs the health or safety of the tenant; (2) maintain the structural components, including, but not limited to, the roofs, floors, walls, chimneys, fireplaces, foundations, and all other structural components, in reasonably good repair so as to be usable; (3) keep any shared or common areas reasonably clean, sanitary, and safe from defects increasing the hazards of fire or accident; (4) provide a reasonable program for the control of infestation by insects, rodents, and other pests at the initiation of the tenancy and, except in the case of a single-family residence, control infestation during tenancy except where such infestation is caused by the tenant; (5) except where the condition is attributable to normal wear and tear, make repairs and arrangements necessary to put and keep the premises in as good condition as it by law or rental agreement should have been, at the commencement of the tenancy; (6) provide reasonably adequate locks and furnish keys to the tenant; (7) maintain all electrical, plumbing, heating, and other facilities and appliances supplied by him or her in reasonably good working order; (8) maintain the dwelling unit in reasonably weathertight condition; (9) except in the case of a single-family residence, provide and maintain appropriate receptacles in common areas for the removal of ashes, rubbish, and garbage incidental to the occupancy and arrange for the reasonable and regular removal of such waste; (10) provide facilities adequate to supply heat and water and hot water as reasonably required by the tenant.

"Rental property" or "property" means all residential dwelling units rented or leased on a contiguous parcel or parcels of land managed by the same landlord as a single rental complex.

"Tenant" is any person who is entitled to occupy a dwelling unit primarily for living or dwelling purposes with or without a rental agreement. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.030 REGISTRATION AND DECLARATION REQUIRED.

(a)    Registration and Declaration of Compliance. Any landlord renting or making available for rent any "dwelling unit" as defined in BMC 5.06.020 that requires a general business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC shall annually with the general business license application or renewal:

(1)    Register each dwelling unit;

(2)    Provide the City with the landlord’s name and contact information;

(3)    Provide the City with the name and contact information of any person designated by the landlord as an alternate contact or as a representative of the landlord responsible for the management of the rental property (optional);

(4)    Provide an email or mailing address or other method of contact as approved by the Bremerton Police Department for participation in the Department’s landlord notification program for notice of police activity on the rental property; and

(5)    File with and as part of the registration a declaration of compliance as defined in BMC 5.06.020 that each dwelling unit complies with RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act and does not present conditions that endanger or impair the health or safety of the tenants.

(b)    Conditions of Issuance. Issuance of the general business license shall require:

(1)    Registration of dwelling units and providing the landlord’s name and contact information as required in subsection (a) of this section;

(2)    Submission of a declaration of compliance as required in subsection (a) of this section or, as applicable, submission of certificate of inspection if required by BMC 5.06.040;

(3)    Payment of applicable fees; and

(4)    Compliance with this chapter.

(c)    Revocation or Denial. Any general business license issued under Chapter 5.02 BMC may be revoked or denied for any violation of this chapter by the licensee or his or her agents or employees pursuant to BMC 5.02.180. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.040 VIOLATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.

To ensure compliance with RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act related to conditions of rental housing, the following shall apply:

(a)    Pending Violation - Correction Notice. Whenever the City is provided notice of a violation of the Building Code, the Fire Code, and/or violations of any other applicable City code or state law which endangers or impairs the health or safety of a tenant, the City code enforcement officer shall issue a correction notice to the owner pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC. Notice to the City of the violation may be provided as a result of a pending code enforcement proceeding or other similar action on rental property, an on-site visit by a City official, or by any other means. The owner shall cure the violation in the time period as requested by the code enforcement officer or provide a plan acceptable to the City to bring the property into compliance with RCW 59.18.060 for any existing violation.

(b)    Notice of Violation - Hearing. In the event the owner does not or cannot cure the violation or obtain an approved plan within the required time period stated in the correction notice, a notice of violation shall be mailed or otherwise served to the owner scheduling a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 1.04.080.

(c)    Certificate of Inspection - Required. In the event a hearing is held before the Administrative Hearing Examiner and an order is issued requiring the owner to cure the violation, the City may request, as part of the order, that the owner obtain a certificate of inspection pursuant to this section. The certificate of inspection must be provided by a qualified inspector for the subject rental property to ensure full compliance with the order and with RCW 59.18.060 of the Landlord-Tenant Act and does not present conditions that endanger or impair the health or safety of a tenant. The dwelling unit or units of the rental property to be inspected and the extent of the inspection shall be as required by the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s order.

(d)    Filing of Certificate of Inspection. The certificate of inspection shall be filed with the City by the date and upon the conditions required by the Administrative Hearing Examiner’s order. If a qualified inspector other than a City code enforcement officer performs the inspection and a selected unit or units of the rental property fails the initial inspection, both the results of the initial inspection and any certificate of inspection must be provided to the City.

(e)    False Reporting - Misdemeanor. Any person who knowingly submits or assists in the submission of a falsified declaration of compliance or certificate of inspection is guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Any inspector convicted of, admitting to or submitting a falsified certificate of inspection will no longer be a qualified inspector as defined under BMC 5.06.020.

(f)    Notice of Inspection to Tenant. Notice to tenant of an inspection shall be provided as follows:

(1)    Landlord shall provide written notification of his or her intent to enter an individual unit for the purposes of providing the City a certificate of inspection in accordance with RCW 59.18.150(6) of the Landlord-Tenant Act. The written notice must indicate the date and approximate time of the inspection and the company or person performing the inspection, and that the tenant has the right to see the inspector’s identification before the inspector enters the individual unit. A copy of this notice must be provided to the inspector upon request on the day of inspection.

(2)    A tenant who continues to deny access to his or her unit is subject to RCW 59.18.150(8) of the Landlord-Tenant Act. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.050 INSPECTION FINDINGS - REVIEW AND APPEAL.

(a)    Administrative Review of Findings. If a landlord does not agree with the findings of an inspection performed by a qualified inspector, as defined under this chapter, the landlord may request an administrative review by the Director by filing a written request with the Department of Community Development within fourteen (14) calendar days of the inspection or may file a direct appeal to the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 5.06.060. The request shall state in writing the reasons the Director should review the findings. Failure to state the basis for the review in writing shall be cause for dismissal of the review. Upon receipt of the request for administrative review, the Director shall review the information provided. In lieu of filing an appeal with the Director, an appeal may also be made directly to the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to subsection (c) of this section within thirty (30) calendar days of the inspection.

(b)    Decision of Director. After considering all of the information provided, including information from the code enforcement officer and the City Attorney, or his or her designee, the Director shall affirm or modify the findings of inspection. The Director’s decision shall be delivered in writing to the appellant by first-class mail, email or hand delivery.

(c)    Administrative Appeal. Appeals of the decision resulting from the Director’s review shall be made to the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 5.06.060. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.060 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.

(a)    Administrative appeals may be filed as follows:

(1)    General Business License. Revocation or denial of a general business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC may be appealed as provided in BMC 5.02.180.

(2)    Penalties, Director’s Decision and Findings of an Inspection. The assessment of penalties pursuant to BMC 5.06.070, a decision of the Director pursuant to BMC 5.06.050(b) and the findings of an inspection performed by a qualified inspector pursuant to BMC 5.06.040(c) ("administrative determination") may be appealed using the appellate procedures set forth in this section.

(b)    Any applicant or licensee may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date notice of the administrative determination was mailed to the applicant or licensee, appeal such administrative determination by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds thereof with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC, Community Development - Rate Table C, shall be submitted with the appeal. The filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the license, and may impose any terms thereupon.

(c)    No administrative determination issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect until fourteen (14) calendar days after service of the notice thereof by the Director, and if the appeal is timely filed, the administrative determination shall be stayed pending final action by the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(d)    The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The applicant or licensee and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed the administrative determination shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


5.06.070 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.

Violations of this chapter constitute a public nuisance and may be enforced, in addition to the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to the Building Code; the Fire Code; Chapter 9.92 BMC, Chronic Nuisance Properties; BMC Title 6, Health and Sanitation; and/or any other applicable City code or state law. In the event of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the City may take the following action:

(a)    Remedies. If the City finds that any landlord fails to register a rental dwelling unit as required herein or file the required certificate of inspection as applicable and/or violates any other provision of this chapter, the City may take any one (1) or more of the following actions to remedy the violation:

(1)    Impose a civil penalty as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC, Community Development - Rate Table C; and/or

(2)    Revoke or deny the general business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC as authorized in BMC 5.02.180.

(b)    Code Enforcement. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement and/or enforcement may be required as provided therein. (Ord. 5269 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5221 §1 (part), 2013)


Chapter 5.08 STREET VENDORS

Sections:

5.08.010    LICENSE REQUIRED.

5.08.020    DEFINITIONS.

5.08.030    LICENSE APPLICATION.

5.08.040    LOCATION REVIEW.

5.08.050    HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS.

5.08.060    OPERATING CONDITIONS.

5.08.070    LICENSE - RENEWALS.

5.08.080    LICENSE - REVOCATION.


5.08.010 LICENSE REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person to engage in street vending in the City without first obtaining a regulatory license in addition to a business license. Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division. (Ord. 5343 §14, 2017: Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.020 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf.

(b)    "Street vending" shall mean one who sells food, nonalcoholic beverages, flowers, plants, or other merchandise to the public from any stand, booth, cart, basket, tray, table or other device on any sidewalk, street, highway or public place.

(c)    "Street vending site" shall mean the location of the street vending unit.

(d)    "Street vending unit" shall mean the cart, tables and other equipment used in conjunction with a street vending site.

(e)    "Tax and Licensing Division" means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §15, 2017: Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.030 LICENSE APPLICATION.

In order to obtain a regulatory license for street vending, an applicant must submit, in addition to the information required in BMC 5.03.050 for a regulatory license, the following:

(a)    A copy of the street vendor’s regulatory license application and appropriate fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(b)    The name and home and business addresses of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the vending business or street vending unit to be used in the operation of the vending business.

(c)    A copy of the current City business license or a copy of the business license application and appropriate fee.

(d)    Written approval for the vending by the abutting property owner. The abutting property owner may revoke said approval upon written notice to the Director, in which case the license shall be revoked pursuant to BMC 5.08.080. 

(e)     A description of the desired location and adjacent businesses and an accurate drawing showing the public area to be used, along with plans detailing the design and size of the vending unit to be used.

(f)    A license or other written document from the Kitsap County Health District granting approval for each food and/or beverage vending unit.

(g)    A license or other written document from the Fire Department granting approval for vendors using flammable substances.

(h)    Written approval from the City Parks and Recreation Department and/or Bremerton School District granting approval if the vending unit will be placed within two hundred (200) feet of a public park, school and/or playground.

(i)    A certificate of insurance naming the City as an additional insured. The minimum liability coverage must be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including products liability if food vending. A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the City for review prior to issuance of the license.

A street regulatory license for street vending is wholly of a temporary nature and vests no permanent rights or interest in property. The City may reject an application and deny a license for health, safety, public welfare and other related reasons. An application expires after thirty (30) days of filing if the required information is not submitted to the City during the thirty (30) day period. The Director may grant an extension at his or her discretion. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.040 LOCATION REVIEW.

Upon receipt of an application for a license or license renewal, the Director shall review the location to determine if it is suitable for vending. In making this determination, the Director shall consider the following criteria:

(a)     A sidewalk vending unit is limited to one (1) assigned location.

(b)     No license shall be issued for a location within ten (10) feet of a driveway, wheelchair ramp, bus stop sign, or crosswalk at any intersection or any location which unreasonably interferes with the public’s or city’s use of the right-of-way. The location of the vending unit shall not reduce or obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk to less than five (5) feet to the nearest street trees, utility poles, traffic control signs and devices, parking meters, fire hydrants, buildings and other similar devices and structures. Such width shall be measured after including the dimensions of the cart, and any support equipment or accessories placed adjacent to the cart during operation. Furthermore, such placement shall be consistent with any applicable standards established by the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall not obstruct vehicular traffic or parking or the use of any crosswalk, wheelchair ramp, bus, or taxi zone.

(c)     The license operating area for a street vending unit must be within a commercial or industrial zone as such is defined in the Bremerton Zoning Code. A street vending unit shall not be licensed in areas where zoning on adjacent private property is classified as residential.

(d)     No license for a vendor shall be issued for a proposed vending site located within one hundred (100) feet of an existing vendor or retail store premises in which the license applicant’s product is the primary product of the existing vendor’s site or retail store without the written consent of said licensed vendor or retail store. This distance requirement shall not apply to applications for special events or festivals issued under a master use license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.36 BMC.

(e)     If a proposed vending site is located within two hundred (200) feet of a park or public school, the vendor must present written consent of the City’s Director of Parks and Recreation or the school district, respectively; if a proposed vending site is located within two hundred (200) feet of a private school, the vendor must present written consent of the administrator or manager of the private school. This distance requirement shall not apply to applications for special events or festivals issued under a master use license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.36 BMC.

(f)     The use of vending devices must be compatible with and must not unreasonably interfere with the public interest in use of the public ways as public rights-of-way.

(g)     In the event that two (2) or more applications for the same location are received, the earliest application, if approved, shall be awarded the location. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.050 HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS.

(a)     Vendors of food and beverages shall comply with all standards established by the Kitsap County Health District.

(b)     All sidewalk vending units in which food or beverage preparation occurs shall be inspected and approved by the City Fire Department to assure compliance of any cooking or heating apparatus with the following provisions:

(1)     Deep fat, oil, or grease cooking processes employing heated liquid shall be protected by a fire extinguishing system approved by the Fire Department. Processes involving heated fat, oil, grease, or liquids other than water shall be shielded from the public.

(2)     Processes requiring flammable gas, liquid, or solid fuels shall not be licensed, unless approved by the Fire Department. LPG containers shall be limited to no more than five (5) gallons capacity, and no more than one (1) container per cart or vendor display.

(3)     Storage of extra fuel is prohibited in the area of vending, or in any buildings, except as licensed by the Fire Department.

(4)     Vendors using open-flame cooking where steaks, hamburgers, sausages, hot dogs, or other products producing grease-laden vapors are cooked shall not be stationed beneath the awning or canopy of a building. Exception may be made when evidence is presented satisfying the Fire Department that no special threat is imposed to the building or awning by virtue of vendor location.

(5)     Pressure-cooking appliances shall be prohibited.

(6)     A fire extinguisher is required in all vending carts using open-flame cooking or cooking products producing grease-laden vapors. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.060 OPERATING CONDITIONS.

Any person with a valid regulatory license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions:

(a)     All vendors must display, in a prominent and visible manner, the license issued by the director under the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Food and beverages sold must be capable of immediate consumption.

(c)     The height of the vending unit, excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, which must be approved by the Director, shall not exceed five (5) feet.

(d)     The vending site must be clean and orderly at all times, and the vendor must provide a refuse container for use by patrons.

(e)     Soliciting or conducting business with persons in motor vehicles is prohibited.

(f)     No merchandise shall be displayed using street furniture (planters, street lights, trees, trash containers, etc.) or placed upon the sidewalk. In addition, sales of merchandise shall not be allowed from a vehicle. No use of any automatic coin-operated vending dispenser shall be allowed.

(g)     Vendors shall not hinder use of any phone booth, mailbox, parking meter, fire alarm, fire hydrant (including automatic sprinklers or standpipe connections), newspaper vending machine, waste receptacle, bench, transit stop, or traffic signal controllers.

(h)     Vendors shall obey any lawful order from a police officer or Fire Department official during an emergency or to avoid congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk.

(i)    No vendor shall make loud noises or use mechanical audio or noise-making devices or hawk to advertise his or her product.

(j)     No licensed sidewalk vending unit shall be left unattended on a sidewalk, nor remain on the sidewalk between midnight and 6:00 a.m.

(k)    Utility service connections are not licensed, except electrical, when provided by the owner of the abutting property. Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying in the pedestrian portion of the sidewalk.

(l)    Signs, banners and/or streamers may be attached to the vending unit for the purpose of advertising or identifying the vending unit, subject to approval of the abutting property owner (or representative or agent) and the director. As determined by the director, such signs, banners, and/or streamers shall be situated so as to not unreasonably obstruct views of neighboring property or create a public safety hazard. Advertising signs may be placed on the vending unit but are not licensed on the sidewalk or street area.

(m)    The footprint of the vending site is subject to the area constraints of the vending site location but in no event shall a vending site footprint exceed two hundred (200) square feet. A vending unit shall not exceed the vending site footprint. 

(n)    A vinyl or canvas umbrella or tent may be included as part of the vending site, but its open coverage may not exceed the vending site footprint. Any part of the umbrella or tent must have a minimum seven (7) feet of vertical clearance to the sidewalk. 

(o)    Vending units shall not be locked or chained to a parking meter, City street light post, tree, or other street fixture or furniture. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.070 LICENSE - RENEWALS.

Applications for renewal of a license may be filed for the same location, features of the cart and/or products (i.e., from food to flowers) as originally applied for. A renewal not applied for prior to the expiration of the existing license may not receive a renewal of the license. A vendor requesting renewal of a license for a business that has changed or proposes to change location, features of the cart and/or products since the last application/renewal must follow the requirements for a new application. 

There is no vested right to a renewal of regulatory license for street vending. The City may reject an application and deny a license for health, safety and other related reasons. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


5.08.080 LICENSE - REVOCATION.

A regulatory license for street vending is wholly of a temporary nature and vests no permanent rights or interest in property. The license may be revoked pursuant to BMC 5.03.070 at any time for good cause by the City upon thirty (30) days’ notice or without notice in case the use or occupation of the public place shall become dangerous or unsafe or upon failure to cure a notice of default. If the revocation is due to circumstances beyond the vendor’s control, then the license fee will be refunded on a prorated basis. In addition, the regulatory license will ordinarily be revoked under the following conditions:

(a)    The Kitsap County Health District withdraws approval or cancels necessary licenses;

(b)    The vendor violates any portion of the Bremerton Municipal Code;

(c)    The vendor misrepresents facts in the license application;

(d)    The Fire Department withdraws approval or cancels necessary licenses;

(e)    The vendor’s insurance in the amounts required by this chapter is not current and in force;

(f)    Upon the establishment of a retail store or a park or school as set forth in BMC 5.08.040(d) and (e) unless the required consent is provided. (Ord. 5140 §3 (part), 2011)


Chapter 5.12 TAXICABS 

Sections:

5.12.010    DEFINITIONS.

5.12.020    PURPOSE.

5.12.030    DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.

5.12.040    CERTIFICATES REQUIRED, TERM AND RENEWAL.

5.12.050    TAXICAB BUSINESS CERTIFICATE - APPLICATION.

5.12.060    OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES - OPERATIONS AND NOTIFICATION.

5.12.070    VEHICLE MAINTENANCE - INSPECTION.

5.12.080    VEHICLE DECAL - FEE.

5.12.090    NAME OF OWNER DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.

5.12.100    ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB BUSINESS CERTIFICATE.

5.12.110    TAXICAB DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE - APPLICATION.

5.12.120    ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.

5.12.130    DRIVER TO FURNISH RECEIPT ON DEMAND.

5.12.140    NO SMOKING IN TAXICABS.

5.12.150    CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS.

5.12.160    PENALTY.

5.12.170    CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES - DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION.

5.12.180    ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.

5.12.190    APPEALS.


5.12.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases used in this chapter mean as follows:

(a)    "Certificate holder" means any person as defined herein required to obtain a taxicab business certificate or a taxicab driver’s certificate under the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    "City" means the City of Bremerton.

(c)    "Compensation" means remuneration or anything of economic value that is provided, promised, or donated primarily in exchange for services rendered. This includes but is not limited to voluntary donations, fee-sharing between a taxicab association or transportation network company and an affiliated driver, or other similar consideration.

(d)    "Driver" means any person, whether agent, employee, contractor, subcontractor or lessee authorized to operate or physically engage in driving a taxicab carrying passengers or baggage for hire, whether or not such person is the owner of or has any financial interest in the ownership of such vehicle; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to drivers of motor vehicles operated by any municipal or privately owned, licensed nonprofit transit system.

(e)    "Operate" or "engage in the business of operating any taxicab" means the pickup and transportation of any fare-paying passenger or baggage from a point within the geographical confines of the City, whether or not the vehicle is dispatched from within any other municipal corporation, and whether or not the ultimate destination or route of travel is within the confines of the City; provided, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to taxicabs licensed by any other municipal corporation and transporting passengers from a point within the licensing municipality to a destination outside thereof, whether or not the ultimate destination or route traveled is within the City.

(f)    "Owner" means any person owning a taxicab and/or a taxicab business who is required to obtain certificates for taxicabs under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a business entity, "owner" includes all officers, directors, shareholders, general partners, limited partners and managing partners of the entity, all persons vested with authority to manage or direct the affairs of the legal entity or to bind the legal entity in dealings with third parties, and all persons who have any ownership interest.

(g)    "Person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, any unincorporated association, or legal entity. In the case of a business entity, "person" includes all officers, directors, shareholders, general partners, limited partners and managing partners of the entity, all persons vested with authority to manage or direct the affairs of the legal entity or to bind the legal entity in dealings with third parties, and all persons who have any ownership interest.

(h)    "Sightseeing vehicle" or "charter bus" means every motor vehicle held for public hire as a common carrier, used primarily for sightseeing purposes and generally over a fixed route for a stipulated consideration per trip.

(i)    "Special service vehicle" means a vehicle equipped to accommodate and which is used for the transportation of developmentally disabled persons as herein defined; the term "developmentally disabled" means any person who is physically or mentally disabled and who is transported by vehicle in a wheelchair.

(j)    "Taxicab," also known as a for-hire vehicle, means every motor vehicle held for public hire as a common carrier, usually for transportation of individuals, subject to call by the public generally or other form of solicitation; and the fare is based on an amount recorded and indicated on a taximeter, or on a special fare rate or contracted agreement, a flat rate or any other compensation for the transportation of individuals as defined herein. "Taxicab" includes sightseeing vehicles and special service vehicles. "Taxicab" does not include vehicles operated by or through a transportation network company as defined herein.

(k)    "Transportation network company (TNC)" means a person or entity that provides application dispatch services to connect TNC drivers with passengers for the transport of passengers. "Application dispatch services" is any technology that allows consumers to directly request, via the Internet or other means, dispatch of for-hire drivers for trips. (Ord. 5296 §1, 2016: Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.020 PURPOSE.

This chapter is an exercise of the City’s power to certify, control and regulate privately operated taxicab transportation services within the City. These regulatory purposes, without limitation, include protection of the public health, safety and welfare as it relates to taxicab transportation service within the City. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.030 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.

(a)    The examining of the qualifications of applicants to operate taxicab businesses and applicants to drive taxicabs, the certifying of taxicab businesses and taxicab drivers, and the enforcing of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police (hereafter referred to as "Chief"). All references to the "Chief" in this chapter shall include the Chief of Police and his or her designee.

(b)    The Chief is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of taxicabs consistent with the terms of this chapter.

(c)    The Chief shall have authority and discretion to interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.040 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED, TERM AND RENEWAL.

(a)    Owner. Any owner who engages in the business of operating any taxicab in the City must obtain a:

(1)    State of Washington for-hire certificate as required by RCW 46.72.070;

(2)    City general business license as required by Chapter 5.02 BMC; and

(3)    Taxicab business certificate as required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Driver. All taxicab drivers must obtain a taxicab driver’s certificate pursuant to this chapter.

(c)    It is unlawful for any owner to allow operation of its taxicab in the City without having first obtained the licenses and certificates required by this chapter and it is unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab without having first obtained a taxicab driver’s certificate as required by this chapter. Issuance or renewal of a general business license, taxicab business certificate and/or taxicab driver’s certificate required by this chapter is subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(d)    All certificates issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31st of each year. Certificates must be renewed by the certificate holder by making application therefor with the Chief by December 15th for the new certificate to be effective by the first of the succeeding year. Certificate renewal is subject to the Chief’s review in the same manner as the original application.

(e)    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to motor vehicles operated by any municipal or privately owned, licensed nonprofit transit system. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.050 TAXICAB BUSINESS CERTIFICATE - APPLICATION.

(a)    Applications. Applications for taxicab business certificates shall be made by the owner thereof upon forms to be furnished by the Chief.

(b)    For-Hire Certificate. Applicants must provide proof of any applicable valid state for-hire certificate or license.

(c)    Taxicab Business Certificate. The applications shall contain:

(1)    The full name and address of the owner;

(2)    The type of each vehicle and each vehicle’s passenger-carrying capacity;

(3)    The vehicle registration with the proper "cab" or "for-hire" endorsement;

(4)    Certificate of insurance pursuant to subsection (d) of this section;

(5)    Authorization for the Chief to review the applicant’s driving record and criminal history pursuant to BMC 5.12.150; and

(6)    Any other information deemed necessary by the Chief.

(d)    Insurance. Applicants shall submit a certificate of insurance to the City at the time of application with the following requirements:

(1)    Insurance coverage must comply with Chapter 46.72 RCW as now or hereafter amended. In addition, in the event the applicant leases its for-hire vehicles, the applicant shall file proof of insurance coverage of all of applicant’s lessees.

(2)    Such insurance coverage must name the City as an additional insured.

(3)    Such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect for the full period to be covered by the certificate, and failure to do so shall result in automatic suspension.

(e)    Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. A certificate may be denied, suspended, or revoked to any person or business, as provided in BMC 5.12.170. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014) 


5.12.060 OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES - OPERATIONS AND NOTIFICATION.

(a)    The owner must ensure the taxicab is being operated only by a driver who holds a valid taxicab driver’s certificate and a valid Washington State driver’s license.

(b)    The owner must provide the Chief with a list of all drivers prior to those drivers operating the owner’s taxicabs, whether the drivers are employees or lessees.

(c)    The owner must maintain a business address and a mailing address where the owner can accept mail, and a business telephone in working order that can be answered at least 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and during all hours of operation. The taxicab office or dispatch center may suffice for this requirement.

(d)    The owner shall comply with all requirements for taxicabs within this chapter.

(e)    The owner must notify the Chief within three (3) working days of learning of the following occurrences:

(1)    Any conviction or other final adverse finding, including diversion agreements resulting from criminal charges, received by the taxicab driver for any criminal offense;

(2)    Any vehicle accident required to be reported to the State of Washington involving any taxicab operated by the taxicab driver;

(3)    Any restriction, suspension, or revocation of the taxicab driver’s state motor vehicle driver’s license;

(4)    The hiring, leasing or termination of any driver of its taxicabs, whether employee or lessee; or

(5)    Any change in vehicles or registration of vehicles. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.070 VEHICLE MAINTENANCE - INSPECTION.

(a)    Each taxicab shall be equipped and maintained at all times by the owner for safety, cleanliness and lawful operation in accordance with the laws of the City and the state and shall be furnished with such equipment as the Chief shall deem necessary for such safe operation.

(b)    The Chief may perform an initial check of each taxicab prior to issuing a taxicab business certificate and a vehicle decal to ensure each vehicle has appropriate basic safety features and to confirm the vehicle identification number, and may perform similar annual checks of each taxicab.

(c)    No taxicab shall be issued a permit unless there is installed therein a taximeter capable of mechanically calculating the rates for hire; provided, that the Chief may, for good cause shown, waive the requirement for installation of the taximeters.

(d)    The taxicab owner shall maintain vigilance over such vehicle to see that it is kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use. The police department may inspect all taxicabs on the complaint of any citizen, or from time to time as may be deemed necessary. If the police department has cause to believe a taxicab is not in a condition safe for the transportation of passengers, the Chief may order an inspection by an independent certified mechanic at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.080 VEHICLE DECAL - FEE.

(a)    Upon completion of the appropriate form and payment of the fee set forth in subsection (c) of this section, and approval of the taxicab business application by the Chief, the Chief shall deliver to the applicant one (1) decal for each vehicle that will operate under the taxicab business certificate; the decal shall be of such size and form as may be prescribed by the Chief.

(b)    The vehicle decal shall be displayed on the rear bumper of each vehicle to the left of the license plate.

(c)    The decal fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC per annum for each taxicab issued a decal. In the case of decals issued on or after July 1st of each year, one-half of the annual fee shall be paid. Such decal shall not be transferable. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.090 NAME OF OWNER DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.

Every taxicab operating under the provisions of this chapter shall have the name of its owner plainly printed in letters at least two (2) inches in height in a conspicuous place on each side of the vehicle. When one (1) company or individual owns or operates multiple taxicabs, each taxicab shall display its owner’s name in uniform lettering. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.100 ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB BUSINESS CERTIFICATE.

(a)    Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements set forth in this chapter, including approval by the Chief, there shall be issued to the applicant a certificate by the Chief. Taxicab business certificates shall be issued for the calendar year.

(b)    The fee for a taxicab business certificate shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(c)    The certificate shall not be transferable. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.110 TAXICAB DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE - APPLICATION.

(a)    Applications. Applications for taxicab driver’s certificates shall be made by any driver of a taxicab upon forms to be furnished by the Chief. The operation of a taxicab is a privilege, not a right. An applicant or certificate holder’s ability to satisfy stated criteria for a taxicab business certificate does not create a right to a taxicab driver’s certificate.

(b)    Driver’s Certificate. Every person driving a taxicab must be certificated as such. Each applicant for a driver’s certificate shall:

(1)    Be licensed by the State of Washington to drive a vehicle;

(2)    Be twenty-one (21) years of age or over;

(3)    Be able to speak, read, and write the English language;

(4)    Operate the taxicab with due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of passengers;

(5)    Provide proof of insurance as required under state law if the driver will be a taxicab lessee not covered under the taxicab owner’s insurance;

(6)    Fill out upon a blank form to be provided by the Chief a statement giving his or her full name; address; age; height; color of eyes and hair; place of birth; whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor; whether the applicant has been previously licensed or certificated as a driver or chauffeur, and if so, when and where; whether his or her license or certificate has ever been suspended or revoked and for what cause; and any other information deemed necessary by the Chief; and shall sign and swear to such statement and file it with the Chief; and

(7)    Every applicant must file with their application two (2) recent photographs of himself or herself of a size designated by the Chief and which may be easily attached to his or her certificate, one (1) of which shall be so attached when issued; the other shall be filed with the application. The photograph shall be so attached to the certificate that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without probability of detection; and

(8)    Authorization for the Chief to review the applicant’s driving record and criminal history pursuant to BMC 5.12.150; and

(9)    Any other information deemed necessary by the Chief.

(c)    Denial, Suspension or Revocation. A taxicab driver’s certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked as provided in BMC 5.12.170. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.120 ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB DRIVER’S CERTIFICATE.

(a)    Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements set forth in this chapter, including approval by the Chief, there shall be issued to the applicant a certificate by the Chief, which shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the certificate holder. Taxicab driver’s certificates shall be issued for the calendar year.

(b)    The fee for a driver’s certificate shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(c)    The certificate shall not be transferable.

(d)    The certificate must be conspicuously displayed within the taxicab at all times the driver is operating the taxicab. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.130 DRIVER TO FURNISH RECEIPT ON DEMAND.

If demanded by the paying passenger, the driver in charge of the taxicab shall deliver to such passenger a receipt in legible type or writing containing the name of the owner, any items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid, and the date of payment. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.140 NO SMOKING IN TAXICABS.

Taxicab drivers must ensure that no person, including the taxicab driver, smokes cigarettes, e-cigarettes, vapor cigarettes, pipes, cigars, marijuana, or any other item within the taxicab. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.150 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS.

(a)    All applicants for a taxicab business certificate, including all owners as defined in BMC 5.12.010, and all applicants for a taxicab driver’s certificate, including all drivers as defined in BMC 5.12.010, must consent to be fingerprinted for criminal background checks. Pursuant to RCW 35.21.920, the Chief may request a state and nationwide background check of each applicant at the time of the applicant’s initial application and during each certificate renewal thereafter. The applicant shall submit fingerprints to the Washington State Patrol, who will then conduct a state background check and forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the nationwide background check. Applicants shall be assessed both a state and nationwide background check fee sufficient to cover the costs of the background checks. The criminal background check fee shall be nonrefundable and payable to the Washington State Patrol, at the time the background checks are requested and the fingerprints are provided. The applicant shall also be responsible for paying a fee for each fingerprinting as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(b)    Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate criminal background check fees, pursuant to RCW 35.21.920, the Washington State Patrol will compare the applicant’s fingerprints against its criminal database and submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a comparison with nationwide records. The results will be sent directly to the City for review. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.160 PENALTY.

In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided herein, any certificate holder, person, or business that violates any provision of this chapter is subject to the following:

(a)    Infraction. The following infractions shall be punishable by a civil penalty of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00).

(1)    Failure to obtain, renew, and/or maintain any certificates required by this chapter, other than a Washington State driver’s license.

(2)    To operate, or allow to be operated, a taxicab that does not have required insurance.

(3)    To operate, or allow to be operated, a taxicab that does not have required vehicle registration with the proper "cab" or "for-hire" endorsement.

(4)    To operate, or allow to be operated, a taxicab that does not have displayed a decal as specified in BMC 5.12.080.

(5)    For a taxicab driver to operate a taxicab without a valid taxicab driver’s certificate as specified in this chapter.

(6)    Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(b)    Misdemeanor.

(1)    Any second or subsequent violation of subsection (a) of this section within a six (6) month period shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2).

(2)    For a driver to operate a taxicab, or an owner to allow a driver to operate a taxicab, after the driver’s certificate has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2).

(3)    For an owner to allow operation of its taxicab after a taxicab business owner certificate has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2).

(4)    Operation of a taxicab by a driver without a valid Washington State driver’s license, or when the driver’s Washington State driver’s license is suspended, shall be a gross misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(1).

(c)    Each day for which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.170 CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES - DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION.

(a)    Generally.

(1)    Any application for the issuance or renewal of a taxicab business certificate or a taxicab driver’s certificate issued under this chapter may be denied, and any certificate issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked based on one (1) or more failures to comply with the requirements of this chapter or based on one (1) or more violations of the requirements of this chapter as well as the provisions set forth below.

(2)    The Chief shall have the power and authority to deny, suspend or revoke any certificate required under the provisions of this chapter. The Chief shall notify such applicant or certificate holder in writing by certified mail or personal service of the denial, suspension or revocation of his or her certificate application or certificate and the grounds therefor. The suspension or revocation of a certificate shall be effective as set forth in BMC 5.12.190. The denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate may be appealed pursuant to BMC 5.12.190.

(3)    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter may result in the denial or revocation of a general business license pursuant to BMC 5.02.180.

(b)    Taxicab Business Certificate. A taxicab business certificate may be suspended or revoked or an application denied, in the sole discretion of the Chief, if the applicant, certificate holder or any of its owners does any of the following:

(1)    Allows any person to drive a taxicab which is not in safe condition;

(2)    Allows a driver to operate owner’s taxicab when insufficiently covered by insurance under state law;

(3)    Makes any false statement on the application or omits information required on the application;

(4)    Owns a taxicab that is engaged in business at any time when its driver does not have a valid taxicab driver’s certificate;

(5)    Owns a taxicab that is engaged in business at any time when it does not have a proper or valid taxicab vehicle license or registration;

(6)    Operates or permits the operation of the taxicab while the driver is using or in possession of alcohol or controlled substances;

(7)    Falsifies or omits any record, document or information required to be kept or submitted to the City by this chapter, or by rule or regulation prescribed thereunder;

(8)    At any time fails to meet the qualifications for a taxicab business certificate under this chapter, in the discretion of the Chief;

(9)    Violates any of the ordinances of the City or laws of the state, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the certificate holder to offer public transportation;

(10)    Exhibits or has exhibited past behavior from which the Chief could reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder does not possess the skill, care or judgment necessary to operate a taxicab business with due regard for the safety of passengers and the public at large or does not possess the trust and honesty necessary in operating a taxicab business. In making this determination, the Chief may consider the following:

(i)    Whether the applicant, certificate holder or any owner has been convicted of violating any law or ordinance reasonably related to the applicant’s or certificate holder’s fitness or ability to operate a taxicab business, such as laws or ordinances pertaining to alcohol, controlled substances, prostitution, gambling, physical violence, fraud, larceny, extortion, theft, racketeering, or any crime of moral turpitude;

(ii)    Any other record and/or reputation as to the applicant or certificate holder being law-abiding;

(iii)    The applicant’s or certificate holder’s business experience and the nature and kind of occupation or business in which the applicant or certificate holder has previously been engaged;

(iv)    The manner in which an applicant or certificate holder has previously conducted business; or

(v)    Any other conduct exhibited by the applicant or certificate holder which would lead the Chief to reasonably conclude that the applicant, certificate holder or any owner is dishonest or immoral, or desires such certificate to enable said person or entity to engage in a dishonest, unlawful, or immoral act, practice or enterprise;

(11)    Violates any of the provisions of this chapter.

(c)    Taxicab Driver’s Certificate. Any driver of a taxicab may have his or her taxicab driver’s certificate suspended or revoked or an application denied, in the sole discretion of the Chief, if the driver:

(1)    At any time fails to meet the qualifications for a taxicab driver under this chapter;

(2)    At any time has his or her state motor vehicle driver’s license suspended or revoked during the time period covered by the certificate;

(3)    At any time drives a taxicab without insurance coverage as required under state law;

(4)    At any time uses or is found to be in possession or consumption of controlled substances or alcohol while in control of or while operating any taxicab;

(5)    At any time drives a taxicab without a valid taxicab driver’s certificate;

(6)    Makes any false statement in his or her application or omits information required on the application;

(7)    Fails, while operating or in control of a taxicab, to display identification or a decal with the information and in the manner and form required in this chapter;

(8)    At any time exhibits conduct which would lead the Chief to reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder does not possess the skill, care or judgment necessary to operate the taxicab with due regard for the safety, health, or welfare of passengers and the public at large;

(9)    At any time exhibits conduct which would lead the Chief to reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder does not possess the trust and honesty necessary in dealing with money and property of the public;

(10)    At any time exhibits conduct which would lead the Chief to reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder is immoral or desires such certificate to enable him to engage in an immoral act, practice or enterprise;

(11)    Exhibits or has exhibited past behavior from which the Chief could reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder does not possess the skill, care or judgment necessary to operate a taxicab with due regard for the safety of passengers and the public at large or does not possess the trust and honesty necessary in operating a taxicab. In making this determination, the Chief may consider the following:

(i)    Whether the applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of violating any law or ordinance reasonably related to the applicant’s or certificate holder’s fitness or ability to operate a taxicab, such as laws or ordinances pertaining to alcohol, controlled substances, prostitution, gambling, physical violence, fraud, larceny, extortion, theft, racketeering, or any crime of moral turpitude;

(ii)    Any other record and/or reputation as to the applicant or certificate holder being law-abiding; or

(iii)    Any other conduct exhibited by the applicant or certificate holder which would lead the Chief to reasonably conclude that the applicant or certificate holder is dishonest or immoral, or desires such certificate to enable said person or entity to engage in a dishonest, unlawful, or immoral act, practice or enterprise; or

(12)    Violates any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5296 §2, 2016: Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.180 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.

In lieu of or in addition to any enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the City Attorney or designee shall, at his or her discretion, have authority to file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the cure or abatement of any violation and the assessment and collection of penalties, fees and costs. (Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)


5.12.190 APPEALS.

(a)    Any applicant or certificate holder may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date that the denial, suspension or revocation notice was mailed to the applicant or certificate holder, appeal from such denial, suspension or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial, suspension or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the certificate, and may impose any terms thereupon.

(b)    No suspension or revocation of a certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect until fourteen (14) calendar days after service of the notice thereof by the Chief, and if an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Administrative Hearing Examiner. All certificates which are suspended or revoked shall be surrendered to the City on the effective date of such suspension or revocation.

(c)    Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, a suspension or revocation of a certificate shall become effective immediately when the Chief determines that such suspension or revocation is in the best interest of the health, safety and/or welfare of the public.

(d)    The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The applicant or certificate holder and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed, the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court.

(e)    When revoked, the certificate shall be canceled and immediately surrendered to the Chief. Upon revocation of any certificate as provided in this chapter, no portion of the certificate fee shall be refunded to the certificate holder.

(f)    Upon denial or revocation, the person whose application was denied or certificate denied or revoked shall not be granted a similar certificate, upon any new application that may be made, for a period of ninety (90) calendar days from date of denial or revocation and, further, no similar certificate shall be issued until such person cures any defaults that resulted in the denial or revocation. (Ord. 5296 §3, 2016: Ord. 5254 §1 (part), 2014)

 


Chapter 5.14 MASSAGE AND REFLEXOLOGY BUSINESSES

Sections:

5.14.010    TITLE AND PURPOSE.

5.14.020    DEFINITIONS.

5.14.030    GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.

5.14.040    LICENSURE OR CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.

5.14.050    MASSAGE OR REFLOEXOLOGY BUSINESS OWNER OR MANAGER TO ENSURE VALID LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION - VIOLATION.

5.14.060    DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION.

5.14.070    INSPECTION OF PREMISES BY CITY LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.

5.14.080    VERIFICATION OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION.

5.14.090    DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

5.14.100    ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.


5.14.010 TITLE AND PURPOSE.

The City of Bremerton ("City") recognizes the health and wellness benefits of massage and reflexology, and that massage and reflexology businesses in the City serve a legitimate and beneficial purpose in the community. 

The City also recognizes that there are some businesses that hold themselves out as massage or reflexology businesses, but employ unlicensed persons to provide massage or reflexology who fail to follow state health and licensing requirements, and do not have the proper training required to obtain a state license or certification. 

In addition, these businesses that employ unlicensed or uncertified persons to provide massage and reflexology are frequently used to facilitate the commission of various criminal acts, including but not limited to prostitution. 

Businesses that permit unlicensed or uncertified persons to perform massage and reflexology or permit the commission of unlawful acts threaten the business and reputation of legitimate and licensed businesses and therapists, and present a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 

This chapter is intended to inhibit the ability of an individual or business to engage in the practice of providing unlicensed massage and uncertified reflexology, support the legitimate provision of these services by licensed massage therapists and certified reflexologists, enable consumers to more easily identify licensed massage therapists and certified reflexologists, and regulate massage and reflexology businesses in the best interests of the community. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.020 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter, "certified reflexologist," "massage," "massage therapy," "massage business," "massage therapist," "reflexology," and "reflexology business" shall have the meanings set forth in RCW 18.108.010, adopted and incorporated herein by this reference, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.030 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.

It is unlawful to conduct, operate or maintain a massage or reflexology business as an owner or manager without first applying for, receiving and possessing a general business license pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.040 LICENSURE OR CERTIFICATION REQUIRED. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to practice or represent himself or herself as a massage therapist or reflexologist in the City without first applying for and receiving a license or certification to practice from the State Department of Health pursuant to RCW 18.108.030, adopted and incorporated herein by this reference, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. Failure to have a license or certification as required by this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.050 MASSAGE OR REFLOEXOLOGY BUSINESS OWNER OR MANAGER TO ENSURE VALID LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION - VIOLATION.

Any person who with knowledge or criminal negligence allows or permits the unlicensed practice of massage therapy or reflexology to be committed within his or her massage business or reflexology business by another is guilty of a misdemeanor for a single violation. Each subsequent violation, whether alleged in the same or in subsequent prosecutions, is a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.060 DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION.

A licensed massage therapist or a certified reflexologist must conspicuously display their credential in their principal place of business in accordance with RCW 18.108.045, adopted and incorporated herein by this reference, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended. If the licensed massage therapist or certified reflexologist does not have a principal place of business or conducts business in any other location, they must have a copy of their credential available for inspection to persons receiving massage or reflexology services or to a City law enforcement officer upon request while performing services within their authorized scope of practice. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.070 INSPECTION OF PREMISES BY CITY LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.

To the extent authorized by RCW 18.108.190, adopted and incorporated herein by this reference, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended, City law enforcement personnel shall have the authority to inspect the premises of any business where massages or reflexology services are provided. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.080 VERIFICATION OF LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION.

If a City official or City law enforcement officer has cause to believe that a massage license or reflexology certification is fraudulent, expired or not issued to a person who represents it to be their license or certification, the City official or City law enforcement officer may require verification of the license or certification. Verification includes, but is not limited to, a comparison of the license or certification with a government issued identification bearing the photograph and date of birth of the license or certification holder. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.090 DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION - PROCEDURE.

Any application for the issuance or renewal of a general business license issued under this chapter may be denied, or any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked, based on one or more violations of the provisions of this chapter or BMC 5.02.170. The procedures for denial, revocation, and appeal are set forth in BMC 5.02.180. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


5.14.100 ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT.

Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other remedy, the City may seek legal or equitable relief to enjoin any acts or practices which constitute or will constitute a violation of any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5373 §1 (part), 2019)


Chapter 5.16 TEMPORARY MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND MOBILE FOOD VENDORS

Sections:

5.16.010    DEFINITIONS.

5.16.020    LICENSE - REQUIRED.

5.16.030    LICENSE - TERMS.

5.16.050    LICENSE - INSPECTION.

5.16.060    SPECIAL CONDITIONS - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.


5.16.010 DEFINITIONS.

In construing the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applied.

(a)    "Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf.

(b)    "Peddler" means any person, either as agent, employee or principal, who carries goods, wares or merchandise of whatever nature or description or any person who offers services from house to house, building to building, or upon any street, highway or public place within the City for the purpose of selling such goods, wares or merchandise or solicitory orders for the same. Exempt from the meaning of this definition shall be newspapers.

(c)    "Temporary merchant" means and includes anyone who, with intent to engage temporarily, transiently or itinerantly in such business in the City, sells goods, wares or merchandise or offers services and has no permanent location within the City; provided, a farmer, gardener, or other person who sells, delivers or peddles any fruit, vegetables, berries, eggs or any farm produce or edibles raised, gathered, produced or manufactured by such person is exempt from requirements of this chapter.

(d)    "Vending of food from mobile unit" means a mobile unit travelling City streets for the purpose of selling edible merchandise. Exempt from the meaning of this definition shall be those mobile units used specifically for the delivering only of food pursuant to orders taken at an established place of business.

(e)    "Tax and Licensing Division" means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §16, 2017: Ord. 5158 §1 (part), 2011: Ord. 4162 §5, 1988; Ord. 4032 §1, 1986)


5.16.020 LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful to engage in business as a peddler or mobile food vendor in the City without first obtaining a regulatory license in addition to a business license. It is unlawful to engage in business as a temporary merchant without first obtaining a regulatory license. A temporary merchant regulatory license shall be issued in lieu of a business license and licensee shall be exempt from payment of City business and occupation taxes. Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §17, 2017: Ord. 5158 §1 (part), 2011: Ord. 4162 §5, 1988; Ord. 4032 §2, 1986)


5.16.030 LICENSE - TERMS.

(a)    Temporary Merchants. This license shall not exceed thirty (30) days in duration. A temporary merchant’s license will be issued only twice in a calendar year. If a temporary site is used for itinerant sales, it must be situated on private property. The site and any temporary structure, excluding motor vehicles and trailers, must be approved by the building official and planning and fire departments before license issuance.

(b)    Peddlers. The fee for a peddler’s license shall not be prorated for any part of a license year. The license must be carried by the vendor.

(c)    Mobile Food Vending. This license is required for each vehicle. The vehicle license plate number must be submitted and will be printed on the regulatory license. The license must be posted inside the vehicle. Vendors are responsible for notifying the City, in writing, of any license plate number changes. (Ord. 5158 §1 (part), 2011: Ord. 4368 §7, 1992; Ord. 4162 §5, 1988; Ord. 4032 §4, 1986)


5.16.050 LICENSE - INSPECTION.

Any person engaging in the business of peddling, temporary merchant or mobile vending, as defined in this chapter, who has obtained a license therefor from the Director, shall on demand by any police officer or business and occupations tax license official forthwith produce the same for inspection. (Ord. 5343 §18, 2017: Ord. 5158 §1 (part), 2011: Ord. 4032 §8, 1986)


5.16.060 SPECIAL CONDITIONS - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.

(a)    Vendors from mobile units shall not use radios or any other sound devices to attract public attention unless in accordance with Chapter 6.32 BMC.

(b)    A receptacle of adequate size shall be provided on such unit for the deposit of refuse.

(c)    The owner or operator of such mobile food vending unit shall fully comply with any and all federal, state and City laws regarding the purity of such food and the cleanliness of such unit.

(d)    A certificate of insurance naming the City as additional insured for general liability coverage and evidencing proof of automobile liability coverage shall be provided before license issuance and subsequently kept current.

(1)    The minimum general liability coverage shall be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit bodily injury and property damage and shall include products liability.

(2)    The minimum automobile liability coverage shall be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage.

(e)    Vending shall occur only on the curbside of the vehicle and shall not impede adjacent parking stalls if conducting business on a City right-of-way. 

(f)    Customer lines for service shall not impede pedestrian traffic nor shall they encroach into the roadway or interfere with vehicular traffic.

(g)    Mobile vending units shall not park in locations that will create site distance problems for traveling motorists.

(h)    No signs are allowed on areas adjacent to or outside the mobile vending unit. Signs are allowed on the immediate structure of the mobile vending unit.

(i)    Vendors shall obey all traffic laws and will comply with the Bremerton Municipal Code. (Ord. 5158 §1 (part), 2011: Ord. 4162 §5, 1988; Ord. 4032 §3, 1986)


Chapter 5.17 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION

Sections:

5.17.010    DEFINITIONS.

5.17.020    LICENSE REQUIRED.

5.17.030    LICENSE - APPLICATION.

5.17.040    CHARITY SOLICITATION LICENSE - TERMS.

5.17.050    PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISER LICENSE - TERMS.

5.17.060    LICENSE - GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.

5.17.070    BOOKS AND RECORDS.

5.17.090    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.


5.17.010 DEFINITIONS.

Whenever used in this chapter:

(a)    "Director" means the Director of Community Development of the City or any officer, agent or employee of the City designated to act on the Director’s behalf.

(b)    "Charitable" shall include recreational, health, social service, humanitarian, educational either actual or purported. "Charitable" shall not include "religious" or "religion" as commonly defined where the proceeds will be used solely for religious purposes as distinguished from educational, recreation, social service, health, humanitarian, or welfare.

(c)    "Charitable organization" shall mean any organization organized and operated for charitable, educational, or other purposes which is exempt from taxation pursuant to 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 

(d)    "Contributions" shall mean and include the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property, or donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.

(e)    "Cost of solicitation" shall mean all costs whatever nature incurred in raising the funds solicited, including costs of promotion.

(f)    "Costs of promotion" shall mean costs of all publications, goods and services sold, given away, or used as prizes in connection with the solicitation.

(g)    "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association, society, league, organization, or religious body and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other representative thereof.

(h)    "Professional fund raiser" also referred to as "promoter" shall mean a person who, for compensation, plans, promotes, conducts, manages, or carries on or attempts to plan, promote, conduct, manage or carry on any drive or campaign, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of soliciting contributions for or on behalf of any charitable organization or engages in the business of soliciting contributions for charitable purposes. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charitable organization shall not be deemed a professional promoter by reason of his participation by or on behalf of his employer.

(i)    "Solicit" and "solicitation" shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such will be used for a charitable purpose as hereafter defined. "Solicit" and "solicitation" shall include the following methods of requests, collections, or receipts:

(1)    Any oral or written request.

(2)    The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any chance, coupon, device, tax, emblem, ticket, book, card, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, advertising space, or other thing in connection with which an appeal is made for a charitable purpose or any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from such sale will be donated to or will go to a charitable purpose.

(3)    Bingo activities, raffles, and amusement games conducted under Chapter 9.46 RCW and applicable rules of the Washington State Gambling Commission are specifically excluded and shall not be deemed a solicitation under this chapter.

(j)    "Tax and Licensing Division" means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §19, 2017: Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any charitable organization, its members or employees, to solicit, collect or receive contributions in the City of Bremerton without first obtaining a regulatory "charity solicitation license." 

It shall be unlawful for any professional fund raiser to solicit, collect or receive contributions in the City where it is represented that the proceeds of such solicitations or any part thereof are to be used for a charitable purpose without first obtaining a regulatory "professional fund raiser license" in addition to a City business license.

Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §20, 2017; Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.030 LICENSE - APPLICATION.

In addition to the application requirements of Chapter 5.03, the following information shall be provided by the applicant for a "charity solicitation license" or "professional fund raiser license":

(a)    The purpose for which such solicitation or sale is to be made and an estimate of the total amount to be raised thereby.

(b)    The manner in which the solicitation will be conducted and an estimate of the cost of solicitation and the cost of promotion, if any, and of the net proceeds expected for the charitable purpose.

(c)    The time when such solicitations or sale shall be made, giving the preferred dates of the beginning and ending of such solicitations.

(d)    If a professional fundraiser is to be employed, a copy of the contract between the promoter and the charitable organization.

(e)    A certified copy of the resolution or other action authorizing the solicitation from the charitable organization.

(f)    The name(s) and address(es) of the person or persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations or sale shall be disbursed.

(g)    A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant in the City.

(h)    A statement to the effect that, if licensing is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the solicitation conducted thereunder by the City of Bremerton, any department, officer, or employee thereof.

(i)    Written verification of current registration and required bonding with the Secretary of State’s office pursuant to RCW 19.09. (Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.040 CHARITY SOLICITATION LICENSE - TERMS.

The license shall not exceed sixty (60) days. Each new solicitation given by or for a charitable organization will require separate application and licensing. If the charitable organization promotes and administers its own charitable solicitation, then a list showing the names of all solicitors and locations of the solicitations must be provided upon request. Each solicitor shall provide proper credentials identifying him/herself and the sponsoring charitable organization to those persons being solicited. (Ord. 4368 §8,1992; Ord. 4192 §1, 1989; Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.050 PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISER LICENSE - TERMS.

The license shall not exceed sixty (60) days. A list showing the names of all solicitors and locations of the solicitation must be provided to the Director. Each solicitor shall provide proper credentials identifying him/herself and the sponsoring charitable organization and the promoter to those persons being solicited. (Ord. 5343 §21, 2017: Ord. 4368 §10, 1992; Ord. 4192 §2, 1989; Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.060 LICENSE - GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.

The Director shall grant licensing under this chapter unless it is found that one (1) or more of the following facts exist:

(a)    That the applicant is or has engaged in fraudulent transactions or enterprises relating to soliciting charitable contributions.

(b)    That the solicitation on behalf of applicant would be a fraud upon the public. (Ord. 5343 §22, 2017: Ord. 4162 §6, 1988)


5.17.070 BOOKS AND RECORDS.

Every person receiving contributions for a charitable purpose shall give a signed, written receipt therefor. Every person managing or supervising the solicitation of contributions for charitable purposes shall maintain a system of accounting wherein all donations and disbursements are recorded and which shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times to the Director or such person as (s)he shall designate. (Ord. 5343 §23, 2017: Ord. 4162 §6, 1988).


5.17.090 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

All violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors. (Ord. 4162 §6, 1988).


Chapter 5.22 PUBLIC DANCES

Sections:

5.22.010    LICENSE - REQUIRED.

5.22.070    INTOXICATING LIQUOR.

5.22.080    EXCLUSIONS.


5.22.010 LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to conduct any public dance to which the general public is admitted without first having obtained a regulatory license in addition to a business license. Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §24, 2017: Ord. 4162 §8, 1988; Ord. 4045 §1, 1986)


5.22.070 INTOXICATING LIQUOR.

It is unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations to sell or permit to be sold or to in any way supply or permit to be supplied or allow to be consumed or possessed any intoxicating liquor on the premises subject to this chapter in violation of any Washington state liquor control regulation codified in RCW Title 66 or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 4045 §6, 1986)


5.22.080 EXCLUSIONS.

The provisions of this chapter, except 5.22.070 pertaining to intoxicating liquors, shall not apply to fraternal organizations conducting dances upon the premises occupied by them where admission is restricted to members of such orders and the families of members of such orders. (Ord. 4045 §7, 1986)


Chapter 5.36 SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

5.36.010    LICENSE - REQUIRED.

5.36.020    LICENSE - TERMS.

5.36.050    SPONSOR TO PROVIDE VENDOR LIST.

5.36.060    USE OF CITY STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.

5.36.070    COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.

5.36.075    INSURANCE REQUIRED.

5.36.080    NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK PARTY - EXEMPTION.


5.36.010 LICENSE - REQUIRED.

No person, firm, company, or corporation shall run, manage, operate, or conduct any circus, parade, carnival games/rides, street fairs, sidewalk sales, or other promotional activity within the City without first obtaining a regulatory license in addition to a business license. Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §25, 2017: Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4162 §12, 1988; Ord. 4046 §1, 1986)


5.36.020 LICENSE - TERMS.

The City reserves the right to charge any sponsor of a special event direct costs incurred by the City as a result of the event. Such costs may include the cost of barricading streets, plan reviews, or public safety involvement. (Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4368 §13, 1992; Ord. 4162 §12, 1988; Ord. 4046 §2, 1986)


5.36.050 SPONSOR TO PROVIDE VENDOR LIST.

The sponsor of the event will provide the Director of Community Development or designee with a list of all participating vendors at least three (3) days prior to the event. (Ord. 5343 §26, 2017: Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4046 §5, 1986)


5.36.060 USE OF CITY STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.

No person, firm, company, or corporation shall run, manage, operate, or conduct sidewalk sales, business activities or special events of any nature upon any sidewalk, street, highway, alley or other public property within the City, unless such activity is for the general public welfare and benefit. (Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4162 §12, 1988; Ord. 4046 §6, 1986)


5.36.070 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.

No license shall be issued to any person, firm, company or corporation to run, operate, conduct or manage any show, exhibition, game or other special event within the City which is in violation of any ordinance of the City or statute of the State of Washington. (Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4046 §7, 1986)


5.36.075 INSURANCE REQUIRED.

Any person, firm, company, or corporation receiving a license pursuant to this chapter shall provide a certificate of insurance with minimum liability coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) combined single limit bodily injury and property damage, including products liability if food and/or beverage vending is part of the special event or public amusement. The certificate of insurance shall name the City as an additional insured if the license is for an event held on City property. (Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 4162 §12, 1988)


5.36.080 NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK PARTY - EXEMPTION.

Neighborhood block parties are exempt from having to apply for and obtain a special event permit. However, in the event a neighborhood block party will require a street closure, an application for street closure must be applied for using the form and process similar to that used for street closures for special events and with such terms and conditions as established by the Director of Public Works and Utilities or designee ("Director"). The granting of a street closure is subject to the discretion of the Director. For the purpose of this section, neighborhood block party is defined as follows: Neighborhood block parties provide opportunities to connect with neighbors, celebrate, work on common projects, and strengthen community relationships. These events are held and attended by people living in the neighborhood surrounding the street; they are not intended to be open to the general public. (Ord. 5328 §1 (part), 2017)


Chapter 5.88 BURGLAR ALARMS

Sections:

5.88.010    NOTICE OF PERSONS TO CONTACT REQUIRED.

5.88.020    NOTIFICATION OF POLICE.

5.88.030    DEFINITIONS.

5.88.040    PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM - FEE - DISCONNECTION CONDITIONS.

5.88.050    FALSE ALARM - REPORT TO POLICE.

5.88.060    PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM - POLICE CHIEF DETERMINATION.

5.88.070    UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS AND EQUIPMENT.

5.88.080    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


5.88.010 NOTICE OF PERSONS TO CONTACT REQUIRED.

It is unlawful to have or maintain on any premises an audible-type burglary and/or robbery alarm unless there is posted at the main entrance to such premises a prominent notice of the current telephone number or numbers at which the person or persons authorized to enter such premises and turn off such alarm can be reached at all times. It is unlawful for any such person to fail to appear and turn off any such alarm within one (1) hour after being notified by the police to do so. (Ord. 4284 §1, 1990; Ord. 3899 §1, 1984)


5.88.020 NOTIFICATION OF POLICE.

It is unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery or burglary alarm for the purpose of summoning police except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary or robbery, or in the reasonable belief that such is occurring. It is unlawful to notify police of an activated alarm having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system or an employee error without at the same time notifying the police of such apparent malfunction. (Ord. 4284 §2, 1990; Ord. 3899 §2, 1984)


5.88.030 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

(b)    "False alarm" shall mean the activation of a burglary and/or robbery alarm at a time when no burglary or robbery is being committed or attempted to be committed.

(c)    "Unpreventable false alarm" shall mean a false alarm caused by power failures or interference unrelated to the operation of the owner’s business.

(d)    "Preventable false alarm" shall mean a false which is not an unpreventable false alarm, as provided in section (c). (Ord. 4284 §3, 1990; Ord. 3899 §3, 1984)


5.88.040 PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM - FEE - DISCONNECTION CONDITIONS.

For each first preventable false alarm resulting in a response by the Bremerton Police Department, in any one quarter (Jan-Mar/Apr-Jun/Jul-Sept/Oct-Dec), a fee pursuant to Chapter 3.01 shall be charged. If subsequent false alarms occur within that same quarter, a graduated fee schedule will be implemented, pursuant to Chapter 3.01 for subsequent false alarms in a calendar quarter. If subsequent false alarms result from the failure to take necessary corrective action as prescribed by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police may order the disconnection of such alarm system until such corrective action is taken; provided, that no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premise required by law to have an alarm system in operation. (Ord. 4730, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4677; Amended, 12/11/1999; Ord. 4284 §5, 1990; Ord. 3899 §5, 1984)


5.88.050 FALSE ALARM - REPORT TO POLICE.

Any person having or maintaining such burglary and/or robbery alarm shall within three (3) working days after notice by the police department at the scene of a false alarm, shall make a written report to the Chief of Police setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service man, and such other information as the Chief of Police may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and prescribe corrective action necessary. (Ord. 4284 §4, 1990; Ord. 3899 §4, 1984)


5.88.060 PREVENTABLE FALSE ALARM - POLICE CHIEF DETERMINATION.

The determination whether or not a false alarm was preventable shall be made by the Chief of Police or his designee. Any fee resulting from a determination that a false alarm was preventable shall be billed by the City Treasurer’s Office, and shall be deposited in the General Fund. (Ord. 4284 §6, 1990; Ord. 3899 §6, 1984)


5.88.070 UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS AND EQUIPMENT.

It is unlawful for any person having or operating a privately owned fire alarm system to have direct electrical mechanical, telephonic or other type of connection with the facilities of any office, branch, department or agency of the fire department, unless such person has and maintains a central station protective signaling system meeting the standards of the National Fire Protection Association dated June, 1956 (C.F. #234509), or for any person having or operating a privately owned burglary and/or robbery alarm system to have or maintain any equipment or device at or any direct connection with the facilities of any office, branch, department or agency of the police department; provided, That nothing herein shall prohibit the installation or use of regular private or business telephone lines for the reporting by any person of a fire, burglary or robbery. (Ord. 4284 §7, 1990; Ord. 3899 §7, 1984)


5.88.080 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Anyone convicted of a violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a civil infraction. (Ord. 4284 §8, 1990; Ord. 3899 §8, 1984)


Chapter 5.96 EROTIC DANCE STUDIOS

Sections:

5.96.010    PURPOSE.

5.96.020    DEFINITIONS.

5.96.040    CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.

5.96.050    LICENSE - REQUIRED.

5.96.060    LICENSE - RENEWAL.

5.96.070    DANCER’S LICENSE - REQUIRED.

5.96.080    DANCER’S LICENSE - TERMS - RENEWAL.

5.96.100    REGULATIONS.

5.96.110    INSPECTIONS.

5.96.130    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


5.96.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to regulate erotic dance studios to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such studios will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot, de facto, approach prohibition otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. This chapter represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity through the regulation of erotic dance studios versus the protected rights of erotic dancers and patrons. (Ord. 3958 §1, 1985)


5.96.020 DEFINITIONS.

In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(a)    "Dancer" means a person who dances or otherwise performs for an erotic dance studio and who seeks to arouse or excite the patrons’ sexual desires.

(b)    "Erotic dance studio" means place of business or establishment where one or more dancers or other live performers emphasize and seek to arouse or excite the patrons’ sexual desires.

It shall be prima facie evidence that a place of business or establishment is an erotic dance studio when one or more dancers or performers display or expose, with less than a full opaque covering, that portion of the female breast lower than the upper edge of the areola.

(c)    "Inspector" means business license inspector.

(d)    "Tax and Licensing Division" means the Tax and Licensing Division of the Department of Community Development. (Ord. 5343 §27, 2017: Ord. 4237 §2, 1989; Ord. 3958 §2, 1985)


5.96.040 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.

No person shall perform lewd acts as defined in BMC 9A.44.070. (Ord. 4237 §4, 1989; Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §4, 1985)


5.96.050 LICENSE - REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful to operate, maintain, or manage an erotic dance studio without first obtaining a regulatory license from the City in addition to a business license. Applications for regulatory licenses shall be filed with the Tax and License Division. (Ord. 5343 §28, 2017: Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §6, 1985)


5.96.060 LICENSE - RENEWAL.

In order to renew, the licensee shall reapply using application procedures and requirements set forth in Chapter 5.03. (Ord. 4368 §23, 1992; Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §6, 1985)


5.96.070 DANCER’S LICENSE - REQUIRED.

No person shall dance at an erotic dance studio without obtaining a dancer’s license issued by the City. (Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §8, 1985)


5.96.080 DANCER’S LICENSE - TERMS - RENEWAL.

A dancer’s license shall entitle a dancer to dance only at the business indicated on the license. In order to renew, the licensee shall reapply using application procedures and requirements set forth in Chapter 5.03. (Ord. 4368 §24, 1992; Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §8, 1985)


5.96.100 REGULATIONS.

(a)    No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance studio without a valid erotic dance studio license issued pursuant to this chapter.

(b)    No later than March 1st of each year, an erotic dance studio licensee shall file a verified report with the inspector showing the licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year.

(c)    An erotic dance studio licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers by the licensee.

(d)    No erotic dance studio licensee shall employ as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter.

(e)    No person under the age of eighteen years shall be admitted to an erotic dance studio.

(f)    An erotic dance studio shall be closed between two a.m. and eight a.m.

(g)    No erotic dance studio licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee.

(h)    An erotic dance studio licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter.

(i)    All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor.

(j)    No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron.

(k)    No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer.

(l)    No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer.

(m)    No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (Ord. 3958 §10, 1985)


5.96.110 INSPECTIONS.

All books and records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter shall be open to inspection by the City Attorney or agents thereof, during the hours when the erotic dance studio is open for business. The purpose of such inspection shall be to determine if the books and records meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3958 §11, 1985)


5.96.130 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4162 §22, 1988; Ord. 3958 §13, 1985)


Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION

Chapters:

6.02    PUBLIC NUISANCES

6.04    GARBAGE AND REFUSE

6.06    JUNK VEHICLES

6.08    NUISANCE VEGETATION

6.10    ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE

6.11    VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDING REGISTRATION

6.12    UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES

6.20    CARRYOUT BAGS

6.28    UNIFORM LITTER CONTROL CODE

6.32    NOISE LEVELS


Chapter 6.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:

6.02.010    PROHIBITED CONDUCT.

6.02.020    TYPES OF NUISANCES.

6.02.030    AUTHORIZED ACT NOT A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

6.02.040    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


6.02.010 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.

It is a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, create, maintain, or allow, upon any premises, any of the acts or things declared in BMC 6.02.020 to be a public nuisance. As used herein, "public nuisance" means a nuisance which affects equally the rights of an entire community or neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal. (Ord. 5147 §2 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4824, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 9.16.010)


6.02.020 TYPES OF NUISANCES.

Each of the following conditions, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the Director determines that any of these conditions exist upon any premises, the Director may provide for the abatement thereof and monetary penalties may be assessed pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC, Code Enforcement:

(a)    Erecting, maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain in or upon any premises, which may be viewed or smelled from without the premises, or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway or other public or private place in the City, any of the following disorderly, disturbing, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring, disease-causing places, conditions or things:

(1)    Any putrid, unhealthy or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins, the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, or waste parts of fish, vegetable or animal matter in any quantity; the carcass of any animal, manure, human urine and/or excrement, decayed waste or discarded food, meat, fish, animal or vegetable refuse or any putrid or offensive animal or vegetable matter; but nothing herein shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in approved appropriate covered receptacles; or

(2)    Any privies, vaults, cesspools, open containers of stagnant water, sumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies and rats, or which are malodorous; or

(3)    An accumulation of material including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, glass, plastic, ashes, scrap metal, wire, bric-a-brac, broken stone, broken crockery, broken glass, broken plaster, litter, rags, empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, mattresses, bedding, packing hay, straw or other packing material or building materials including lumber, plumbing materials, wallboard, sheet metal, plaster, brick, cement, asphalt, concrete block, roofing material, cans of paint and similar materials which are not properly stored or neatly piled or are offensive to a reasonable person or in which flies or rats may breed or multiply; or

(4)    Accumulation of any garbage and refuse as defined in Chapter 6.04 BMC; or

(5)    Accumulation of yard trimmings, excluding properly maintained yard compost, or other matter which is offensive to a reasonable person; except for such yard debris that is properly contained for the purpose of composting and concealed so as not to affect the health, safety or depreciation of adjoining property.

(b)    The existence of any fence or other structure on private property abutting or fronting upon any public street, sidewalk or place which is in a sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed or other dilapidated or unsafe condition.

(c)    The existence of wrecked or disassembled trailers, house trailers, boats, tractors or other vehicle, appliance or machinery of any kind, or any major parts thereof.

(d)    The existence on any premises of any abandoned or unused well, pit, shaft, cistern or storage tank without first demolishing or removing from the premises such storage tank, or securely closing and barring any entrance or trapdoor thereto or without filling any well, pit, shaft or cistern or capping the same with sufficient security to prevent access thereto.

(e)    The existence in a place accessible to children of any attractive nuisance dangerous to children, including but not limited to any abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerator, freezer, or other large appliance.

(f)    Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes people to gather in numbers sufficient to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. This subsection shall not apply to events, programs or parades authorized by the City.

(g)    Any poisonous or harmful substance which is reasonably accessible to persons or to animals.

(h)    Soils contaminated by dangerous waste, hazardous substances or hazardous wastes as those terms are defined in RCW 70.105.010.

(i)    Nuisance vegetation as defined in Chapter 6.08 BMC.

(j)    Lumber, wood, cardboard or other flammable material of any kind including, but not limited to, any hazardous materials or waste oil, gasoline or diesel products stored in such a manner as to constitute a fire or safety hazard.

(k)    Scrap metal, appliances, rubber, tools, implements, or parts or portions thereof, batteries, rope, rags, or plastic.

(l)    The maintenance of signs and/or sign structures relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on vacant commercial, industrial or institutional buildings or lots more than forty-five (45) days after the building becomes vacant or event or purpose for which the sign or structure was erected has passed.

(m)    Buildings or structures which are abandoned, vandalized, partially destroyed, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction or partial demolition in such a state as to constitute an attractive nuisance.

(n)    The failure to safely and completely close, maintain and secure all doorways, windows or other openings into vacant structures or to secure broken windows to secure the structure from unauthorized entry.

(o)    Every building or unit within a building used for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing, delivering, selling, storing or giving away any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW, and every building or unit within a building wherein or upon which such acts take place.

(p)    Unprotected and/or hazardous foundations and excavations.

(q)    Land or property which because of conditions on site (whether its natural state or as a result of grading, surface water drainage or acts of nature such as earthquakes, rain, landslides, sinkholes and so forth) presents problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, including to adjacent property owners.

(r)    The existence of any graffiti. As used in this subsection, “graffiti” means the writing, drawing, or script located on any public or private buildings, structures, places, walls, fences, windows, signs or other open printable spaces which damages or defaces the structure or other surface and which is visible from any public right-of-way or public property. (Ord. 5147 §2 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4824, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 9.16.020)


6.02.030 AUTHORIZED ACT NOT A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of a statute or ordinance can be deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 5147 §2 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4824, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 9.16.030)


6.02.040 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.12.020(2) BMC.

(c)    As an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter, pursuant to a violation of BMC 6.02.020(o), abatement proceedings may be instituted under Chapter 7.43 RCW. (Ord. 5147 §2 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4824, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 9.16.040)


Chapter 6.04 GARBAGE AND REFUSE

Sections:

6.04.010    TERRITORY INCLUDED.

6.04.020    MANDATORY COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.

6.04.030    DEFINITIONS.

6.04.040    ACCUMULATION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.

6.04.050    UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.

6.04.055    DIVERSION OF RECYCLABLES.

6.04.070    TIME OF COLLECTION.

6.04.080    SEPARATION OF REFUSE.

6.04.090    APPEALS.

6.04.120    PAYMENT OF CHARGES.

6.04.130    SCHEDULE OF FEES.

6.04.160    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


6.04.010 TERRITORY INCLUDED.

This chapter shall apply to all territory included within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 1905 §1, 1950)


6.04.020 MANDATORY COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.

The maintenance of health and sanitation require, and it is the intention hereof, to make the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and refuse within the City mandatory. Property with existing residential uses annexed to the City after January 1, 2007, to which mandatory collection is not being provided on the date of annexation, are exempt from mandatory collection unless ordered to obtain service by the City Hearing Examiner in a code enforcement proceeding due to public health and safety concerns. This annexation exemption applies until such time as title to the property is transferred to a new owner. (Ord. 5000 §1, 2007: Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 1905 §2, 1950)


6.04.030 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Refuse" includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, swill and all other nonputrescible and putrescible wastes except sewage, from all public and private establishments and residences.

(b)    "Garbage" includes all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but not including recognized industrial by-products, and shall include all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.

(c)    "Rubbish" includes all nonputrescible wastes, including, but not limited to:

(1)    Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment, appliances and furnishings, and personal belongings;

(2)    Salvage materials and automobile parts, including, but not limited to, tires, wheels, engine parts, body parts, interior parts and auto glass; and

(3)    Abandoned, broken or neglected equipment and machinery.

(d)    "Ashes" includes the solid waste products of coal, wood and other fuels used for heating and cooking from all public and private establishments and from all residences.

(e)    "Swill," as used in this chapter, includes every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, and vegetables, except coffee grounds.

(f)    "Health Officer" means an enforcement officer of the Kitsap County Health District.

(g)    "Cans" means strong, watertight, not easily corrodible, rodent-proof, insect-proof containers of the type normally manufactured and used to contain garbage and shall have two (2) handles at the sides thereof and a tight-fitting, fly-proof, insect-proof lid of solid construction.

(h)    "Mini cans" means cans of no more than twenty (20) gallons capacity in volume nor forty (40) pounds in weight, including contents.

(i)    "Standard trash cans" means cans of no more than thirty-two (32) gallons or four (4) cubic feet of capacity nor sixty-five (65) pounds in weight, including contents.

(j)    "Yard waste" means grass clippings, leaves, loose plant material, and branches or sticks four (4) inches in diameter or less and four (4) feet or less in length. Yard waste shall not include any substance otherwise within this definition that has been contaminated by hazardous waste, fecal matter, or any other substance that will inhibit the natural decomposition of the yard waste. (Ord. 4823, Amended, 11/05/2002; Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 4250 §1, 1989; Ord. 1905 §3, 1950)


6.04.040 ACCUMULATION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.

(a)    It shall be the duty of every person who owns or is in possession, charge, or in control of any dwelling, flat, roominghouse, group home, apartment house or other multi-residential unit, hospital, school, hotel, club, restaurant, boarding house, or eating place, or who owns or is in possession, charge or control of any shop, place of business or manufacturing establishment where garbage, refuse, or swill is created or accumulated, at all times to keep or cause to be kept portable appurtenances, metal or other approved containers in sufficient numbers, for the deposit therein of garbage, refuse, and recyclables, and to deposit or cause to be deposited the same therein. Upon request, the garbage collector may provide a solid waste container larger than the standard garbage container that may be suitable for automated pick up. Yard waste may be collected at the place where garbage containers are left, in containers or bundled so that they will not be scattered by the wind or tipping over of the container and can be easily picked up by the collector.

(b)    The lids on garbage containers shall not be removed, except when necessary to place garbage and refuse in such cans or take the same therefrom. When garbage and refuse is placed therein or taken therefrom, such lid shall be securely replaced by the person placing the same therein or taking the same therefrom. Such containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition with the outside thereof clean and free from accumulative grease and decomposing material. Each container shall be kept in a place easily accessible to the garbage truck on collection day and shall be removed from the City right-of-way between collection days. The property owner and occupant is responsible for ensuring that the lids are properly secured on the containers and that said containers are removed from the right-of-way between collection days.

(c)    Each garbage can shall be kept clean inside and out so that no odor nuisance shall exist.

(d)    In the case of isolated dwellings or places of business located in sparsely settled portions of the City, or where reasonable access cannot be made by truck, garbage and refuse therefrom may, upon special arrangement with the garbage collector, be otherwise collected, removed and disposed of. Garbage and swill shall not be disposed of upon private premises by incineration.

(e)    Large suitable containers for collection of both garbage and refuse may, with the approval of the collector, be used by hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, eating places, apartment houses and other multi-residential units, schools and hospitals, and in the business district.

(f)    Except as provided in BMC 6.04.020, it shall be the duty of every person to cause garbage and refuse to be removed and disposed of only by the garbage collector; provided, however, that items that will not fit within a garbage container may be transported by the owner thereof to a County-approved disposal site for disposal. 

(g)    It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any dead animal or upon whose premises the same may be located to forthwith cause the same to be removed and properly disposed of by Animal Control and to pay the required disposal fee. (Ord. 5000 §2, 2007: Ord. 4823, Amended, 11/05/2002; Ord. 4528 §1, 1995; Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 1928 §§2-4, 1951; Ord. 1905 §5, 1950)


6.04.050 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.

(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, deposit, or in any manner to cause, permit or allow the disposal of refuse upon any street, alley, public place or private property within the City, otherwise than as provided in this chapter.

(b)    It shall be unlawful to dump, place, bury, deposit or thrown any garbage, oil, grease, offal, yard waste or other refuse on the water, tidelands or beaches within the City, upon public property or private property of another or to dispose of such garbage, oil, grease, offal, yard waste, brush, tree stumps, branches, tree cuttings, or other refuse in such a manner so as to allow the same to enter the City’s water, waste water or stormwater discharge system or as prohibited by BMC 15.02.210 or 15.03.210.

(c)    It shall be unlawful to dispose of garbage or refuse by placing such garbage or refuse into a garbage collection container which another person owns or pays for the use of without that person’s express consent. (Ord. 4823, Amended, 11/05/2002; Ord. 4486 §1, 1994; Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 4250 §2, 1989; Ord. 1905 §6, 1950)


6.04.055 DIVERSION OF RECYCLABLES.

No person may divert to personal or commercial use any recyclable material placed in a container as part of a recycling program, without the consent of the generator of such recyclable material or the solid waste collection company operating under contract with the City. (Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993)


6.04.070 TIME OF COLLECTION.

The garbage collector shall collect, remove and dispose of all garbage and refuse in the residential sections of the City at least once each week; and from all other places as often as shall be found necessary, but not less than once a week. All places of business shall have their garbage removed as frequently as may be necessary to avoid the creation of a nuisance or the violation of any ordinance, regulation or law, but in no event less than once a week with at least twenty-four (24) hours between collections; provided, however, that a dispute over the frequency of collection determined to be appropriate by the garbage contractor may be appealed pursuant to BMC 6.04.090. (Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 1928 §5, 1951; Ord. 1905 §8, 1950)


6.04.080 SEPARATION OF REFUSE.

The City reserves the right to and may have option to require the separation of paper or swill or other component parts of garbage, and may require the deposit and/or storage thereof in separate cans or receptacles or other hard-sided closed containers, and may prescribe the methods of disposal thereof. (Ord. 4823, Amended, 11/05/2002; Ord. 1905 §9, 1950)


6.04.090 APPEALS.

Determinations made by the garbage contractor regarding the frequency of collection or the size of solid waste containers required of the public may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner. (Ord. 4547, Amended, 03/28/1996; Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993)


6.04.120 PAYMENT OF CHARGES.

The charges for garbage and refuse collection and disposal shall be compulsory and universal. Said charges shall be billed and collected by the garbage collector at his own cost. Every occupant of the property and every owner of the property for which garbage and refuse collection and disposal services are rendered shall be responsible for and shall pay, without delinquency, all charges therefor. The charges shall be paid to the garbage collector at his office by the person or persons responsible and shall be paid not later than thirty (30) days after the billing therefor is mailed, and if not so paid, the charges shall be deemed delinquent. In the event of delinquency, any such charge or charges shall be a lien against the property for which the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse was rendered. Such a lien shall be prior to all other liens and encumbrances filed subsequent to the filing with the County Auditor of Kitsap County of such notice of lien except liens for general taxes and local improvement assessments, provided notice of such lien is given as provided by law. Interest shall accrue upon delinquent accounts at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) or one (1) percent per month whichever is greater, until fully paid. Billings for account shall be mailed to the person or tenant in possession unless special instructions to the contrary are received from the owner. (Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 3116 §1, 1974; Ord. 1928 §6, 1951; Ord. 1905 §13, 1950)


6.04.130 SCHEDULE OF FEES.

The fees to be charged by the contractor for its garbage and refuse collection services to the residents of the City shall be fixed by contract, and shall be included in and be a part of any agreements or contracts between the City and the contractor. Fees shall be based upon the volume or weight of garbage or refuse and the distance from a public thoroughfare of said garbage or refuse. Where a requested collection is of such an unusual size, or at some time other than when regular collections are made of the premises, a special charge based on the extra expenditure of labor and equipment shall be set by the garbage collector based upon schedules established by the contract. (Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 3116 §1, 1974; Ord. 1928 §6, 1951; Ord. 1905 §13, 1950)


6.04.160 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of BMC 6.04.040, 6.04.050 and 6.04.080 constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of BMC 6.04.040, 6.04.050 and 6.04.080 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 4823, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 4464 §1, 1994; Ord. 4431 §1 (in part), 1993; Ord. 1905 §18, 1950)


Chapter 6.06 JUNK VEHICLES

Sections:

6.06.010    PURPOSE.

6.06.020    DEFINITIONS.

6.06.030    PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.

6.06.040    EXEMPTIONS.

6.06.050    ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF JUNK VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.

6.06.060    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

6.06.070    RULES AND PROCEDURES.


6.06.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the character and safety of the City’s neighborhoods by eliminating as nuisances, junk vehicles from private property, and to provide procedures for the removal of junk vehicles as authorized by RCW 46.55.240. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.020 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

"Director" means the director of the department in charge of code enforcement or his or her designee or any designated alternate who is empowered by ordinance or by the Mayor to enforce this chapter including assigned code enforcement officials.

"Junk vehicle" means a vehicle meeting at least three (3) of the following requirements (RCW 46.55.010(4)):

(a)    Is three (3) years old or older;

(b)    Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to any of the following: a broken window or windshield or missing wheels, tires, motor or transmission;

(c)    Is apparently inoperable;

(d)    Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the approximate value of the scrap in it.

"Landowner" means an owner of private property, or a person in possession or control of private property. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.030 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.

All junk vehicles certified as such by a law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer designated by the Director according to RCW 46.55.230 and found on private property are declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to removal, impoundment and disposal. It is unlawful for any individual firm, entity or corporation to allow, cause to allow or place a junk vehicle on any premises. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.040 EXEMPTIONS.

(a)    A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(b)    A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler or licensed vehicle dealer and is fenced according to the provisions of RCW 46.80.130. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.050 ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF JUNK VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(a)    Voluntary Correction. Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that a vehicle is a public nuisance and in violation of this chapter, a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure voluntary correction from the landowner and the vehicle’s registered owner.

(b)    Issuance of Notice of Civil Violation. If the code compliance officer does not obtain voluntary correction of the public nuisance, the officer may issue a notice of civil violation to the landowner of record and the vehicle’s last registered owner of record in accordance with the provisions of BMC 1.04.040.

(c)    Content. For violations of this chapter, the notice of civil violation shall contain the following information:

1.    The name and address of the landowner of record upon whose property the vehicle is located;

2.    The name and address of the vehicle’s last registered owner of record provided license or vehicle identification numbers are available;

3.    The vehicle description including: the license plate number and/or the vehicle identification number; the model year; the make; and the factors which render the vehicle a public nuisance;

4.    The street address of a description sufficient for identification of the property where the vehicle is located;

5.    The required corrective action and a date and time by which the correction must be completed;

6.    The date, time and location of a hearing before the Hearing Examiner on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance which will be at least ten (10) days from the date the notice is issued;

7.    A statement indicating that the hearing will be canceled and no monetary penalty will be assessed if the required corrective action is completed at the time requested for compliance prior to the scheduled hearing;

8.    A statement indicating that the City may remove, impound and dispose of the vehicle, and assess all costs and expenses of administration, removing, impounding and disposing of the vehicle against the landowner or the registered owner as ordered by the Hearing Examiner; and

9.    A statement that a monetary penalty pursuant to BMC 1.04.040(b) in an amount per day for each violation shall be assessed against the landowner and/or the vehicle’s registered owner as specified and ordered by the Hearing Examiner in accordance with BMC 1.04.040.

(d)    Service of Notice. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, with a fifteen (15) day return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

(e)    Landowner Responsibility Disclaimer. The landowner may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement prior to the hearing, to deny responsibility for the vehicle’s presence on the property. If the Hearing Examiner determines that the vehicle was placed on the property without the landowner’s consent and that the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the costs and expenses of administration, removing, impounding and disposing of the vehicle shall not be assessed against the landowner or otherwise attempted to be collected from said landowner.

(f)    Removal by the City. Pursuant to the Hearing Examiner’s orders, the vehicle or part thereof may be removed at the request of a law enforcement officer; the City may use any lawful means to cause the vehicle to be removed from the private property and disposed of to a licensed motor vehicle wrecker or hulk hauler or scrap processor, with notice to the Washington State Patrol and the Washington Department of Licensing that the vehicle has been wrecked.

(g)    Recovery of Costs and Expenses.

1.    The costs of removal and disposal shall be assessed against the last registered owner if the identity of the owner can be determined unless the owner in the transfer of ownership complied with RCW 46.12.650, or against the landowner of record of the property on which the vehicle is stored, or both. If both the owner of the vehicle and the landowner are assessed the costs of removal, then liability for the costs shall be their joint and separate obligation.

2.    The costs of administration and of removal and disposal of the vehicle may be recovered pursuant to BMC 1.04.090(b).

(h)    Conflict of Provisions. The notice and related requirements of this section are intended to supplement those of BMC 1.04.040; however, should a conflict exist, the provisions of this section shall prevail. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.060 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil violation as provided for in Chapter 1.04 BMC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


6.06.070 RULES AND PROCEDURES.

The applicable department director in charge of enforcement of this chapter may adopt such rules as may be necessary to effectively implement and administer this chapter. (Ord. 5147 §3 (in part), 2011)


Chapter 6.08 NUISANCE VEGETATION

Sections:

6.08.010    PURPOSE.

6.08.020    NUISANCE DECLARED.

6.08.030    EXEMPTIONS.

6.08.040    NOTICE TO REMOVE.

6.08.050    SERVICE OF NOTICE.

6.08.060    HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL.

6.08.070    COST OF REMOVAL.

6.08.080    LIEN.

6.08.090    FAILURE TO REMOVE - PENALTY.

6.08.100    ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT.


6.08.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter is an exercise of the City’s police power to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to provide enforcement, abatement and collection of abatement expenses by the City. This chapter shall be enforced for the benefit of the general public, not for the benefit of any particular person or class of persons.

It is the intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon the owner or occupant or other person in control of the property within the scope of this chapter and not to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers, officials or employees which would subject them to damages in a civil action. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4822, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4584, Added, 02/28/1997. Formerly 9.14.005)


6.08.020 NUISANCE DECLARED.

(a)    The owner or occupant or other person in control of any property within the City shall remove or destroy all trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or any parts thereof, which overhang any sidewalk at a clearance height of less than eight (8) feet or street at a clearance height of less than sixteen (16) feet or which are situated on the property or on the portion of the street or sidewalk abutting thereon in such manner as to obstruct or impair the free and full use of the sidewalk or street, including the interruption or interference with the clear vision of pedestrians or persons operating vehicles thereon, or interfering with sidewalks, streets, poles, wires, pipes, fixtures or any other part of any public utility situate in the street.

(b)    It is unlawful and a nuisance for the owner or occupant or other person in control of real property, including any unimproved planting strips, right-of-way or similar area abutting and adjacent to such real property, to allow, continue or maintain the following vegetation:

(1)    Grass and weeds exceeding twelve (12) inches in height except in areas maintained for domestic livestock.

(2)    Shrubs, brush, vines, trees or other vegetation growing or which has grown and died, cut vegetation, blackberry vines, and organic debris, which constitutes a fire hazard, or provides a harborage for rats, rodents or horticultural pests or otherwise constitutes a health hazard.

(3)    Noxious and poisonous plants, including poison ivy, poison oak, poison hemlock, poison sumac, nettles and nightshade.

(4)    Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4822, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §1, 1959. Formerly 9.14.010)


6.08.030 EXEMPTIONS.

The following are exempt from the application of BMC 6.08.020(b):

(1)    Undeveloped publicly owned watershed lands.

(2)    Private property designated as open space land, farm and agricultural land and timberland under Chapter 84.34 RCW and taxed at current use assessment.

(3)    Wetlands and critical areas designated for protection under the Growth Management Act, Chapter 36.70A RCW.

(4)    Parcels of land greater than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet, provided the perimeter fifty (50) feet of these parcels must be maintained in compliance with BMC 6.08.020. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4584, Added, 02/28/1997. Formerly 9.14.018)


6.08.040 NOTICE TO REMOVE.

Whenever in the opinion of the code enforcement officer any trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation or parts thereof should be removed or destroyed for any of the reasons set forth in BMC 6.08.020, he or she shall cause a notice to be served on the owner or occupant or other person in control of the property in the manner hereinafter set forth. Such notice shall describe the property involved and the condition to be corrected and shall require that the owner or occupant or other person in control of the property cause the condition to be corrected within such period of time as shall be designated in the notice. The notice shall further provide that if the condition is not corrected within the time specified, that after the termination of such period of time and on a date specified in the notice, a resolution will be presented to the City Council to provide for the removal or destruction of the trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation or parts thereof, and the cost of that removal or destruction become a charge against the owner and a lien against the property. Additionally, when enforcement of this chapter is pursued pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC, the owner or occupant or other person in control of the property are subject to the enforcement provisions and remedies set forth therein. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4822, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §2, 1959. Formerly 9.14.020)


6.08.050 SERVICE OF NOTICE.

The notice provided for in BMC 6.08.040 shall be served by delivering the notice pursuant to requirements for service of notice set forth in Chapter 1.04 BMC. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4822, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §3, 1959. Formerly 9.14.030)


6.08.060 HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL.

If the conditions described in the notice have not been corrected prior to the time specified therein, as authorized by RCW 35.21.310, a resolution shall be presented to the City Council on the date designated in the notice therefor, which resolution shall provide that the department of the City named therein shall after the date set therein forthwith cause the removal or destruction of the vegetation, or any part thereof, as specified or complained of in the notice. Upon introduction of the resolution, the owner shall be entitled to be heard and to show cause, if any, why the vegetation or such part thereof should not be removed or destroyed. The finding of the City Council determining that the vegetation described in the notice is or is not a nuisance shall be conclusive. If the City Council finds that the same is a nuisance and the owner has appeared at the hearing thereon, the owner may in the discretion of the Council be given such additional time as may be specified by the Council to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §4, 1959. Formerly 9.14.040)


6.08.070 COST OF REMOVAL.

Whenever, after authorization by resolution of the City Council, any trees, plants, shrubs or vegetation, or parts thereof, are removed or destroyed, the department causing the removal or destruction thereof shall keep an accurate record of the necessary costs, including administrative charge, and shall become a charge against the owner and a lien against the property as authorized by RCW 35.21.310, as now or hereafter amended. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4627, Amended, 07/02/1998; Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §5, 1959. Formerly 9.14.050)


6.08.080 LIEN.

Notice of the lien herein authorized shall as nearly as practicable be in substantially the same form, filed with the same officer within the same time and manner and enforced and foreclosed as is provided by law for liens for labor and material. (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §6, 1959. Formerly 9.14.060)


6.08.090 FAILURE TO REMOVE - PENALTY.

The owning or maintaining of any trees, plants, shrubs, vegetation or parts thereof, in the manner described in BMC 6.08.020 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter by failing to abate such nuisance within the time specified in the notice herein before described or within the time set by resolution of the City Council, whichever time may be later, shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 2364 §7, 1959. Formerly 9.14.070)


6.08.100 ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    In lieu of conducting a hearing, the City Council may, by resolution, forward any violation of this chapter to Chapter 1.04 BMC for enforcement.

(b)    In lieu of and as an alternative to a hearing and Council resolution as provided for in this chapter, any violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced as a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(c)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5147 §4 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4822, Added, 11/15/2002. Formerly 9.14.080)


Chapter 6.10 ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE

Sections:

6.10.010    PURPOSE.

6.10.020    DEFINITIONS.

6.10.030    ADMINISTRATION.

6.10.040    MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.

6.10.050    RESPONSIBLE PERSON - LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGER.

6.10.060    LENDER INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION.

6.10.070    MONTHLY INSPECTIONS.

6.10.080    MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.

6.10.090    SECURING AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS.

6.10.100    VACANT PROPERTIES NOT ABANDONED.

6.10.110    TIME TO REMEDY FOLLOWING INSPECTION.

6.10.120    ADDITIONAL MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY.

6.10.130    ENFORCEMENT.

6.10.140    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


6.10.010 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose and intent of the Bremerton City Council to establish an abandoned real property registration program to protect the community from becoming blighted as a result of vacant properties that are abandoned and not properly secured and maintained. Abandoned properties are deemed to be a public nuisance. This chapter requires that abandoned properties be properly maintained by the owners, lenders, and other responsible persons. Through the registration process, lenders who have an interest in real properties within the City that are vacant and have been abandoned by the owners are required to maintain and secure these properties. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.020 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

"Abandoned" means a property that is vacant and (1) is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale; (2) is the subject of a pending tax assessor’s lien sale; (3) has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; or (4) has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

"Accessible" means a property that is accessible through a compromised/ breached gate, fence, wall, or similar condition or a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.

"Beneficiary" means a lender or holder of a note secured by a deed of trust.

"Borrower" means any owner as defined in this section who becomes obligated on a real estate loan agreement, either directly or indirectly, and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagors, vendees under conditional land sales contracts and grantors under trust deeds.

"City" means City of Bremerton.

"Days" means consecutive calendar days.

"Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan and often used in Washington instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed or third trust deed.

"Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale" means a recorded document that transfers ownership of property from the borrower to the lender in lieu of foreclosure including, but not limited to, a trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

"Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary, or conditional.

"Director" means the Director of Community Development or authorized designate thereof.

"Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant and not occupied by authorized persons. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk, and/or debris; statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant; and for residential properties, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation.

"Foreclosure" means the foreclosure process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction, deed of trust foreclosure or a judgment is obtained to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults.

"Lender" means any person who makes, extends, or holds a real estate loan agreement and includes, but is not limited to, mortgagees; beneficiaries under deeds of trust; underwriters under deeds of trust; vendors under conditional land sales contracts; trustees and a successor in interest to any mortgagee, beneficiary, vendor or trustee and any other lien holder on the property. The term also includes any mortgagee, beneficiary or trustee that accepts a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 

"Local" means within Kitsap County.

"Notice of default" means a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale.

"Out of area" means outside Kitsap County.

"Owner" means any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity having legal title in real property including any borrower as defined in this section.

"Property" means any unimproved or improved, residential or commercial real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City, and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition.

"Responsible person" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or any interest in any real property, including but not limited to an owner, borrower, and lender as defined in this section.

"Securing" or "secure" means such measures as may be directed by the Director that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates and the repair, replacement or boarding of doors, windows, and/or other openings. 

"Trustee" means the person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity holding a deed of trust on a property.

"Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

"Vacant" means a subject property that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.030 ADMINISTRATION.

This chapter shall be administered by the Department of Community Development by its Director, or his or her designee, who shall promulgate procedures to administer the registration, maintenance, security and related provisions as authorized in this chapter. Appropriate fees for services as well as fines and penalties for violations shall be set by the City Council and are set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.040 MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.

Abandoned properties shall be properly maintained and secured as required by this chapter by the owners, lenders and other responsible persons as defined in BMC 6.10.020. Lenders who have an interest in real properties within the City that are vacant and have been abandoned are required to register abandoned properties with the City pursuant to BMC 6.10.060. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.050 RESPONSIBLE PERSON - LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGER.

(a)    Responsible Person. When any act as required under this chapter involves more than one lender or other responsible person as defined in BMC 6.10.020, both or all are responsible for performing such act and may be charged with a violation of this code for failure to act. However, it is sufficient if it is accomplished by either one. If information is required to be provided, then both must provide such information.

(b)    Local Property Manager. If the lender or other responsible person is a corporation and/or out of area lender/owner, that responsible person shall retain a local property manager authorized to take the appropriate steps to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.060 LENDER INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION.

(a)    Initial Inspection Upon Default. Any lender who holds a security interest on a property located within the City shall perform an initial inspection of the property upon default by the borrower prior to initiating foreclosure proceedings such as posting a notice of default or initiating other applicable proceedings to begin the foreclosure process. This inspection shall be performed within fourteen (14) days of default. This inspection shall be to determine whether the property is vacant. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the lender shall, within fourteen (14) days from the date of the inspection, register the property with the Director on forms or in the manner provided by the City.

(b)    Defaults Prior to August 1, 2013. Any lender who holds a security interest on a property located within the City, and which property as of August 1, 2013, (1) is under a current notice of default; (2) is under a current notice of trustee’s sale; (3) is the subject of a pending tax assessor’s lien sale; (4) has been the subject of a foreclosure where the title was retained by the beneficiary of the deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; or (5) was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, shall perform an inspection of the property to determine whether the property is vacant. This inspection shall be performed by August 15, 2013. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned, and the lender shall, within fourteen (14) days from the date of the inspection, register the property with the Director on forms or in the manner provided by the City.

(c)    Registration Contents. Each registration shall contain the following: 

(1)    Information for both the beneficiary and trustee: name (corporation or individual); 

(2)    The street/office address (not a post office box) and, if different, the mailing address;

(3)    A direct contact name (corporation or individual);

(4)    A direct contact name and phone number for the person handling the foreclosure; and

(5)    In the case of a corporation or out of area lender, the telephone number and other contact information of local property manager/management company responsible for the inspections, maintenance and security of the property.

(d)    Registration Fee and Other. 

(1)    There shall be no fee for the annual registration. 

(2)    The registration shall be valid for one (1) calendar year following the date on which registration is initially due to the City. Subsequent registrations are required and due each year thereafter on the anniversary of the due date of the initial registration until such time as the property is transferred or becomes legally occupied. 

(3)    Lenders required to register properties pursuant to this chapter shall keep such properties registered and all required information updated, and comply with all the security and maintenance requirements of this chapter for the entire time such properties remain vacant.

(4)    When properties required to be registered become occupied or title is transferred, the prior lender shall notify the Director in writing within fourteen (14) days of the occupancy or transfer.

(5)    Any lender required to register a property pursuant to this chapter shall report any change of information contained in the registration within fourteen (14) days of the change.

(6)    Inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter are intended only for the purposes set forth in this chapter and not for purposes of triggering disclosure obligations to potential real property purchasers. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.070 MONTHLY INSPECTIONS. 

(a)    The property shall be inspected on a monthly basis to determine whether or not the property is vacant and whether or not the maintenance, security and other requirements of this chapter and any other applicable laws are being met.

(b)    If a property is occupied, but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the lender, or an agent/designee of the lender, monthly to determine whether the property is vacant until (1) the borrower or other party remedies the default; or (2) the foreclosure is completed and ownership is transferred to a new owner who is not the former beneficiary or another lender; or (3) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the lender shall, within fourteen (14) days of that inspection, register the property with the Director on forms or in the manner provided by the City.

(c)    The property shall continue to be inspected after a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or the underwriter of the deed of trust, or any other person or entity who held a security interest in the property, and any property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. If upon inspection the property is found to be vacant, it is hereby deemed abandoned and must be registered within fourteen (14) days as required in this chapter.

(d)    These inspections shall be reported to the City as required by the Director. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.080 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    Responsible persons shall maintain and keep properties free of conditions including, but not limited to:

(1)    Weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials and junk vehicles, 

(2)    Accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state, or local law), and discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, or large and small appliances.

(3)    Graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches and/or coordinates with the color of the exterior of the structure.

(b)    Responsible persons shall;

(1)    Maintain yards in accordance with City requirements and standards;

(2)    Secure ponds, pools and hot tubs and ensure that they do not become a public nuisance; and

(3)    Take any other action necessary to prevent giving the appearance that the property is abandoned.

(c)    Additionally, responsible persons shall maintain properties pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 17.04 BMC, the City Building Code, Chapter 18.02 BMC, the City Fire Code, Chapter 9.92 BMC, Chronic Nuisance Properties, BMC Title 6, Health and Sanitation, and/or any other applicable City code or state law. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.090 SECURING AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    Securing. All properties subject to registration shall be secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the following: the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates, and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child or any other person to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). Securing also includes boarding as applicable. Material used for boarding shall be painted with an exterior grade paint that matches and/or coordinates with the color of the exterior of the structure.

(b)    Posting. The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact phone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet, and shall contain, along with the name and a twenty-four (24) hour contact number, the words:

"THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY [insert name]" and

"TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL [insert local telephone number]." 

The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with, weather resistant materials. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.100 VACANT PROPERTIES NOT ABANDONED.

Vacant properties that are not abandoned as defined in BMC 6.10.020 but have been boarded up and/or otherwise secured as a result of City code enforcement action, shall comply with the local property manager requirements of BMC 6.10.050(b) and the posting and security requirements of BMC 6.10.090. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.110 TIME TO REMEDY FOLLOWING INSPECTION.

The lender or other responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to remedy any defects found following any inspection required by this chapter, except that the lender or other responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of registration to remedy any defects found during the initial inspection set forth in BMC 6.10.060(a) or (b) to meet the registration, inspection, maintenance, and security obligations of this chapter, unless otherwise extended by the Director at his or her sole discretion. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.120 ADDITIONAL MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY.

In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this chapter and applicable City Code, the Director shall have the authority to require any responsible person of any abandoned property affected by this chapter to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures, including, but not limited to, securing any/all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, disconnecting utilities, or any other measures as may be reasonably calculated to arrest the decline of the property, prevent unauthorized entry, and/or ensure maintenance of the property in accordance with this code. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.130 ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    In the event the Director believes lender or other responsible person has failed to meet the registration, inspection, maintenance, and security obligations of this chapter, the Director shall send notice of said failure to the responsible person at the address listed on the tax rolls of the County or at such other address as may be known to the Director. The notice shall set out the nature of the failure(s) to be corrected and shall give the responsible person within fourteen (14) days from the date of the notice to correct them unless an imminent danger exists in which case the responsible person shall take immediate action to cure the condition creating the imminent danger. In the event the lender or other responsible person fails to remedy the matters within the time set out in the notice (or make, in the view of the Director, adequate arrangements otherwise) the City may seek enforcement pursuant to BMC 6.10.140.

(b)    Violations of this chapter constitute a public nuisance and may be enforced, in addition to the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to Chapter 17.04 BMC, the City Building Code, Chapter 18.02 BMC, the City Fire Code, Chapter 9.92 BMC, Chronic Nuisance Properties, BMC Title 6, Health and Sanitation, and/or any other applicable City code or state law. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)


6.10.140 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Penalty. Any person, firm or entity who fails to register and perform the required inspections, maintenance and/or security as required herein shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. 

(b)    Code Enforcement. In addition, any violation of any provision of this chapter is a civil violation as provided for in Chapter 1.04 BMC, for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein. (Ord. 5215 §1 (part), 2013)

 


Chapter 6.11 VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDING REGISTRATION

Sections:

6.11.010    PURPOSE.

6.11.020    ADMINISTRATION.

6.11.030    DEFINITIONS.

6.11.040    VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDING REGISTRATION.

6.11.050    DUTY TO AMEND REGISTRATION STATEMENT.

6.11.060    INSPECTIONS.

6.11.070    ENFORCEMENT.


6.11.010 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose and intent of the City to establish a vacant commercial building registration program to protect the community from becoming blighted as a result of commercial buildings that are vacant and not properly secured and maintained. The failure to safely and completely close, maintain and secure all doorways, windows or other openings into vacant commercial buildings, or to secure broken windows to secure the structure from unauthorized entry, is deemed to be a public nuisance. This chapter requires that vacant commercial buildings be properly maintained by the owners, lenders, and other responsible persons as defined in BMC 6.11.030. Through the registration process, responsible persons are required to maintain and secure these properties. The intent of this chapter is to obtain information for at least one (1) responsible person for each vacant commercial building in the City to ensure that properties are maintained consistent with the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by Chapter 17.04 BMC. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.020 ADMINISTRATION.

This chapter will be administered by the Building Official, who may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with its terms. The Building Official, and his or her designee, and/or code enforcement officers, are authorized to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.030 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter:

"City" means the City of Bremerton, its officers, employees, and agents.

"Commercial building" means any building that is used for commercial purposes in the City that is not intended for residential use.

"Occupied" means a commercial building with a permitted, nonresidential use that is physically located and lawfully operating in the building.

"Responsible person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or any agent thereof, owning, leasing, renting or having lawful possession or control of a structure in the City.

"Vacant commercial building" means a commercial building that has not had any legal occupancy during the preceding one hundred eighty (180) days. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.040 VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDING REGISTRATION.

(a)    At least one (1) responsible person for each vacant commercial building must register that building with the City within ten (10) calendar days of the date the building becomes a vacant commercial building, as that term is defined in BMC 6.11.030, unless:

(1)    The building is the subject of a current, valid building permit for repair or rehabilitation and required inspections are ongoing, or the responsible person provides proof, such as receipts, invoices, or executed contracts, that the repair or rehabilitation is proceeding without significant delay; or

(2)    The property where the vacant commercial building is located is the subject of a land use application for redevelopment for which approval has been granted and building permits have been applied for but have not yet been issued.

(b)    A building will be considered to be registered on the date the City receives, on a form or in the manner provided by the Building Official and properly completed and signed by a responsible person, the following information:

(1)    The street address and parcel number of the vacant commercial building;

(2)    The name, address, and daytime and evening telephone numbers of each responsible person for the vacant commercial building, including any owner or tenant;

(3)    Any other information requested by the Building Official for the administration of this chapter.

(c)    A responsible person must renew the registration of each vacant commercial building on or before January 1st of each year that the building remains vacant. A responsible person must submit the renewal application to the City on forms provided by the Building Official.

(d)    Upon satisfactory proof to the Building Official that the vacant commercial building is occupied as defined in BMC 6.11.030, the vacant commercial building will be unregistered. Proof of physical occupation shall include a valid City of Bremerton business license, if required, and a certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Official.

(e)    There shall be no fee assessed for registration of the vacant commercial building. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.050 DUTY TO AMEND REGISTRATION STATEMENT.

Responsible persons for any registered vacant commercial building shall advise the Building Official, in writing, of any changes to the information on the registration form within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the change. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.060 INSPECTIONS.

The Building Official (and his/her designee), or code enforcement officers, or both, are authorized to conduct inspections to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


6.11.070 ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will be performed in accordance with Chapter 1.04 BMC.

(b)    No responsible person may violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this chapter. Each responsible person commits a separate offense for each and every day they commit, continue or permit a violation of any provision of this chapter.

(c)    All responsible persons for a vacant commercial building are jointly and severally responsible with respect to that vacant commercial building for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and for any payments that they may be required to make to the City under this chapter. If the vacant commercial building is subject to a lease, the City shall have discretion to determine whether to enforce this chapter against the vacant commercial building owner, the tenant or both of them, but the City shall consider in this determination whether the lease provides that the compliance with this chapter is the responsibility of the vacant commercial building owner or the tenant. (Ord. 5365 §1 (part), 2018)


Chapter 6.12 UNFIT DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES

Sections:

6.12.010    PURPOSE - FINDINGS.

6.12.020    DEFINITIONS.

6.12.030    AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC OFFICER.

6.12.040    CRITERIA FOR UNFIT OR DANGEROUS DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES.

6.12.050    INSPECTION AND COMPLAINT.

6.12.060    FINDINGS AND ORDER.

6.12.070    APPEALS.

6.12.080    ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER.

6.12.090    SALE OR DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS AND CONTENTS.

6.12.100    RECOVERY OF COSTS AND EXPENSES.

6.12.110    PERMITS AND REGULATIONS.

6.12.120    REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.


6.12.010 PURPOSE - FINDINGS.

(a)    Pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW, incorporated herein by this reference, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended, the City Council finds that there are within the City of Bremerton dwellings which are unfit for human habitation and buildings, structures, and premises or portions thereof which are unfit for other uses due to dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, unpermitted and substandard construction or modification, filth and other conditions attracting insects or vermin or likely to spread disease, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, or other similar conditions and violations of various building, health, and safety regulations, and/or which are vacant, unsecured, and abandoned or apparently abandoned.

(b)    Such dwellings, buildings, structures, and premises are dangerous to occupants, threaten the public health, safety, and welfare, attract and harbor vagrants and criminals, offend public values, lower the value of neighboring properties, contribute to neighborhood or community deterioration, and hamper community and economic development.

(c)    When the owners or other persons in possession or control of such properties are unwilling or unable to correct such conditions in a proper and timely manner, it is in the interest of the community for the City to intervene and correct, repair, or remove such dwellings, buildings, structures, premises and conditions and to pursue all legal means to recover from such persons and/or properties the costs of doing so, including the costs of staff salaries and benefits, materials, contractors, and all other legally recoverable costs and expenses. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.020 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is plainly required:

(a)    "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy a condition that constitutes a civil violation by such means, in such manner, and to such an extent to put an end to, or otherwise diminish the intensity of, any condition causing a structure to be dangerous or unfit as the code enforcement officer or the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.

(b)    "Act" means doing or performing something.

(c)    "Administrative Hearing Examiner" means the Administrative Hearing Examiner established pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC which shall serve as the board as defined in and pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW.

(d)    "Building" means any permanent or temporary structure enclosed within exterior walls and a roof, and shall include a dwelling as applicable.

(e)    "City" means City of Bremerton.

(f)    "Code enforcement officer" means a public officer as defined in RCW 35.80.020(4) and includes any person or persons authorized by statute, ordinance, regulation, written City policy, or interlocal agreement, or designated by the Mayor or his or her designee, to enforce any of the regulations subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter, and shall expressly include the City’s code enforcement officers; the City Attorney, or his or her designee; the Chief of the Bremerton Police Department, or his or her designee; the Director of the Department of Community Development, or his or her designee; the Director of the Department of Public Works and Utilities, or his or her designee; building inspectors; construction inspectors; the Chief of the Bremerton Fire Department, or his or her designee; Fire Code Official; and fire inspectors. For the purpose of RCW 35.80.020(4), "code enforcement officer" shall also mean Administrative Hearing Examiner as applicable for the duties set forth in this chapter for the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(g)    "Complaint" means a written statement, issued by a code enforcement officer, pursuant to RCW 35.80.030.

(h)    "Costs of abatement" means the costs of any abatement action taken by the City to abate the violation using lawful means in the event that the person responsible for the violation fails so to do. The term includes incidental expenses including, but not limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect and including attorney’s fees; costs incurred in documenting the violation; hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and actual costs and expenses of the City in preparing notices, specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and inspecting the work; the costs of any required printing and mailing; and costs of enforcement.

(i)    "Costs" or "costs of enforcement" means costs incurred related to enforcement under this chapter, including but not limited to costs of service of notice, costs of the hearing, administrative costs established by resolution for enforcement of garbage and refuse and nuisance vegetation violations, as well as other administrative costs.

(j)    "Day" or "days," as used in this chapter, shall mean calendar days unless expressly stated otherwise in a given section or subsection. In addition, any portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day shall constitute a full calendar day.

(k)    "Dwelling" shall mean or include any building or structure developed or utilized for human habitation.

(l)    "Municipal Court Hearing Examiner" means the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner established pursuant to Chapter 2.62 BMC which shall serve as the appeals commission as defined in and pursuant to Chapter 35.80 RCW.

(m)    "Omission" means a failure to act.

(n)    "Owner" shall mean the owner or taxpayer shown in the records of the Kitsap County Assessor-Treasurer, recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor, or as otherwise known to the City of Bremerton, and shall include any manager or other representative of the owner, or other person with responsibility for or control over the structure or premises.

(o)    "Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any entity, public or private.

(p)    "Person responsible for the violation" or "person who violates" means, unless otherwise defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to the regulation, an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject to the regulation, a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to the regulation and/or any person who created the violation or any person who has control over the property and allows the violation to continue.

(q)    "Property" or "premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks, public rights-of-way, and parking strips, and any lake, river, stream, drainage way or wetland.

(r)    "Public officer" means public officer as defined in RCW 35.80.020(4) and includes the code enforcement officer and the Administrative Hearing Examiner as defined in this section.

(s)    "Regulation" means and includes the following, as now enacted or hereafter amended:

(1)    All Bremerton Municipal Code provisions making reference to this chapter;

(2)    All standards, regulations and procedures adopted by the City that make reference to this chapter; and

(3)    The terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued by the City, or any concomitant agreement with the City, pursuant to code provisions that make reference to this chapter.

(t)    "Structure" shall mean or include that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof and shall include a building or dwelling as applicable.

(u)    "Violation" or "civil violation" means an act or omission contrary to a regulation as defined in subsection (s) of this section. A violation continues to exist until abated to the satisfaction of the City, with each day or portion thereof in which the violation continues constituting a separate violation. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.030 AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC OFFICER.

As defined in BMC 6.12.020, the public officer, as used in this chapter, includes the code enforcement officer and the Administrative Hearing Examiner as applicable, also as defined in BMC 6.12.020. The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter. These powers shall include the following in addition to others granted in this chapter:

(a)    To determine: (i) which dwellings are unfit for human habitation; and/or (ii) which buildings, structures, or premises are unfit for other use;

(b)    To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; and

(c)    To investigate the dwelling and other property conditions and to enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations when the code enforcement officer has reasonable grounds for believing they are unfit for human habitation, or for other use;

Provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and to obtain an order for this purpose after submitting evidence in support of an application which is adequate to justify such an order from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or resisted;

Provided further, that the public officer may recognize and give appropriate effect to special and extenuating circumstances which, in order to do substantial justice, warrant the exercise of discretion to adjust the time frames, standards and other provisions of this chapter. Examples of circumstances which may warrant such exercise of discretion include, without limitation, medical illness or disability affecting a property owner’s ability to respond to orders or appear at hearings and bona fide insurance coverage disputes which create a definite risk that enforcement of this chapter would unfairly result in a substantial economic loss to the property owner. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.040 CRITERIA FOR UNFIT OR DANGEROUS DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND PREMISES.

The code enforcement officer may determine that a structure is dangerous or unfit for human habitation or other use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants of such structure, the occupants of neighboring structures, or other residents of the City. Such conditions may include the following, without limitations:

(a)    Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is too narrow or small, or other factors or conditions exist, so as to be unsafe or to hinder safe exit in case of panic, fire, or other emergency.

(b)    The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or other factors or conditions exist, so as to be unsafe or to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of panic, fire, or other emergency.

(c)    The stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1-1/2) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code, Chapter 17.04 BMC, for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(d)    Any portion has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such damage or deterioration and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

(e)    Any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons, damage property, or render other portions of the structure or premises unsafe or unfit to occupy.

(f)    Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place, as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings.

(g)    Any portion thereof is wracked, warped, buckled, settled, or other conditions exist, such that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind, earthquakes, snow, or other loads than is required in the case of similar new construction.

(h)    The building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

(i)    For any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used or is designed and intended to be used.

(j)    The exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall within the middle one-third (1/3) of the base.

(k)    The building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

(l)    Any structure or premises that is damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood, or any other cause has become dilapidated, deteriorated, or neglected, or is abandoned or apparently abandoned and not thoroughly and adequately secured against unauthorized entry, so as to (i) be an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) attract and/or provide harborage for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons; or (iii) enable persons to resort thereto and commit unlawful, immoral, or dangerous acts.

(m)    Any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code, Chapter 17.04 BMC, or of any other law of this state or ordinance of the City relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings.

(n)    Any building or structure, which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion less than fifty (50) percent or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law for newly constructed buildings of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

(o)    Any structure or premises which, because of: neglect, dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction; inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities; infestation of rodents, roaches, wood-destroying organisms, or other vectors of disease; filth or accumulation of garbage; or for any other reason, is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or occupancy, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

(p)    A structure or premises which, because of obsolescence, deterioration, damage, lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistive construction or fire-protection systems, faulty electric wiring or components, gas connections, or mechanical systems, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal to be a fire hazard.

(q)    Equipment or systems which are unsafe due to damage, deterioration, faulty or inadequate maintenance or construction, or any other reason.

(r)    Any portion of a structure remaining on a site after the demolition or destruction of the structure or any structure abandoned so as to constitute such structure or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(s)    Any building or structure in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.

(t)    Any other condition the Building Official or other official or expert can articulate that renders the structure unsafe or unfit for habitation or occupancy. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.050 INSPECTION AND COMPLAINT.

(a)    Complaint and Service. If, after a preliminary investigation of any dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the code enforcement officer finds that it is dangerous or unfit for human habitation or other use, he/she shall cause to be served either personally or by certified mail, with return receipt requested, upon all persons having any interest therein, as shown upon the records of the Kitsap County Auditor, and shall post in a conspicuous place on such property, a complaint stating in what respects such dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use. If the whereabouts of any of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the code enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made either by personal service or by mailing a copy of the complaint and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at the address of the building involved in the proceedings, and mailing a copy of the complaint and order by first class mail to any address of each such person in the records of the Kitsap County Treasurer-Assessor or Auditor.

(b)    Notice of Hearing. Such complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Administrative Hearing Examiner, at a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; and that all parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear in person, or otherwise, and to give testimony at the time and place in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(c)    Filing of Complaint. A copy of such complaint shall also be filed with the Kitsap County Auditor and such filing of the complaint or order shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.060 FINDINGS AND ORDER.

(a)    Findings. The Administrative Hearing Examiner may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or premises is unfit for human habitation or other use if it finds that conditions exist in such dwelling, building, structure, or premises which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of such municipality. Such conditions may include the following, without limitations: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire or accident, inadequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, uncleanliness, overcrowding, or inadequate drainage based on City building code, fire code and other applicable City codes.

(b)    Order and Service. If, after the required hearing, the Administrative Hearing Examiner determines that the dwelling is dangerous or unfit for human habitation, or building or structure or premises is unfit for other appropriate use, he/she shall state in writing his/her findings of fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owners and parties in interest thereof, as provided in BMC 6.12.050, and shall post in a conspicuous place on the property, an order that (1) requires the owners and parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to render it fit for human habitation, or for other appropriate use, or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if such course of action is deemed proper on the basis of the standards set forth in BMC 6.12.040; or (2) requires the owners and parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, structure, or premises, if this course of action is deemed proper on the basis of those standards. If no appeal is filed, a copy of such order shall be filed with the Kitsap County Auditor.

(c)    Demolition of Structure. In ordering the required course of action to be taken by the owner to abate the unfit or dangerous structure, the Administrative Hearing Examiner may order the structure or a portion thereof demolished and not repaired under the following circumstances:

(1)    The structure is patently illegal with regard to building, zoning, or other regulations;

(2)    The estimated cost to repair the structure or portion thereof is more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure or portion thereof; or

(3)    The estimated cost to repair the structure or portion thereof is less than fifty (50) percent of the value and repairing and/or securing the structure from entry would, nevertheless, cause or allow the structure to remain a hazard or public nuisance, continue a nonconforming use, or otherwise be an unreasonable use of public funds.

(d)    Value of Structure. The value of the structure shall be as determined by the Kitsap County Assessor-Treasurer. In estimating the cost of repairing the structure, the Administrative Hearing Examiner may rely upon such cost-estimating publication or method the Building Official deems appropriate. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.070 APPEALS.

(a)    Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. Within thirty (30) days from the date of service upon the owner and posting of the decision issued by the Administrative Hearing Examiner under BMC 6.12.060, the owner or any party in interest may file an appeal with the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner, serving as the appeals commission pursuant to RCW 35.80.030. Appeals shall be filed pursuant to RCW 35.80.030(g).

(b)    Order. Absent an injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with RCW 35.80.030(2), within thirty (30) days after posting and service of the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner’s order, the decision of the Municipal Hearing Examiner shall be final. The findings and orders of the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall be reported in the same manner and shall bear the same legal consequences as if issued by the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(c)    Superior Court. An appeal of the decision of the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner pursuant to subsection (b) of this section must be filed with the Superior Court within thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of the decision.

(d)    Service. Service shall be deemed complete when the Administrative Hearing Examiner or Municipal Court Hearing Examiner, or his or her assistant, hands any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person prior to, during, or after a hearing or sends by certified mail, with return receipt requested, any order, ruling, decision, or other document to a person having an interest therein. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.080 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDER.

(a)    If the owners or parties in interest, following exhaustion of his or her rights to appeal, fail to comply with the final order to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove, or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or premises, the code enforcement officer may direct or cause such dwelling, building, structure, or premises to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated and closed, removed, or demolished.

(b)    In the enforcement of this section, the code enforcement officer is authorized to enter the structure and/or premises for inspection, testing, sampling, or other purposes preparatory to and in the conduct of the repairs, demolition, or other actions, to hire contractors as necessary to perform the work, and to spend public funds to complete the work. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.090 SALE OR DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS AND CONTENTS.

If the dwelling, building, structure, or premises is removed or demolished by the code enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer shall, if possible, sell the materials of such dwelling, building, structure, or premises in accordance with procedures set forth in BMC 2.76.150 and 2.78.010 and other applicable laws and policies and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and, if there be any balance remaining, it shall be paid to the parties entitled thereto, as determined by the code enforcement officer, after deducting the costs incident thereto. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.100 RECOVERY OF COSTS AND EXPENSES.

(a)    Costs of Abatement. The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements; or vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the code enforcement officer, shall be assessed against the real property upon which such cost was incurred unless such amount is previously paid.

(b)    Related Costs. For purposes of this section, the cost of vacating and closing shall include all reasonable expenses, including but not limited to the costs of staff time, materials, incidentals, mailing, publishing, and recording notices.

(c)    Certification and Final Order. Upon certification by the City Treasurer of the assessment amount being due and owing, the code enforcement officer will send a notice to the property owner requesting payment and scheduling a hearing in front of the Administrative Hearing Examiner to sign a final order certifying the assessment amount due and owing that would be sent to the Assessor. The final order is not appealable to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner.

(d)    Assessment on Property. If unpaid, the final order certifying the assessment amount due and owing shall be sent to the County Assessor-Treasurer to enter the amount of such assessment upon the tax rolls against the property for the current year and the same shall become a part of the general taxes for that year to be collected at the same time and with interest at such rates and in such manner as provided for in RCW 84.56.020 for delinquent taxes, and when collected to be deposited to the abatement fund of the City.

(e)    Lien. Pursuant to RCW 35.80.030(1)(h), the amount of such costs shall constitute a lien against the property of equal rank with state, county, and municipal taxes. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.110 PERMITS AND REGULATIONS.

All repairs, improvements, maintenance, or other work performed in relation to any enforcement under this code shall be performed and completed in compliance with all permitting and other requirements of all applicable codes and regulations. The owner shall be responsible for identifying and complying with all applicable codes and regulations. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


6.12.120 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.

(a)    This section does not abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the City to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.

(b)    This section does not impair or limit in any way the power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. 5346 §1 (part), 2018)


Chapter 6.20 CARRYOUT BAGS

Sections:

6.20.010    DEFINITIONS.

6.20.020    REGULATIONS.

6.20.030    EXEMPTIONS.

6.20.040    VIOLATIONS.


6.20.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

(a)    "Compostable" means that the product will break down into, or otherwise become part of, usable compost in a safe and timely manner in an appropriate composting facility, or in a home compost pile or device, and has been certified as compostable by the Biodegradable Products Institute or similar national or international certification authority.

(b)    "Carryout bag" means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases such as merchandise, goods or food from the retail establishment. "Carryout bags" do not include:

(1)    Bags used by consumers inside stores to package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards or small hardware items such as nails, bolts or screws; to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish regardless of whether they are prepackaged; to contain or wrap flowers, potted plants or other items where dampness may be a problem; to contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; or to contain prescription drugs; or

(2)    A bag used to protect a purchased item from damaging or contaminating other purchased items when placed in a recyclable paper bag or reusable bag, such as prepared take-out foods or prepared liquids intended for consumption away from the retail establishment; or

(3)    Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, tire bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags for uses such as food storage, garbage, pet waste or yard waste; or

(4)    Paper bags with a capacity of eight (8) pounds or less, that contain at least twenty (20) percent postconsumer recycled material.

(c)    "Recycled paper carryout bag" means a paper carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point-of-sale that meets all of the following requirements:

(1)    Has a material weight of larger than eight (8) pounds and contains an average of forty (40) percent postconsumer recycled materials;

(2)    Is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the City;

(3)    Is capable of composting in a commercial composting facility; and

(4)    Is clearly labeled with the minimum percentage of postconsumer content.

(d)    "Retail establishment" means any person, corporation, partnership, business, facility, vender, organization or individual that sells or provides food, merchandise, goods, or materials, directly to a customer including home delivery, temporary stores, or vendors at farmers markets, street fairs, and festivals.

(e)    "Reusable carryout bag" means a bag made of cloth or other material with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for long-term multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements:

(1)    Has a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty-five (125) uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capacity of carrying a minimum of twenty-two (22) pounds one hundred twenty-five (125) times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy-five (175) feet;

(2)    Is machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; and

(3)    If made of film plastic, is a minimum of at least two and one-quarter (2.25) mils thick.

(f)    "Single-use plastic carryout bag" means any bag that is less than two and one-quarter (2.25) mils thick and is made from plastic or any nonrenewable resource.

(g)    "Pass-through charge" means a charge collected by retailers from their customers when providing plastic or recycled paper carryout bags, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge. (Ord. 5368 §2 (part), 2019)


6.20.020 REGULATIONS.

Except as provided by BMC 6.20.030, all retail establishments within the City must comply with the following regulations:

(a)    Plastic Carryout Bags.

(1)    Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bags. Retail establishments shall not provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to any customer.

(2)    Reusable Plastic Carryout Bags. Retail establishments may provide to any customer at the point-of-sale a reusable plastic carryout bag as defined in BMC 6.20.010(e)(3). For each reusable plastic carryout bag provided by the retail establishment, it shall collect a pass-through charge of not less than eight cents ($0.08) and such shall be clearly indicated on the customer transaction receipt.

(b)    Paper Carryout Bags. Retail establishments shall not provide to any customer at the point-of-sale a paper bag that is not a recycled paper carryout bag as defined in BMC 6.20.010(c). For each recycled paper carryout bag provided by the retail establishment, it shall collect a pass-through charge of not less than eight cents ($0.08) and such shall be clearly indicated on the customer transaction receipt.

(c)    Reusable Carryout Bags. Retail establishments may make reusable carryout bags available to customers through sale.

(d)    Noncarryout Bags.

(1)    Noncompostable Plastic Bags. Retail establishments shall not use or provide to any customer polyethylene or other noncompostable plastic film bags tinted green or brown for customers to bag products in stores.

(2)    Compostable Plastic Bags. Any film bags meeting the definition of compostable that retail establishments provide to customers for food or other products, such as vegetables bagged in stores prior to checkout, must be tinted green or brown and shall be clearly labeled "COMPOSTABLE," including language following the Federal Trade Commission’s "Green Guides." (Ord. 5368 §2 (part), 2019)


6.20.030 EXEMPTIONS.

No retail establishment may collect a pass-through charge from anyone with a voucher or electronic benefits card issued under programs including, but not limited to, Women Infants and Children (WIC); Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF); Federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as Basic Food; and the Washington State Food Assistance Program (FAP). (Ord. 5368 §2 (part), 2019)


6.20.040 VIOLATIONS.

In addition to any other violation set forth in this chapter, any violation of BMC 6.20.020 constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and enforcement may be required as provided therein. (Ord. 5368 §2 (part), 2019)


Chapter 6.28 UNIFORM LITTER CONTROL CODE

Sections:

6.28.010    SHORT TITLE.

6.28.020    PURPOSE.

6.28.030    INTERPRETATION.

6.28.040    DEFINITIONS.

6.28.050    LITTER IN GENERAL.

6.28.060    PLACEMENT OF LITTER RECEPTACLES.

6.28.070    USE OF RECEPTACLES.

6.28.080    DAMAGING RECEPTACLES.

6.28.090    REMOVAL OF LITTER.

6.28.100    MANDATORY LITTER BAGS.

6.28.110    SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTER PROHIBITED.

6.28.120    THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.

6.28.130    DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PROPERTY.

6.28.140    LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.

6.28.150    VEHICLE LOADING.

6.28.160    ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS AND PROCEDURES.

6.28.170    PENALTIES.


6.28.010 SHORT TITLE.

This chapter shall be known and may be commonly referred to as the "Uniform Litter Control Code." (Ord. 3250 §1, 1975)


6.28.020 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish litter control in the city. This chapter is intended to place upon all persons within the city the duty of contributing to the public cleanliness of the city and appearance in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to protect the economic interests of the people of the city against unsanitary and unsightly conditions. It is further the intent of this chapter to protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to littering. (Ord. 3250 §15, 1975)


6.28.030 INTERPRETATION.

In the event any other city ordinance, whether or not codified, is in conflict with any of the terms of this chapter, the more stringent shall be construed as applicable. (Ord. 3250 §17, 1975)


6.28.040 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this uniform litter control code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms have the following meanings. All words used in the present tense include the future and past tense; all words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.

(1)    "City" means the city of Bremerton, Washington.

(2)    "Handbill" is any printed or written matter, excluding newspapers, which advertises for sale any commodity, or thing, or which directs attention to any business or other activity, or event of any kind.

(3)    "Highway" is synonymous with and includes street, road and alley.

(4)    "Litter" means all solid wastes, including, but not limited to containers, packages, wrappings, printed matter or other material thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, but not including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.

(5)    "Litter bag" means a bag, sack, or other container made of any material which is large enough to serve as a receptacle for litter inside the vehicle or watercraft of any person.

(6)    "Litter receptacle" means those containers meeting minimum requirements of state regulations of the State Department of Ecology.

(7)    "Newspaper" is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law.

(8)    "Park" is a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other area in the city devoted to active or passive outdoor recreation.

(9)    "Person" is any individual, industry, public or private corporation, copartnership, association, firm, or other entity whatsoever.

(10)    "Private property" means any property not publicly owned or held out for use by the public.

(11)    "Public place" means any area that is used or held out for use by the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests.

(12)    "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes including garbage, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, and discarded commodities.

(13)    "State regulations" means the regulations duly promulgated and adopted by the State Department of Ecology pursuant to RCW 34.04 and codified or prepared for codification as part of the Washington Administrative Code.

(14)    "Vehicle" includes every device capable of being moved upon a public street and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street, excepting devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rail or tracks.

(15)    "Watercraft" means any boat, ship, vessel, barge, or other floating craft. (Ord. 3250 §2, 1975)


6.28.050 LITTER IN GENERAL.

(a)    No person shall throw, drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of litter upon any public place in the city or upon any private property not owned by him, or in any waters within the jurisdiction of the city whether from a vehicle or otherwise, except:

(1)    When such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or the city for disposal or garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or

(2)    Into a litter receptacle or other container in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of said public place or any private property; or

(3)    When such person is the owner or does have control or custody of the property, or has prior consent of the owner or tenant, and provided said litter will not cause a public nuisance or be in violation of any other state or local laws, rules or regulations.

(b)    It is a civil infraction for a person to discard, in violation of this section, a cigarette, cigar, or other burning refuse that is capable of starting a fire. The maximum fine, not including statutory assessments, is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).

(c)    Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a civil infraction and in addition to or in lieu of any other penalty, such person may, in the sound discretion of the court, be directed by the court to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property, with permission of the owner or the person in possession of the property upon which it is established that such person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the execution of sentence. (Ord. 4608, Amended, 10/09/1997; Ord. 3250 §3, 1975)


6.28.060 PLACEMENT OF LITTER RECEPTACLES.

Litter receptacles shall be placed in all parks, trailer parks in respect to the service of transient habitation, gasoline service stations, tavern parking lots, shopping centers, grocery store parking lots, marinas, boat launching areas, beaches, bathing areas and other such public places in numbers appropriate to need as specified by state regulations. (Ord. 3250 §4, 1975)


6.28.070 USE OF RECEPTACLES.

Litter receptacles placed on sidewalks and other public places shall be used only for such litter material as persons may have for disposal while passing along the street or other public places and in no event shall be used for the disposal of other solid waste accumulated in residences or places of business. (Ord. 3250 §5, 1975)


6.28.080 DAMAGING RECEPTACLES.

It is unlawful for any person to wilfully damage or deface any litter receptacle. (Ord. 3250 §6, 1975)


6.28.090 REMOVAL OF LITTER.

It shall be the responsibility of the local municipality, other agency or person owning or maintaining the same for the removal of litter from litter receptacles placed in parks, beaches, campgrounds, and other public places. (Ord. 3250 §7, 1975)


6.28.100 MANDATORY LITTER BAGS.

The owner and person in possession of all vehicles or watercraft shall keep a litter bag in said vehicle or watercraft at all times. (Ord. 3250 §8, 1975)


6.28.110 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTER PROHIBITED.

No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, alley or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building, lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 3250 §9, 1975)


6.28.120 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.

No person shall throw or deposit any handbill upon any public place within the city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to any occupant of a vehicle, or to any other person who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 3250 §10, 1975)


6.28.130 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR VACANT PROPERTY.

(a)    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any uninhabited or vacant private property.

(b)    Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private residences or other private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or upon private property. (Ord. 3250 §11, 1975)


6.28.140 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.

No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or otherwise deposit litter upon any public place or upon any private property. (Ord. 3250 §12, 1975)


6.28.150 VEHICLE LOADING.

(a)    No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public street unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand or gravel may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway surface in the cleaning or maintaining of such roadway by public authority having jurisdiction for the same or by persons under contract or other authorization by such public authority.

(b)    Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any glass or other objects of its load have fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public street, shall immediately cause such public street to be cleaned of all such glass or other objects and shall pay any cost therefor. (Ord. 3250 §13, 1975)


6.28.160 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS AND PROCEDURES.

Enforcement of this chapter may be by any police officer. All such enforcement officers are empowered to issued citations to and/or arrest without warrant, persons violating the provisions of this chapter. Said enforcement officers may serve and execute all warrants, citations, and other process issued by the courts. In addition, mailing by registered mail of such warrant, citation, or other process to the last known place of residence of the offender shall be deemed as personal service upon the person charged. (Ord. 3250 §14, 1975)


6.28.170 PENALTIES.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3410 §1, 1978; Ord. 3250 §18, 1975)


Chapter 6.32 NOISE LEVELS

Sections:

6.32.010    DEFINITIONS.

6.32.040    ENVIRONMENTAL SOUND - MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE LEVELS.

6.32.050    MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.

6.32.060    POSITION OF ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED.

6.32.070    VARIANCE PROCEDURE.

6.32.090    APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT.

6.32.110    PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISES.

6.32.115    BELLS, CHIMES OR CARILLONS.

6.32.120    VIOLATIONS - CIVIL PENALTY, CRIMINAL PENALTY.


6.32.010 DEFINITIONS.

All technical terminology used in this chapter not defined herein shall be interpreted in conformance with American National Standards Institute Specifications, Sections 1.1-1960 and 1.4-1971. For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meaning indicated below:

(a)    "Administrator" means the Mayor of the City of Bremerton or his or her designee.

(b)    "db(A)" means a sound level, measured in decibels, using the A frequency-weighing network of a sound-level meter.

(c)    "District" means the land use zones to which the provisions of this chapter apply. For the purposes of this chapter, the following noise control districts shall be established, which include land use zones designated in the Bremerton zoning ordinance, as follows:

	Noise Control District	Land Use Zones (pursuant to BMC Title 20)

	District I	R-10, R-10M, R-20, East Park Subarea Plan (SAP)

	District II	NB, BC, DCC, DW, DC, EC, INST, GC, Bay Vista SAP, Downtown SAP, Gorst SAP

	District III	I, CUL, WS, FC

(d)    "Emergency work" means:

(1)    Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity;

(2)    Work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger; or

(3)    Work by private or public utilities for providing or restoring immediately necessary utility service.

(e)    "Motorcycle" means any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, except farm tractors and such vehicles powered by an engine of less than five (5) horsepower.

(f)    "Motor vehicle" means any vehicle which is self-propelled, used primarily for transporting persons or property upon public highways, and required to be licensed under RCW 46.16.010 or a motorized transportation device as defined in BMC 10.13.010. (Aircraft, watercraft, and vehicles used on rails or tracks are not motor vehicles as that term is used herein.)

(g)    "Noise" means the intensity, duration and character of sounds from any and all sources.

(h)    "Person" means any individual firm, association, partnership, corporation or any other entity, public or private.

(i)    "Police officer" means a duly appointed city, county or State law enforcement officer.

(j)    "Property boundary" means the survey line at ground surface which separates real property owned, rented or leased by one or more other persons and its vertical extension.

(k)    "Receiving property" means real property within which sound originating from sources outside the property is received.

(l)    "Sound level" means a weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and weighted as specified in American National Standards Institute Specifications, Section 1.4-1971.

(m)    "Sound level meter" means a sound-level measuring device, either Type I or Type II, as defined by American National Standards Institute Specifications, Section 1.4-1971.

(n)    "Weekend" means Saturday and Sunday or any legal holiday. (Ord. 5301 §9, 2016: Ord. 4977 §2, 2006; Ord. 4915 §2, 2004; Ord. 4891 §1, 2004; Ord. 4226 §1, 1989; Ord. 3722 §1, 1982)


6.32.040 ENVIRONMENTAL SOUND - MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE LEVELS.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit noise from any source located within the City of Bremerton to intrude into the property of another which exceeds the maximum or permissible noise level set forth below:

	TABLE I

	 District of Sound Source	District Receiving Property Within the City of Bremerton

	 	I	II	III

	I	55 dB(A) 	 57 dB(A)	60 dB(A)

	II	57 dB(A) 	 60 dB(A)	65 dB(A)

	III	60 dB(A) 	65 dB(A) 	70 dB(A)

(b)    Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the noise limitations of the foregoing table shall be reduced by ten (10) dBA for receiving property within District I.

(c)    At any hour of the day or night the applicable noise limitations in (a) and (b) above may be exceeded for any receiving property by no more than:

(1)    Five (5) dBA for a total of fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour period; or

(2)    Ten (10) dBA for a total of five (5) minutes in any one (1) hour period; or

(3)    Fifteen (15) dBA for a total of one and one-half (1.5) minutes in any one (1) hour period.

(d)    Exemptions. 

(1)    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.:

i.    Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds and appurtenances.

ii.    Sounds created by the discharge of firearms on authorized shooting ranges.

iii.    Sounds created by blasting.

iv.    Sounds created by aircraft engine testing and maintenance not related to flight operations; provided, that aircraft testing and maintenance shall be conducted at remote sites whenever possible.

v.    Sounds created by the installation or repair of essential utility services.

(2)    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection (b).

i.    Noise from electrical substations and existing stationary equipment used in the conveyance of water, waste water, and natural gas by a utility.

ii.    Noise from existing industrial installations which exceed the standards contained in these regulations and which, over the previous three years, have consistently operated in excess of fifteen (15) hours per day as a consequence of process necessity and/or demonstrated routine normal operation. Changes in working hours, which would affect exemptions under this regulation, require approval of the State Department of Ecology.

(3)    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), except insofar as such provisions relate to the reception of noise within District I between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

i.    Sounds originating from temporary construction sites as a result of construction activity.

ii.    Sounds originating from forest harvesting and silvicultural activity.

(4)    The following shall be exempt from all provisions of subsections (a) and (b):

i.    Sounds created by motor vehicles when regulated by Chapter 173-62 WAC.

ii.    Sounds originating from aircraft in flight and sounds that originate at airports which are directly related to flight operations.

iii.    Sounds created by surface carriers engaged in interstate commerce by railroad.

iv.    Sounds created by warning devices not operating continuously for more than five (5) minutes, or bells, chimes, and carillons.

v.    Sounds created by safety and protective devices where noise suppression would defeat the intent of the device or is not economically feasible.

vi.    Sounds created by emergency equipment and work necessary in the interests of law enforcement or for health safety or welfare of the community.

vii.    Sounds originating from motor vehicle racing events at existing authorized facilities.

viii.    Sounds originating from officially sanctioned parades and other public events.

ix.    Sounds emitted from petroleum refinery boilers during start-up of said boilers; provided, that the start-up operation is performed during daytime hours whenever possible.

x.    Sounds created by watercraft.

xi.    Sound created by the discharge of firearms in the course of hunting.

xii.    Sounds created by motor vehicles, licensed or unlicensed, when operated off public highways except when such sounds are received in District I. (Ord. 4226 §3, 1989; Ord. 3722 §3, 1982)


6.32.050 MEASUREMENT OF SOUND.

(a)    If the measurements of sound are made with a sound-level meter, it shall be an instrument in good operating condition meeting the requirements for a Type I or Type II instrument, as delineated in American National Standards Institute Specifications (ANSI), Section 1.4-1971. If the measurements are made with other instruments, or assemblages of instruments, the procedure must be carried out in such a manner that the overall accuracy shall be at least that called for in Section 1.4-1971 ANSI for Type II instruments.

(b)    When the location, distance or technique for measurement of sound is impractical or would yield misleading or inaccurate results, measurements shall be taken at other locations or distances utilizing appropriate correction factors, as specified in the rules promulgated by the Administrator.

(c)    Where a receiving party is partly within one (1) district and partly within another, the maximum permissible noise level at a point within the property boundary shall be that permitted into a receiving property wholly within the lowest intensity district in which the sound is measured. (Ord. 4226 §4, 1989; Ord. 3722 §7, 1982)


6.32.060 POSITION OF ADMINISTRATOR ESTABLISHED.

(a)    Establishment. The position of administrator is hereby established, and shall be the mayor, or his or her designee. The administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Qualifications of Administrator. The administrator shall be a person having a working knowledge of acoustics and competent in the field of noise control. The administrator shall have completed instructional guidance provided by the State Department of Ecology or other recognized institution to operate Type I and Type II sound-level meters, and make all computations and calculations necessary to enforce this chapter.

(c)    Duties of Administrator. The duties of the administrator shall include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Obtaining assistance from other appropriate city departments and officials;

(2)    Training law enforcement officers and staff;

(3)    Purchasing measuring instruments and training inspectors in their calibration and use;

(4)    Establishing a noise-control field procedures manual providing techniques and procedures for measuring or reducing noise to provide for clarification, interpretation and implementation of this chapter;

(5)    Investigating citizens’ noise complaint;

(6)    Issuing orders for the reduction or elimination of noise;

(7)    Assisting citizens and city departments in evaluating and reducing the noise impact of their activities;

(8)    Assisting city planning officials in evaluating the noise component in planning and zoning actions;

(9)    Instituting a public education program on noise; and

(10)    Reviewing at least every three years the provisions of this chapter and recommending revisions consistent with technology to reduce noise. (Ord. 4288 §1, 1990; Ord. 4226 §4, 1989; Ord. 3722 §6, 1982)


6.32.070 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.

(a)    A person who owns or is in possession of any property or use, or any process or equipment, may make a request for a variance to the Administrative Hearing Examiner for relief from any provision of this chapter governing the quality, nature, duration or extent of discharge or noise. The application shall be accompanied by such information and data as the Hearing Examiner may require. The Hearing Examiner shall enforce rules and regulations governing the application for and granting of variances, including hearing and notices. A variance or its renewal shall not be the right of the applicant or holder thereof, but shall be at the reasonable discretion of the Hearing Examiner.

(b)    The variance shall not be granted under this section unless the Hearing Examiner has considered the relevant interests of the applicant, other owners of property likely to be affected, and the general public and finds that all the following facts and conditions exist:

(1)    That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the applicant’s property, or intended use thereof, that do not apply generally to other properties in the same noise control district;

(2)    That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial personal or property right of the applicants possessed by the owners of other properties in the same noise control district;

(3)    That the authorization of such variance does not endanger public health or safety in the same or adjacent noise control districts;

(4)    That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the general policy and purposes of this chapter.

(c)    In authorizing a variance, conditions regarding noise level, duration, type and other considerations deemed necessary to carry out the policy and purpose of this chapter may be imposed. (Ord. 5093 §1, 2009: Ord. 4226 §5, 1989)


6.32.090 APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT.

An appeal of the decision of the Hearing Examiner must be filed with the Superior Court within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the issuance of the decision. (Ord. 5093 §2, 2009: Ord. 4547, Amended, 03/28/1996; Ord. 4226 §6, 1989; Ord. 4022 §1, 1986; Ord. 3722 §9, 1982)


6.32.110 PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISES.

It is hereby unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow, noise defined in this section. For prosecution under this section, evidence of sound level through the use of a sound level meter reading shall not be necessary to establish a commission of the offense. Provisions of this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy including any prosecution for violation of sections regulating environmental noise. The following shall be public disturbance noises:

(a)    The frequent, repetitive or continuance sound of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle, except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law.

(b)    The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous noise in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off-highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within District I so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property.

(c)    The use of a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing amplified sound upon public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or sales or for attracting the attention of the public to any vehicle, structure or property or the contents therein except as permitted by law, and except that vendors whose sole method of selling is from a moving vehicle shall be exempt from this subsection.

(d)    Sound from motor vehicle sound systems, such as tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty (50) feet from the vehicle itself.

(e)    Sound from audio equipment, such as tape players, radios, and compact disc players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty (50) feet from the source.

(f)    The creation of any loud noises which emanate frequently, or repetitively or continuously from any building, structure or property which unreasonably disturbs the peace, comfort and repose of others. (Ord. 4851 §1, 2003; Ord. 4780, Amended, 11/26/2001; Ord. 4226 §9, 1989)


6.32.115 BELLS, CHIMES OR CARILLONS.

The operation of bells, chimes or carillons shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4780, Added, 11/26/2001)


6.32.120 VIOLATIONS - CIVIL PENALTY, CRIMINAL PENALTY.

(a)    Every offense defined by this chapter or conduct made unlawful hereby shall constitute a civil infraction under the Bremerton Municipal Code; provided, however, A second violation within a twenty-four (24) hour period shall constitute a misdemeanor.

(b)    In addition to any other sanction or injunctive procedure which may be available at law or equity, any person failing to comply with the final order issued by the administrator or a police officer shall be subject to a cumulative civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day from the date set for compliance until compliance. The civil penalty shall be collected by legal action brought in the name of the City.

(c)    For enforcement purposes, each day, defined as a twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. in which violation of this chapter occurs, shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 4288 §3, 1990; Ord. 4226 §11, 1989)


Title 7 ANIMALS

Chapters:

7.04    GENERALLY

7.05    PROHIBITED ANIMALS

7.06    CHICKENS

7.08    LICENSES AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS

7.10    IMPOUNDMENT AND QUARANTINE

7.12    DANGEROUS ANIMALS

7.14    ANIMAL CRUELTY

7.15    VIOLATIONS AND INFRACTIONS

7.16    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Chapter 7.04 GENERALLY

Sections:

7.04.010    DECLARATION.

7.04.020    DEFINITIONS.

7.04.030    AUTHORITY TO ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.

7.04.040    ANIMAL CONTROL ZONE ESTABLISHED.

7.04.050    CONSTRUCTION.


7.04.010 DECLARATION.

The ordinance codified in this title is enacted to enhance the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the regulation of animal behavior to the end that offensive animal behavior will be reduced or eliminated. Furthermore, this title contains standards for the use, care and treatment of animals to the end that cruelty to animals will be reduced or eliminated. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.04.020 DEFINITIONS.

The terms defined below have the meanings that follow unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates a different meaning:

(a)    "Adequate food and water" means food or feed appropriate to the species for which it is intended. Both food and water must be in sufficient quantity and quality to sustain the animal, and should be in containers designed and situated to allow the animal easy access.

(b)    "Adequate shelter" means a structure that is moisture- and wind-proof, allows the animal to turn around freely, sit, stand and lie without restriction, keeps the animal clean and dry, and by application does not cause the animal injury, disfigurement, or physical impairment.

(c)    "Adult cat" means a cat more than six (6) months of age.

(d)    "Adult dog" means a dog more than six (6) months of age.

(e)    "Animal control authority" means the Bremerton Police Department, Kitsap Animal Control, Kitsap Humane Society, or other organization contracted by the City of Bremerton to enforce the City’s animal control provisions.

(f)    "Animal welfare facility" means any indoor or outdoor facility where pets are routinely housed or maintained by or for an animal welfare organization.

(g)    "Animal welfare organization" means any public or private organization registered with the Washington Secretary of State’s Office as a not-for-profit organization, whether called a kennel, cattery, shelter, society, or rescue, and includes the organization’s officers, agents, and representatives when acting in the name or on behalf of the organization that controls, rescues, shelters, cares for, or disposes of pets as all or part of the purpose of the organization.

(h)    "At large" means an animal that is off the premises of the owner and not under physical restraint adequate for its size and nature or is sufficiently near its owner to be under its owner’s direct control and is obedient to its owner’s commands, except that all dogs must be leashed when off the premises of the owner; provided, however, unleashed dogs shall be allowed in City of Bremerton dog parks as provided in Chapter 13.04 BMC.

(i)    "Chick" means a chicken that has not reached the adult stage.

(j)    "Chicken" means the commonly known domestic fowl Gallus gallus domesticus, bred and raised for its eggs.

(k)    "Chicken tractor" means a small, moveable coop.

(l)    "Commercial pet facility" means any place or entity where pets are boarded or bred for the primary purpose of compensation, or where pets are housed for resale, such as pet shops, but not including a veterinary hospital where boarding is incidental to treatment.

(m)    "Coop" means an enclosure or cage as for chickens.

(n)    "Dangerous animal" means any pet or livestock that:

(1)    Inflicts severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property;

(2)    Kills a domestic animal without provocation while the attacking animal is off the owner’s property; or

(3)    Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, because of injury inflicted on a human, the owner having received notice of such and the animal again aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans, pets, or livestock.

(o)    "Feral cat" means any cat that has no apparent owner or identification and is apparently wild, untamed, unsocialized, unmanageable, and unable to be approached or handled.

(p)    "Grooming parlor" means any place or entity, public or private, stationary or mobile, where pets are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value and for which a fee is charged.

(q)    "Hearing examiner" means the Municipal Hearings Examiner established under Chapter 2.62 BMC.

(r)    "Hen" means an adult female chicken.

(s)    "Henhouse" means a permanent or fixed house or shelter for chickens.

(t)    "Hybrid(s)" means the offspring of two (2) animals of different species, such as the offspring resulting from breeding a domesticated dog (Canis familiaris) with a wolf (Canis lupus).

(u)    "Impoundment" means when an animal is placed under the control or custody of the animal control authority.

(v)    "Juvenile cat" means a cat seven (7) weeks to six (6) months of age.

(w)    "Juvenile dog" means a dog seven (7) weeks to six (6) months of age.

(x)    "Livestock" means animals including, but not limited to, all equine (horse, mule), bovine (cattle), porcine (swine), caprine (goats), ovine (sheep), camelid (camel, llama, alpaca), ratitae (ostrich, emu, rhea), domesticated poultry (domesticated poultry shall not include chickens), game birds and waterfowl (as authorized by the State of Washington), or federally permitted fowl and other pen-raised fowl, or other animals raised primarily for use as food or fiber for human utilization or consumption.

(y)    "Owner" means any person or entity which controls, maintains, possesses, has custody of, or otherwise provides care, shelter, protection, restraint, refuge, food, or nourishment in such a manner as to control an animal’s activities.

(z)    "Pet" means any animal maintained by a person or entity for the primary purpose of personal enjoyment, exhibition, companionship or service including, but not limited to, domesticated animals, such as chickens, cats and dogs, and nondomesticated animals suitable to living in companionship with humans, such as some birds and mammals.

(aa)    "Pet shop" means a commercial establishment that acquires pets for the purpose of resale.

(bb)    "Potentially dangerous animal" means any animal that when unprovoked:

(1)    Inflicts a bite(s) on a human, pet, or livestock either on public or private property;

(2)    Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any other public grounds or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or any animal;

(3)    With a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury or otherwise threaten the safety of humans, pets, or livestock on any public or private property.

(cc)    "Provoke" means to intentionally agitate, harass, or excite an animal.

(dd)     "Rodent" means members of the order rodentia, including rats and mice in the family muridae, any other introduced rodents, and various native species such as field mice, voles, wood rats, ground and tree squirrels, chipmunks and prairie dogs.

(ee)    "Rodent-proofing" means any form of construction to prevent the ingress of rodents into structures or feed storage containers from the outside or from one structure to another and consists of construction or treatment with material impervious to rodent gnawing of all actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors and roofs that may be reached rodents from the ground, by climbing or by burrowing.

(ff)    "Rooster" means an adult male chicken.

(gg)     "Service dogs" means any guide or signal dog individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability or that serves public or tribal law enforcement, as well as any dog enrolled in a recognized formal training program for those types of services.

(hh)     "Severe injury" means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.

(ii)    "Wheeled vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance intended for use as a means of transport of persons or goods. (Ord. 5126 §1, 2010: Ord. 4952 §1, 2005; Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.04.030 AUTHORITY TO ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.

(a)    The City grants to the animal control authority the authority within Chapters 16.08, 16.10 and 16.52 RCW, and further vests in the animal control authority the primary responsibility for animal control and for securing compliance with this title.

(b)    Employees of the animal control authority over the age of twenty-one (21), who are commissioned as Washington Humane Officers by the Superior Court, may be commissioned as special officers by the Police Chief. When so commissioned, the officer shall thereby be charged with the enforcement of all ordinances, statutes and regulations relating to the care, treatment, control, impoundment, and licensing of animals. Such commissions may be issued and revoked in the discretion of the Police Chief. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.04.040 ANIMAL CONTROL ZONE ESTABLISHED.

All of the area within the city limits of Bremerton is declared to be a single animal control zone. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.04.050 CONSTRUCTION.

This title shall be liberally interpreted and construed to secure the public health, safety, morals and welfare and the rules of strict construction shall have no application. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


Chapter 7.05 PROHIBITED ANIMALS

Sections:

7.05.010    PROHIBITED ANIMALS.

7.05.020    VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


7.05.010 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.

The keeping or maintenance of the following animals is prohibited within the City limits except as otherwise provided herein:

(a)    Venomous, Poisonous, or Wild Animals. Possession of any creature that is venomous (excluding bees), poisonous, or wild is prohibited. Prohibited animals include, but are not limited to, lions, tigers, bears, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, cougars, mountain lions, badgers, wolves, hybrids, coyotes, fox, lynx, alligators, caiman, crocodiles, snakes over seven (7) feet in length, or any venomous/poisonous creature.

(b)    Livestock. Possession of livestock is prohibited, except that:

(1)    This provision shall not apply to the transporting of livestock through the City when such entry into the City is of minimal duration and the livestock are properly secured for transport in a cage or other suitable enclosure.

(2)    Chickens may be kept or maintained in the City if licensed pursuant to Chapter 7.06 BMC.

(3)    Goats may be temporarily kept or maintained in the City for the specific purpose of vegetation control provided they are:

(i)    Kept or maintained no more than once during any six (6) month period and for no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days per occasion at any particular location unless otherwise approved by the Mayor or designee or animal control authority. For the purpose of this subsection, “location” means a lot and/or adjoining lots where the vegetation control is being performed;

(ii)    Tethered, supervised on site, or are maintained within a securely fenced area; and

(iii)    Their housing in the City does not cause a public health or safety issue.

(4)    Owners and authorized occupants of property annexed to the City upon which livestock is maintained on the date of annexation may continue to maintain livestock on the property unless ordered otherwise by the City Hearing Examiner in a code enforcement proceeding due to public health and safety concerns. During said time, there may not be an expansion of livestock or livestock activity on the property beyond that which existed at the time of annexation. This annexation exemption applies until such time as title to the property is transferred to a new owner.

(c)    Exempt Organizations and Activities. The following organizations and activities are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section:

(1)    State-registered wildlife rehabilitation centers with regard to care and rehabilitation of those wild animals that are indigenous to North America.

(2)    Licensed trappers and animal welfare organizations. 

(3)    Circuses, zoos, museums, and similar facilities when licensed or permitted if proper safeguards are taken to protect the public. 

(4)    Special events, festivals, parades and other similar activities and uses when licensed or permitted for short-term limited purposes if proper safeguards are taken to protect the public as required in the licensing or event permitting process. 

(5)    An unlicensed or unpermitted activity or event for a one (1) time, short-term limited purpose:

(i)    When approved by the Mayor or designee;

(ii)    For a period not to exceed five (5) consecutive days; and

(iii)    When proper safeguards are taken to protect the public. (Ord. 5322 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5283 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5000 §3, 2007: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.05.020 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

(a)    Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or maintain any prohibited animals subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Civil Infraction. Any violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), not including statutory assessments.

(c)    Misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of subsection (a) of this section by any person within a twelve (12) month period shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5322 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5283 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 7.06 CHICKENS

Sections:

7.06.010    CHICKEN MANAGEMENT.

7.06.020    CHICKEN LICENSE.

7.06.030    CHICKEN LICENSE PROCEDURE.


7.06.010 CHICKEN MANAGEMENT.

Chickens may be kept within the City limits of Bremerton, provided:

(a)    No more than five (5) hens, including chickens and chicks, may be kept per single-family residential lot pursuant to subsection (m) of this section. In no event shall the five (5) allowed hens, including chickens or chicks, count toward the accumulative total of four (4) household pets pursuant to BMC 7.08.010.

(b)    No roosters are allowed.

(c)    Chickens, except for chicks, shall not be kept inside any permitted dwelling.

(d)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors must be set back at least three (3) feet from all property lines.

(e)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors shall provide for adequate shelter and be kept clean and maintained so that dust, manure and odors are not detectable beyond any property line.

(f)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors including chicken runs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in size and shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height at the structure’s highest point.

(g)    Henhouses and coops shall provide at least six (6) square feet of space per chicken.

(h)    Chicken tractors shall provide at least four (4) square feet of space per chicken.

(i)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors shall be restricted to the backyard area of a single-family residential lot.

(j)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors shall be set back from any body of water in compliance with the City of Bremerton’s shoreline master plan and critical areas ordinance as each are currently enacted or hereinafter amended.

(k)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from any public or private well.

(l)    Chickens shall not be allowed to run at large and shall be enclosed within a henhouse, coop or chicken tractor at all times.

(m)    Chickens shall be allowed only on single-family residential lots containing a maximum of one (1) residence.

(n)    Chicken manure shall be managed so as not to create a nuisance or be in violation of Chapter 6.02 BMC as currently enacted or hereinafter amended.

(o)    Chickens shall not be slaughtered.

(p)    All chicken feed or food set aside for chickens shall be stored in rodent-proof containers and feeders.

(q)    All structures used to house or care for chickens, including henhouses, coops and chicken tractors, shall be rodent-proof.

(r)    Any rodent activity in the vicinity of any chicken structure or enclosure shall require the licensed owner of the chickens to eradicate the rodents in compliance with local, state and federal laws. (Ord. 5185 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 5154 §5, 2011: Ord. 5126 §2 (part), 2010).


7.06.020 CHICKEN LICENSE.

(a)    Annual License. A single license to keep up to five (5) chickens per single-family residential lot shall be obtained annually by the owner or within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the owner acquires the chicken(s) or brings chickens into the City of Bremerton.

(b)    License Expiration. A chicken license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance.

(c)    Chicken License Fee. License fees are set pursuant to BMC 3.01.010.

(d)    Additional License Fee. Licenses not renewed by the designated renewal date shall be assessed an additional license fee of ten dollars ($10.00); provided, there shall be no additional license fee where:

(1)    The applicant has owned the chicken(s) for less than thirty (30) calendar days; or

(2)    The applicant has resided in the City for less than thirty (30) calendar days; or

(3)    At the discretion of the City Clerk, amnesty may be granted to all residents for an announced period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days in duration, and no more frequently than once per calendar year.

(e)    Exemptions from License Fees. The following are exempt from license fees:

(1)    Chickens in the temporary custody of a veterinarian or animal welfare organization whose owners are unknown; or

(2)    Chickens owned, and available for retail sale, by the owner or operator of a licensed commercial pet facility. (Ord. 5185 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 5126 §2 (part), 2010).


7.06.030 CHICKEN LICENSE PROCEDURE.

(a)    Issuance of Licenses. The City Treasurer, animal control authority, or the authorized agents thereof shall issue licenses pursuant to BMC 7.06.020, as specified in this section.

(b)    Contents of License. The license shall contain the following:

(1)    Date of issuance and date of expiration;

(2)    A serial number;

(3)    The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the chicken(s).

(c)    Transferability of Licenses. Licenses are not transferable from one chicken owner to another. (Ord. 5185 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 5126 §2 (part), 2010).


Chapter 7.08 LICENSES AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

7.08.010    CAT AND DOG LICENSES. 

7.08.020    CAT AND DOG LICENSE PROCEDURE.

7.08.030    COMMERCIAL PET FACILITIES, GROOMING PARLORS AND ANIMAL WELFARE FACILITIES.

7.08.040    UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


7.08.010 CAT AND DOG LICENSES.

(a)    License. All dogs and cats shall be licensed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the owner acquires the animal or takes up residence in the City of Bremerton.

(b)    License Expiration.

(1)    Annual licenses shall expire one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance.

(2)    Lifetime or permanent licenses shall expire upon death of the cat or dog, or upon change of ownership of the animal.

(c)    Cat and Dog License Fee. License fees are as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(d)    Additional License Fee. Annual licenses not renewed by the designated renewal date shall be assessed an additional license fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC; provided, there shall be no additional license fee where:

(1)    The applicant has owned the cat or dog for less than thirty (30) calendar days; or

(2)    The applicant has resided in the City for less than thirty (30) calendar days; or

(3)    At the discretion of the City Clerk, amnesty may be granted to all residents for an announced period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days in duration, and no more frequently than once per calendar year.

(e)    Exemptions from License Fees. The following are exempt from license fees:

(1)    Cats and dogs in the temporary custody of a veterinarian or animal welfare organization whose owners are unknown;

(2)    Cats and dogs owned, and available for retail sale, by the owner or operator of a licensed commercial pet facility; or

(3)    Service dogs.

(f)    Maximum Number of Household Pets. Not more than the accumulative total of four (4) of the following animals may be kept in conjunction with each permitted dwelling:

(1)    Dogs, cats and ferrets over the age of six (6) months.

(2)    Rabbits and similar animals over the age of three (3) months.

(3)    Pigeons over the age of three (3) months. (Ord. 5294 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 5064 §1, 2008: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.08.020 CAT AND DOG LICENSE PROCEDURE.

(a)    Issuance of Licenses. The City Treasurer, animal control authority, or the authorized agents thereof shall issue licenses pursuant to BMC 7.08.010, as specified in this section.

(b)    Contents of License. The license shall contain the following:

(1)    Date of issuance and date of expiration, if applicable;

(2)    A serial number;

(3)    Type of animal, its name, age, color(s), sex, breed/mix, distinguishing characteristics, and whether the animal is spayed or neutered;

(4)    The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the animal;

(5)    Permanent identification number or marking, such as microchip implant, if applicable.

(c)    License Tag.

(1)    With each license, the owner shall receive a license tag that shall contain the serial number that corresponds to the serial number on the license and the date of license expiration.

(2)    The license tag shall be worn at all times except that the license tag need not be worn by the licensed cat or dog in a sanctioned cat or dog show or while engaged in formal, recognized training. A microchip implant may replace a license tag; provided, the license is valid and the owner informs the licensing agent of change of address or phone number.

(d)    Licenses Not Transferable. Licenses are not transferable from one (1) cat or dog to another or from one (1) owner to another.

(e)    Lost Tags. Lost license tags may be replaced by a substitute license or tag upon application to the City Treasurer, the animal control authority, or their authorized agents thereof and payment of a replacement charge, as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. (Ord. 5294 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.08.030 COMMERCIAL PET FACILITIES, GROOMING PARLORS AND ANIMAL WELFARE FACILITIES.

(a)    License Required. Commercial pet facilities, grooming parlors, and animal welfare facilities shall be licensed pursuant to Chapters 3.01 and 5.02 BMC.

(b)    Operation Requirements for Commercial Pet Facilities and Animal Welfare Facilities.

(1)    Adequate food and water for each species, pursuant to BMC 7.04.020(a), and proper habitat and medical attention, if needed, shall be provided during normal business hours and when the facilities are not open for business;

(2)    Food shall be stored in a fashion that prevents contamination or infestation;

(3)    The facilities shall be maintained and operated in a healthful and sanitary manner, free from disease, infestation, and foul odors;

(4)    Sick animals shall be isolated from healthy ones in quarters adequately ventilated to prevent contamination of healthy animals;

(5)    Sick or injured animals shall receive appropriate medical treatment by or under the auspices of a licensed veterinarian. Records shall be maintained reflecting treatment, care, dates of veterinary visits, and the name of the veterinarian and veterinary clinic providing treatment. Sick or injured animals shall not be sold, bartered, or otherwise transferred from a commercial pet facility or animal welfare facility to a new owner until the illness or injury is substantially healed, unless such transfer is to an animal welfare organization that assumed all responsibility for providing the appropriate medical treatment;

(6)    Cats and dogs shall receive age-appropriate vaccines and anthelmintics. Records of such shall be maintained for each animal and made available to the animal control authority and the Bremerton-Kitsap County Health District, including the name and address of the attending veterinarian, if applicable;

(7)    A copy of all medical records including, but not limited to, the records described in subsections (b)(5) and (6) of this section shall be provided to new owners at the time the ownership of the animal is transferred, or to the animal control authority upon request;

(8)    A pet shop may offer for sale only those cats and dogs that the pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with an animal welfare organization;

(9)    A pet shop shall not offer for sale a cat or dog that is younger than eight (8) weeks old;

(10)    A pet shop shall maintain records stating the name and address of the animal welfare organization that each cat and dog was obtained from for at least two (2) years following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be provided to new owners at the time the ownership of the animal is transferred, and to the animal control authority upon request. Each pet shop shall display on each cage a label stating the name and address of the animal welfare organization of each cat or dog kept in a cage; and

(11)    Commercial pet facilities, grooming parlors, and animal welfare facilities shall comply with the veterinary certification requirements of WAC 16-54-170 when importing dogs, cats, and ferrets from outside Washington. Records documenting compliance with WAC 16-54-170 shall be maintained for at least two (2) years following the date of acquisition of the animal and such records shall be provided to new owners at the time the ownership of the animal is transferred, and to the animal control authority upon request.

(c)    Facility and individual housing and habitat requirements for commercial pet facilities and animal welfare facilities:

(1)    Indoor and outdoor animal housing facilities shall be in good repair, protect the animals from injury, and shall provide sufficient security to contain the animals while preventing entry by unwanted animals. Also, the habitat shall provide species-specific requirements including, but not limited to, temperature, humidity, and light.

(2)    Indoor facilities shall:

(i)    Provide the animal with adequate space for movement and ability to sit, lie, stand, and stretch without touching the sides or top of housing;

(ii)    Be heated or cooled to protect the animals from temperatures to which they are not acclimated;

(iii)    Be adequately ventilated;

(iv)    Have interior walls, ceilings, and floors that are sealed and are resistant to absorption of moisture or odors;

(v)    Have flooring with a surface that can be sanitized and treated to minimize growth of harmful bacteria;

(vi)    Have a waste collection and removal system that facilitates cleaning and permits maintaining the facility in a sanitary condition; and

(vii)    Have available a washroom with sink for hot and cold running water.

(3)    Outdoor facilities shall:

(i)    Provide adequate shelter and protection from adverse weather;

(ii)    Provide sufficient room for adequate exercise and movement; and

(iii)    When no indoor facility is available, outdoor facilities shall also:

(iv)    Have flooring with a surface that can be sanitized and treated to minimize growth of harmful bacteria;

(v)    Have a waste collection and removal system that facilitates cleaning and permits maintaining the facility in a sanitary condition; and

(vi)    Have available a washroom with sink for hot and cold running water.

(d)    Operation and Facility Requirements for Grooming Parlors. Grooming parlors shall:

(1)    Not board animals;

(2)    Provide restraining straps for animals to prevent injury while being groomed;

(3)    Sterilize grooming equipment after each use;

(4)    Not leave animals unattended when placed before a dryer;

(5)    Not prescribe or administer treatment or medicine or otherwise engage in veterinary practice as defined in RCW 18.92.010;

(6)    Not confine more than one (1) animal in the same cage unless so requested by the owner of the animals;

(7)    Be structurally sound and in good repair, designed to protect the animals from injury, and provide sufficient security to contain the animals while preventing entry by unwanted animals;

(8)    Have grooming and animal containment areas with walls, ceilings and floors that are sealed and resistant to absorption of moisture and odors; and

(9)    Be cleaned and sanitized on a regular basis.

(e)    Inspections. The animal control authority shall inspect existing or proposed commercial pet facilities, animal welfare facilities, and grooming parlors in connection with its licensing investigation and when inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this title. Such inspections shall be made during regular business hours. (Ord. 5334 §1, 2017; Ord. 5140 §2, 2011; Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.08.040 UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

(a)    It shall be unlawful:

(1)    For a person other than the owner, keeper, or other authorized person to remove the license tag from an animal required or permitted to be licensed pursuant to this chapter;

(2)    To operate a commercial pet facility, animal welfare facility, or grooming parlor without a valid license;

(3)    To operate a commercial pet facility, animal welfare facility, or grooming parlor in a fashion contrary to that required by BMC 7.08.030.

(b)    Any violation of this chapter as set forth in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Further, any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this section is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 7.10 IMPOUNDMENT AND QUARANTINE

Sections:

7.10.010    IMPOUNDING, REDEMPTION, AND DISPOSITION OF PETS AND/OR LIVESTOCK.

7.10.020    QUARANTINE.

7.10.030    UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


7.10.010 IMPOUNDING, REDEMPTION, AND DISPOSITION OF PETS AND/OR LIVESTOCK.

(a)    Impounding Pets and/or Livestock. Pets and/or livestock may be impounded in the following situations:

(1)    When the animal is at large;

(2)    When the animal has been subjected to cruel treatment as defined by Chapter 16.52 RCW;

(3)    When the animal has injured or bitten a person or other animal, and/or where the animal poses a threat to people or other animals;

(4)    When the animal is found in violation of any restrictions imposed by a court, animal control authority or hearing examiner, relating to potentially dangerous animals; or to BMC 7.12.030 relating to dangerous animals;

(5)    When the animal is found in violation of BMC 7.15.010(c) pertaining to animal noise, after two (2) written warnings to the owner within a calendar year;

(6)    When the animal is found within the City limits and has previously been declared to be a dangerous animal by a court, animal control authority or hearing examiner.

(b)    Place and Manner of Impoundment. Pets and livestock shall be impounded in the place and manner designated by the animal control authority.

(c)    Authority to Pursue. Animal control authority employees may pursue pets or livestock running at large onto City-owned property, vacant property and unenclosed private property to seize, remove, and impound such animals. This shall not restrict the animal control authority to pursue/impound an animal pursuant to Chapter 16.52 RCW.

(d)    Notice to Owner. Forthwith following impoundment, the animal control authority shall notify the owner of the animal of its impoundment; provided, if the owner of the animal is unknown, the animal control authority shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the impoundment.

(e)    Redemption of Impounded Animals.

(1)    Pets may be redeemed upon payment of the cost of the animal’s medical care, an impound fee, a vaccination fee, a boarding fee, and any appropriate license and microchip fees.

(2)    Livestock may be redeemed upon payment of an impound fee, a boarding fee, and, if impounding requires special transportation, a special transportation fee.

(3)    All costs and fees shall be charged per animal handled by the animal control authority. The applicable fees are set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(f)    Disposition of Impounded Animals Not Redeemed.

(1)    When a pet is not redeemed, no sooner than ninety-six (96) hours following impoundment, the animal control authority may give or adopt the animal to an animal welfare organization or qualified person, or euthanize the animal.

(2)    When livestock is not redeemed, no sooner than seventy-two (72) hours following impoundment, the animal control authority may give or adopt the animal to an animal welfare organization or qualified person, or may commence to auction the animal to the highest bidder that can provide the animal with a suitable environment, or euthanize the animal. Notice of the auction and a description of the livestock to be auctioned shall be published at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the sale in the official City newspaper. Such notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the livestock, if known.

(3)    When a feral cat is not redeemed, no sooner than twenty-four (24) hours following impoundment, the animal control authority may give or adopt the animal to an animal welfare organization or qualified person, or euthanize the animal.

(g)    Disposition of Sick or Injured Impounded Animals. Sick or injured impounded animals may be euthanized in accordance with RCW 16.52.210. (Ord. 5253 §1, 2014: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.10.020 QUARANTINE.

A pet or livestock that bites and breaks the skin of any person may be impounded by the animal control authority and, if impounded, shall be quarantined for ten (10) calendar days to determine if the animal is infected with a disease. The place of quarantine shall be established by the animal control authority. The animal control authority may, in its discretion, allow the owner of the animal to maintain the quarantine. Any boarding fees incurred during the quarantine shall be paid by the owner of the animal. During the quarantine, the animal shall not have contact or access to any person or any other pet or livestock other than with the owner of the animal or animal control authority employees. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.10.030 UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

(a)    It shall be unlawful:

(1)    For an owner or keeper to sell an animal knowing it to be ill or injured without first disclosing such knowledge to the buyer;

(2)    For an owner or keeper to refuse to quarantine or permit the quarantine of an animal when and as required by BMC 7.10.020;

(3)    For any person to prevent, obstruct or hinder the impoundment of an animal pursuant to BMC 7.10.010.

(b)    Any violation of this chapter as set forth in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Further, any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this section is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 7.12 DANGEROUS ANIMALS

Sections:

7.12.010    POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

7.12.020    FAILURE TO CONTROL AN ANIMAL DECLARED POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS.

7.12.030    DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

7.12.040    POSSESSION OF AN ANIMAL DECLARED DANGEROUS.


7.12.010 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

(a)    Declaration of an Animal as Potentially Dangerous. The animal control authority shall have the authority to declare and restrict an animal potentially dangerous, if the animal control authority has probable cause to believe that the animal falls within the definitions set forth in BMC 7.04.020(v). The declaration must be based upon:

(1)    The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of BMC 7.04.020(v); 

(2)    Animal bite reports filed with the animal control authority;

(3)    Actions of the animal witnessed by any employee of the animal control authority or law enforcement officer; or

(4)    Other substantial evidence.

(b)    Exclusions. An animal shall not be declared potentially dangerous if the animal control authority determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the threat, injury, or bite alleged to have been committed by the animal was sustained by a person who was at the time committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or who was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or who had been in the past observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal, or who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

(c)    Restrictions. The animal control authority may impose any or all of the following restrictions on an animal to protect the public safety or other animals:

(1)    Training. The animal control authority may require the owner of the potentially dangerous animal and the animal to attend, complete, and pay all costs associated with an accredited obedience/training class or seminar. The animal control authority shall pre-approve any choice of class by the owner of the animal, and proof of satisfactory completion of such training shall be provided to the animal control authority upon completion, even if such type of training has been completed by the animal in the past. 

(2)    Restraint. The animal control authority may require the owner of the potentially dangerous animal to muzzle, leash, collar, confine, lock, isolate, or remove the animal from the City, or any combination of the foregoing.

(3)    Indemnification. The animal control authority may require the owner of the potentially dangerous animal to prove purchase of liability insurance or bond and renewals in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more, as set by the animal control authority. The insurer/bond issuer must be qualified under RCW Title 48 and must provide coverage/funds to offset any injuries inflicted by the potentially dangerous animal. All costs associated with the insurance/bond must be paid by the insured.

(4)    Warning. The animal control authority may require the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to post all entrances to any property where such animal is located with such visible warning sign(s) as the animal control authority deems necessary.

(5)    Financial Responsibility. The animal control authority may require the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to pay any costs associated with enforcement of this section including, but not limited to, those stated above.

(d)    Prohibited Ownership. No person(s) under the age(s) of eighteen (18) years old shall own a potentially dangerous animal, as defined in BMC 7.04.020(v). 

(e)    Notice of Animal Control Authority Declaration. If the animal control authority receives a report of a potentially dangerous animal, it shall immediately initiate an investigation including, but not limited to, interviewing the complainant(s), interviewing the owner of the animal, if known, and observing the animal. Upon completion of its investigation, if the animal is declared potentially dangerous, the animal control authority shall prepare a written declaration. The declaration shall include, but is not limited to, a description of the animal, the name and address of the owner of the animal, if known, a brief summary of the facts upon which the declaration is based, a statement of any restrictions placed on the animal or owner as a consequence of the declaration, a statement of the penalties for further violations, and notice of the right to appeal the declaration.

(f)    Service of Notice of Declaration. The animal control authority shall personally serve or send by certified mail its declaration to the owner of the animal. If the owner is unknown, the animal control authority shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of its written declaration.

(g)    Appeal to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. The owner of an animal declared potentially dangerous shall have seven (7) calendar days from receipt of the written declaration to appeal the declaration to the municipal court hearing examiner pursuant to BMC 2.62.045. Unless otherwise agreed to by the animal owner, the appeal hearing must be scheduled to be heard within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the City’s receipt of the notice of appeal. The municipal court hearing examiner shall provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the owner of the potentially dangerous animal and to the animal control authority. Such notice must be provided at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing.

(h)    Hearing Before the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. At the appeal hearing before the municipal court hearing examiner, the animal control authority shall have the burden of proving that the animal is potentially dangerous by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner of the animal may present evidence in defense of the animal. The municipal court hearing examiner shall weigh the evidence presented by both the animal control authority and the owner (if applicable), and shall issue a written decision to the appealing animal owner and animal control authority that either sustains or reverses the animal control authority’s declaration.

(i)    Change of Ownership, Custody, and/or Residence. Owners of an animal that has been declared potentially dangerous who sell, barter, or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody, or residence of the animal shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the change, inform the animal control authority in writing of the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, and/or the address of the new residence where the animal is located. Such notice shall also include the name, description, and license number of the animal. In the event the ownership and/or custody of the animal changes, the owner shall notify the new owner in writing of the details of the animal’s record relating to being declared potentially dangerous and the terms and conditions of the declaration. The owner shall also provide the animal control authority with a copy of the written notification that shall contain a notarized statement by the new owner acknowledging receipt of the original notification.

(j)    Failure to Abide by Restraints. Failure on the part of the owner(s) of a potentially dangerous animal to abide by the restraints placed upon the owner(s) or their animal by the animal control authority, municipal court hearing examiner, district court, or superior court may result in impoundment of the potentially dangerous animal by the animal control authority as well as further punitive action pursuant to BMC 7.12.020. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4866 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.12.020 FAILURE TO CONTROL AN ANIMAL DECLARED POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS.

(a)    Misdemeanor. When an animal has been previously declared potentially dangerous, by a court, animal control authority or municipal court hearing examiner, the owner of the potentially dangerous animal shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2) if such animal is thereafter found:

(1)    At large;

(2)    To have, when unprovoked, inflicted a bite(s) upon a human, pet, or livestock either on public or private property; 

(3)    To have chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any other public grounds in such a manner as to significantly threaten the safety of humans, pets, or livestock; or

(4)    To have caused injury to or otherwise threatened the safety of humans, pets, or livestock. This section shall not preclude immediate criminal prosecution under RCW 16.08.100 in a first bite situation causing severe injury or death of any human.

(b)    Impoundment of Potentially Dangerous Animals. In the event that a potentially dangerous animal is impounded due to the owner’s failure to abide by the restraints imposed by the animal control authority, municipal court hearing examiner, district court, superior court or municipal court, the animal shall be forfeited to the animal control authority unless the owner of the animal makes a written request for a hearing before the municipal court hearing examiner in the same manner as an appeal pursuant to BMC 2.62.045 within seven (7) calendar days of the date the notice of impound was provided. If a hearing is requested, the hearing must be scheduled to be heard within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the City’s receipt of the request for a hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the animal owner. The municipal court hearing examiner shall determine whether it is in the best interest of the community that the animal should be returned to the owner, forfeited by the owner to the animal control authority, or euthanized by the animal control authority. The municipal court hearing examiner shall provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the owner of the animal and to the animal control authority. Such notice must be provided at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4866 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.12.030 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

(a)    Declaration of an Animal as Dangerous. The animal control authority shall have the authority to declare an animal as dangerous if the animal control authority has probable cause to believe that the animal falls within the definition set forth in BMC 7.04.020(j). The declaration must be based upon:

(1)    The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of BMC 7.04.020(j); 

(2)    Animal bite reports filed with the animal control authority;

(3)    Actions of the animal witnessed by any employee of the animal control authority or law enforcement officer; or

(4)    Other substantial evidence.

(b)    Exclusions. An animal shall not be declared dangerous if the animal control authority determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the threat, injury, or bite alleged to have been committed by the animal was sustained by a person who was at the time committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or who was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or who had been in the past observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal, or who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

(c)    Possession Unlawful. It shall be unlawful to possess an animal, inside the City limits of Bremerton, that has been declared to be dangerous by any agency, animal control authority, municipality or court. This prohibition on possession does not apply to the animal control authority or police department. It is a gross misdemeanor to violate this provision.

(d)    Euthanasia. If the animal control authority determines that the restrictions placed on the ownership of dangerous dogs/animals by Chapter 16.08 RCW or other applicable state statutes are insufficient to protect the public from a particular animal declared dangerous, the animal control authority may order the animal euthanized.

(e) Notice of Animal Control Authority Declaration. If the animal control authority receives a report of a dangerous animal, it shall immediately initiate an investigation including, but not limited to, interviewing the complainant(s), interviewing the owner of the animal, if known, and observing the animal. Upon completion of its investigation, if the animal is declared dangerous, the animal control authority shall prepare a written declaration. The declaration shall include, but is not limited to, a description of the animal, the name and address of the owner of the animal, if known, a brief summary of the facts upon which the declaration is based, a statement of any restrictions placed on the animal or owner as a consequence of the declaration, a statement of the penalties for further violations, and notice of the right to appeal the declaration.

(f)    Service of Notice of Declaration. The animal control authority shall personally serve or send by certified mail its declaration to the owner of the animal. If the owner is unknown, the animal control authority shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of its written declaration.

(g)    Appeal to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. The owner of an animal declared dangerous shall have seven (7) calendar days, from receipt of the written declaration, to appeal the declaration of the animal control authority to the municipal court hearing examiner pursuant to BMC 2.62.045. Unless otherwise agreed to by the animal owner, the appeal hearing must be scheduled to be heard within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the City’s receipt of the notice of appeal. The municipal court hearing examiner shall provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the owner of the animal and the animal control authority. 

(h)    Hearing Before the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. At the appeal hearing before the municipal court hearing examiner, the animal control authority shall have the burden of proving that the animal is dangerous by a preponderance of the evidence. The owner of the animal may present evidence in defense of the animal. The municipal court hearing examiner shall weigh the evidence presented by both the animal control authority and the owner (if applicable), and shall issue a written decision to the appealing animal owner and animal control authority that either sustains or reverses the animal control authority’s declaration. If the declaration is sustained or reversed by the municipal court hearing examiner, the appealing animal owner or the animal control authority shall be notified of the right to appeal. If the declaration is reversed and an appeal is not timely filed by the animal control authority, any restrictions on the animal previously imposed shall be annulled.

(i)    Change of Ownership, Custody, and/or Residence. Owners of an animal that has been declared dangerous who sell, barter, or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody, or residence of the animal shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the change, inform the animal control authority in writing of the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, and/or the address of the new residence where the animal is located. Such notice shall also include the name, description, and license number of the animal. In the event the ownership and/or custody of the animal changes, the owner shall notify the new owner in writing of the details of the animal’s record relating to being declared dangerous and the terms and conditions of the declaration. The owner shall also provide the animal control authority with a copy of the written notification that shall contain a notarized statement by the new owner acknowledging receipt of the original notification. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4866 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


7.12.040 POSSESSION OF AN ANIMAL DECLARED DANGEROUS.

(a)    Gross Misdemeanor. When an animal has been previously declared dangerous, by a court, animal control authority or municipal court hearing examiner, the owner of the dangerous animal shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(1) if such animal is thereafter found:

(1)    In the owner’s possession inside Bremerton City limits; or

(2)    Inside City limits under circumstances evidencing that the animal was intentionally brought into the City by the owner or at the request or acquiescence of the owner.

(b)    Impoundment of Dangerous Animals. In the event that a dangerous animal is impounded due to the animal being found within the Bremerton City limits, the animal shall be forfeited to the animal control authority unless the owner of the animal makes a written request for a hearing within seven (7) calendar days of the date the notice of impound was provided to the owner of the animal. If a hearing is requested, the hearing must be scheduled to be heard within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the day of the City’s receipt of the request for a hearing before the municipal court hearing examiner in the same manner as an appeal pursuant to BMC 2.62.045 unless otherwise agreed to by the animal owner. The municipal court hearing examiner shall determine whether it is in the best interest of the community that the animal should be returned to the owner, forfeited by the owner to the animal control authority, or euthanized by the animal control authority. The municipal court hearing examiner shall provide written notice of the hearing date and time to the owner of the potentially dangerous animal and to the animal control authority. Such notice must be provided at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled hearing. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005: Ord. 4866 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4807, Repealed & Replaced, 06/28/2002)


Chapter 7.14 ANIMAL CRUELTY

Sections:

7.14.010    ANIMAL CRUELTY.

7.14.020    UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.


7.14.010 ANIMAL CRUELTY.

RCW 16.52.207 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.14.020 UNLAWFUL - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

RCW 16.52.200 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 7.15 VIOLATIONS AND INFRACTIONS

Sections:

7.15.010    INFRACTIONS.

7.15.020    INFRACTION PENALTY.

7.15.030    VIOLATION - MISDEMEANOR.

7.15.040    VIOLATION - PUBLIC NUISANCE.


7.15.010 INFRACTIONS.

In addition to other violations and related fines or penalties provided in this title, the following violations are declared to be Class 1 civil infractions:

(a)    Animal at Large. For the owner of a pet or livestock to suffer or permit such animal to leave the premises of the owner, unless the animal is under physical restraint adequate to the size and nature of the animal or is sufficiently near its owner to be under its owner’s direct control and is obedient to its owner’s commands, except that all dogs must be leashed when not on the premises of the owner. Exceptions to this restriction are pets engaged in formal training, competition, service dogs engaged in an activity for which they are trained or in service, or dogs allowed in City of Bremerton dog parks as provided in Chapter 13.04 BMC. This provision also applies to the requirements established in BMC 7.06.010(m);

(b)    Animal in Heat. For the owner of a pet in heat to keep such an animal where it is accessible to male animals unless such accessibility is for the purpose of planned breeding;

(c)    Animal Noise. For any person(s) to own any animal which by its barking, howling, baying, squealing, crowing, crying, bleating, screeching, or making any other noise which by its volume or frequency unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace of any person(s) for more than fifteen (15) minutes in any one (1) hour period of any day, and is documented by three (3) or more separate episodes of such noise in a sequential seven (7) day period. The burden is upon the owner of such animal(s) to maintain quiet. Exceptions to this subsection are commercial pet facilities, animal welfare facilities, veterinary hospitals, or grooming parlors otherwise in compliance with the Bremerton Municipal Code including, but not limited to, BMC 7.08.030, or those who can substantiate that such animal noise was caused by an injury or illness of the animal(s) or by willful trespass, torment, or abuse of the animal(s) on its property by others.

Enforcement may be undertaken only upon written receipt of a complaint made to either the animal control authority or law enforcement by a person(s) residing at or who is employed in an area affected by such public noise disturbance. Any such animal(s) shall be deemed a nuisance and may be seized and impounded, pursuant to BMC 7.10.010(a), if the disturbance reoccurs after the owner or custodian of such animal(s) has received two (2) written warnings from either the animal control authority or law enforcement within a calendar year;

(d)    Damaging Property. For the owner of a pet or livestock to suffer or permit the animal to leave the premises of the owner and thereafter cause damage to anything of value or any other pet or livestock;

(e)    Disturbing Pedestrians. For the owner of a pet or livestock, when off the property of the owner, to suffer or permit the animal to disturb people lawfully on public ways. For the purposes of this section, "disturb" shall mean to chase or approach a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any other public grounds or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack;

(f)    Chasing Vehicles. For the owner of a pet or livestock to suffer or permit the animal to chase or run at or after vehicles lawfully on public ways;

(g)    Reporting and Releasing Stray Animals. For any person to fail to notify the animal control authority that a stray pet or livestock is in the person’s possession, or to refuse to release such stray animal to the animal control authority upon demand;

(h)    Releasing Animal. For any person except the owner or other authorized person to release any pet or livestock from confinement;

(i)    Excess Number of Animals. To own more than a total of four (4) household pets as provided in BMC 7.08.010(f) or to own more than a total of five (5) chickens as provided in BMC 7.06.010(a) at the same place or residence without a valid commercial pet facility or animal welfare facility license;

(j)    Failure to License. For an owner to fail to license a cat or dog as required by BMC 7.08.010(a); or to fail to obtain a chicken license as required by BMC 7.06.020(a);

(k)    Animal Bites. To own a pet or livestock that bites a person while such person is on public property or lawfully on private property;

(l)    Agitating an Animal. To intentionally agitate, harass, or provoke a pet or livestock except that a person may take reasonable steps, not causing undue pain or suffering, to remove unwanted animals from their property;

(m)    Failing to Notify Animal Control Authority of Change of Ownership, Custody, and/or Residence. For any owner of an animal that has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous to sell, barter, or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody, or residence of such an animal without notifying the animal control authority within fourteen (14) calendar days of the change as required by BMC 7.12.010(i) or to otherwise fail to comply with the requirements of that section;

(n)    Sale, Barter, or Other Transfer of Pets in Public Places Prohibited. It is unlawful to sell, barter, or otherwise transfer for the purpose of changing ownership any pet in an area open to the public, unless such activity is pursuant to BMC 7.08.030, or occurs at a sanctioned dog or cat show;

(o)    Transporting a pet or livestock in the open bed of a pickup truck or other outside part of a vehicle unless a suitable harness, cage, or enclosure is utilized and attached so as to protect such animal from falling or being thrown from the vehicle, and would not by its design or application cause injury to the animal;

(p)    Pets Chasing Livestock. For the owner of a pet to permit that animal to harass or chase another owner’s livestock, when not engaged in the specific work of herding approved by the owner of the livestock;

(q)    Animal Waste. For the owner of a pet to fail to remove deposits of fecal material originating from the owner’s animal from public or private property unless the owner of such property has given permission for such material to be deposited. This shall not authorize such deposits as are otherwise governed by public health regulations or other provisions of this code;

(r)    Outdoor Feeding. It shall be unlawful:

(1)    To feed or allow any domestic or wild animals or birds to be fed outdoors at such times and in such numbers that feeding birds or animals create an unreasonable disturbance or accumulation of droppings on surrounding properties, including public property; or

(2)    To feed or allow raccoons to be fed outdoors at any time;

(s)    Ownership or possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old of any dangerous or potentially dangerous animal;

(t)    Roosters. It is unlawful to keep a rooster or roosters as prohibited by BMC 7.06.010(b);

(u)    Henhouses, coops and chicken tractors. For an owner to fail to comply with the provisions of BMC 7.06.010(d) through BMC 7.06.010(k);

(v)    For an owner to keep chickens in violation of BMC 7.06.010(m);

(w)    Chickens kept inside a permitted dwelling. For anyone to keep chickens, except chicks, inside any permitted dwelling as prohibited by BMC 7.06.010(c);

(x)    For an owner to fail to manage chicken manure as required in BMC 7.06.010(n);

(y)    For an owner to fail to maintain chicken feed in rodent-proof containers as required by BMC 7.06.010(p);

(z)    For an owner to fail to provide for rodent-proof chicken structures pursuant to BMC 7.06.010(q);

(aa)     For an owner to fail to take necessary steps to eradicate rodents pursuant to BMC 7.06.010(r);

(bb)    For any owner to slaughter chickens in violation of BMC 7.06.010(o). This provision shall in no way limit the City of Bremerton’s ability to prosecute for violations of Chapter 7.14 BMC. (Ord. 5243 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5185 §2, 2012; Ord. 5126 §3, 2010; Ord. 4952 §2, 2005; Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.15.020 INFRACTION PENALTY.

(a)    Infraction. The base penalty for any infraction specified in BMC 7.15.010 shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for the first violation, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second infraction committed within any twelve (12) month period, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and subsequent infractions committed within any twelve (12) month period. In addition to the base penalty, a public safety and educational assessment and any other assessments required by statute shall be imposed. Each and every day or portion thereof in which an infraction is committed shall constitute a separate and distinct infraction. Infractions under this section may be charged and processed pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC. (Ord. 5243 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.15.030 VIOLATION - MISDEMEANOR.

Any person who fails to cure a violation or comply with the requirements of this chapter after issuance of an infraction pursuant to BMC 7.15.020 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5243 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.15.040 VIOLATION - PUBLIC NUISANCE.

Any violation of the provisions of this title, regardless if such constitutes a crime or infraction hereunder, shall be, and the same are declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 5243 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Chapter 7.16 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

7.16.010    FAILURE TO REPORT STRIKING OF ANIMAL.

7.16.020    OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.

7.16.030    HABITUAL VIOLATORS.


7.16.010 FAILURE TO REPORT STRIKING OF ANIMAL.

Any person who fails to report the striking of an animal with a vehicle to the animal control authority or law enforcement shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2); provided, that no person shall be held liable for the injury or death of an animal under this section unless found to have committed a crime pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.52 RCW or this section. (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.16.020 OBSTRUCTING ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY.

Any person who willfully hinders, delays, or otherwise obstructs any animal control authority employee in the discharge of the employee’s official powers or duties shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(1). (Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


7.16.030 HABITUAL VIOLATORS.

(a)    Habitual Violators. Any owner receiving any combination of four (4) or more:

(1)    Convictions, singularly or in combination, of crimes relating to animals within a five (5) year period; and/or

(2)    Infractions under this title, singularly or in combination, pursuant to BMC 7.15.010 found to be committed by the Municipal Court within a five (5) year period shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(1) for each additional act constituting a crime or infraction under this title.

(b)    Habitual Violators – Chicken Regulations. In addition to the sanctions provided in subsection (a) of this section, any owner receiving three or more infractions relating to any chicken regulation found to be committed by the Municipal Court within a two (2) year period shall have his or her chicken license revoked and shall be prohibited from renewing his or her chicken license.

(c)    Any applicant or licensee may, within seven (7) working days from the date that a denial or revocation notice was mailed to the applicant or licensee, appeal from such denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor with the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 2.62.045. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in BMC 2.62.045. After the hearing thereon the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the license, and may impose any terms thereupon.

(d)     No revocation of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect until seven (7) working days after service of the notice thereof by the Kitsap Humane Society, and if the appeal is timely filed, the revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner. All licenses which are revoked shall be surrendered to the Kitsap Humane Society on the effective date of such revocation.

(e)    The decision of the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner shall be final. The applicant or licensee and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. If review is sought as herein prescribed, the renewal or revocation shall be stayed pending final action by the Superior Court.

(f)    When revoked, the license shall be canceled and immediately surrendered to a representative of the Kitsap Humane Society. Upon revocation of any license as provided in this chapter, no portion of the license fee shall be returned to the licensee. Additionally, any licensee who has had his or her chicken license revoked shall remove any chickens from his or her property within seven (7) days of the effective date of the revocation. (Ord. 5126 §3, 2010: Ord. 4949 §1 (part), 2005)


Title 8 (Reserved)


Title 9 PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS

Chapters:

9.06    POLICE DOGS

9.10    TOW TRUCK ROSTER

9.12    TOW TRUCK SERVICES

9.18    NO SMOKING SIGNS

9.20    PAWNBROKERS AND SECOND-HAND DEALERS

9.24    PROSTITUTION

9.29    NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES

9.32    UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING

9.34    HOTELS/MOTELS

9.37    UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES

9.39    SOLICITING

9.48    FIREWORKS

9.50    SOLVENT INHALATION

9.88    DRUG OFFENSES

9.89    DRUG RELATED LOITERING

9.92    CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES


Chapter 9.06 POLICE DOGS

Sections:

9.06.010    INJURING OR INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED - PENALTIES.


9.06.010 INJURING OR INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED - PENALTIES.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly strike, injure, attempt to injure, restrain by holding a collar or harness, or in any way interfere with the duties of any police dog used by a police officer while performing a police duty or function.

(b)    Any person convicted of violating chapter, or any part hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12.

(c)    In addition, any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to contribute one hundred dollars to the Police Department Canine Unit Fund, and such contribution shall not be suspended or deferred. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3896 §§1 and 2, 1984)


Chapter 9.10 TOW TRUCK ROSTER

Sections:

9.10.010    TOWING ROSTER.

9.10.020    ELIGIBILITY QUALIFICATIONS.

9.10.030    ROTATING ROSTER.

9.10.040    ADDITIONS TO ROSTER.

9.10.050    COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.

9.10.060    FEES.


9.10.010 TOWING ROSTER.

The Chief of Police shall establish a roster of companies qualified to provide City authorized and City requested towing services. Any towing company which meets the requirements set forth in BMC 9.10.020 shall, upon request, be placed on the roster. (Ord. 4391 §1 (in part), 1992)


9.10.020 ELIGIBILITY QUALIFICATIONS.

In order to be eligible to provide City authorized and City requested towing to the City, a towing operator shall:

(a)    Own and maintain within the City at least three (3) Class A tow trucks;

(b)    Own and maintain within the City at least one (1) Class C tow truck;

(c)    Maintain an impound lot located within the City of Bremerton and within one-quarter mile of its business office;

(d)    Maintain a business office within the City manned and opened to the public eight (8) hours per day and five (5) days per week; provided, however, that during months when a particular towing contractor is providing services to the City and one day thereafter its business office shall be manned and opened to the public twenty-four (24) hours per day and seven (7) days per week; and

(e)    Possess a valid City of Bremerton business license. (Ord. 4391 (in part), 1992)


9.10.030 ROTATING ROSTER.

Towing operators placed by the Chief of Police on the roster maintained in accordance with BMC 9.10.010 shall have the exclusive right to provide City authorized and City requested tows; provided, however, That the various individual towing operators shall be granted such right on a rotating basis, for periods of thirty (30) days; and Provided, further, That if during the towing operator’s period of rotation the City has need for towing services which the towing operator does not possess the equipment to meet, the City may, at its option, request towing services from any towing operator capable of meeting those needs. (Ord. 4391 (in part), 1992)


9.10.040 ADDITIONS TO ROSTER.

Towing operators which qualify for placement upon the roster after the initial roster is established shall enter the rotation provided for in BMC 9.10.030 only after each operator on the roster has completed one additional month in the rotation. (Ord. 4391 (in part), 1992)


9.10.050 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.

All tow operators maintained on the roster operated or created herein shall comply with requirements set forth in RCW 46.55. The failure of a contractor to comply with the requirements set forth therein shall result in its name being stricken from the roster. (Ord. 4391 (in part), 1992)


9.10.060 FEES.

Fees charged by the towing operators to the City for City authorized and City requested tows shall be those then in effect under the Washington State Patrol towing contract with the exception that no additional fees will be charged for release of property after regular business hours. (Ord. No. 4391 (in part), 1992)


Chapter 9.12 TOW TRUCK SERVICES

Sections:

9.12.010    PAYMENT OF TOWING SERVICES - ACCEPTANCE OF CHECKS REQUIRED.

9.12.020    REFUSAL TO ACCEPT CHECK - FINE IMPOSED.

9.12.030    PENALTY FOR BAD CHECKS.

9.12.040    PENALTY NOTICE - POSTING OF SIGN.


9.12.010 PAYMENT OF TOWING SERVICES - ACCEPTANCE OF CHECKS REQUIRED.

Any tow truck operator doing business in the city who removes a vehicle, shall release such vehicle to the owner, operator, driver or authorized designee thereof upon the presentation to any person having custody of such vehicle of commercially reasonable tender sufficient to cover the cost of towing, storage or other services rendered during the course of towing, removing, impounding or storing any such motor vehicle, such commercially reasonable tender to include, without limitation, cash, personal checks drawn on local financial institutions with valid local identification such as a valid Washington driver’s license, or valid and appropriate credit cards; provided, that no tow truck operator shall be required to accept a personal check from an individual who has, in the past, delivered any check, draft or order which, when presented to the financial institution for payment, is returned to the towing company unpaid. (Ord. 3690 §1, 1982)


9.12.020 REFUSAL TO ACCEPT CHECK - FINE IMPOSED.

There shall be imposed a fine of one hundred dollars on any towing company doing business in the city which refuses to accept a personal check drawn on a local financial institution and accompanied by valid local identification, such as a valid Washington driver’s license, in payment for towing services. (Ord. 3690 §2, 1982)


9.12.030 PENALTY FOR BAD CHECKS.

Any person who delivers any check, draft or order which, when presented to the financial institution for payment, is returned to the towing company unpaid, shall be liable for double the amount of the check as a penalty. (Ord. 3690 §3, 1982)


9.12.040 PENALTY NOTICE - POSTING OF SIGN.

Every towing company doing business in the city shall post in a conspicuous place upon its business premises a sign which states:

WE ACCEPT CHECKS PER BREMERTON MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE NO. 3690; IF CHECK IS RETURNED UNPAID TO THE TOWING COMPANY, YOU WILL BE LIABLE FOR DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF THE CHECK AS A PENALTY.

(Ord. 3690 §4, 1982)


Chapter 9.18 NO SMOKING SIGNS

Sections:

9.18.010    PURPOSE.

9.18.015    SMOKING IN POSTED BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.

9.18.020    THEATER RESTRICTIONS.

9.18.030    BUS RESTRICTIONS.

9.18.050    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.


9.18.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter is an exercise of the police power for the purpose of abating the fire hazard occasioned by smoking in theaters, busses, and buildings posted with "No Smoking" signs. (Ord. 1518 §1, 1943)


9.18.015 SMOKING IN POSTED BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.

It is unlawful to light or smoke a cigar, cigarette or a pipe, or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or a pipe in any building in the city on which is posted in a conspicuous place over and near each principal entrance a notice in plain, legible characters, stating that no smoking is allowed in such building. (Ord. 1518 §4, 1943)


9.18.020 THEATER RESTRICTIONS.

It is unlawful to light or smoke a cigar, cigarette or a pipe, or to carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or a pipe in any place in a theater except in a restroom, lounge, or other space therein properly equipped with ashtrays, and approved by the fire chief of the City of Bremerton as a safe place for smoking. (Ord. 1518, §2, 1943)


9.18.030 BUS RESTRICTIONS.

It is unlawful to light or smoke a cigar, cigarette or a pipe, or to carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or a pipe on any public transportation bus in the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 1518 §3, 1943)


9.18.050 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 1518 §5, 1943)


Chapter 9.20 PAWNBROKERS AND SECOND-HAND DEALERS

Sections:

9.20.010    ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.


9.20.010 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.

Chapter 19.60 RCW, entitled "Pawnbrokers and Second-Hand Dealers," with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4859 §2, 2003)


Chapter 9.24 PROSTITUTION

Sections:

9.24.010    DEFINITIONS.

9.24.020    PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

9.24.040    PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE PROHIBITED.

9.24.050    PERMITTING PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

9.24.060    SOLICITING OR LOITERING FOR PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

9.24.070    DEFENSE.

9.24.080    STAY OUT OF AREAS OF PROSTITUTION ORDERS.

9.24.090    VIOLATION OF CONDITION OF RELEASE OR PROBATION.

9.24.100    VIOLATIONS.


9.24.010 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter:

(a)    "Known prostitute or promoter of prostitution" means a person who, within one (1) year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this chapter, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court of an offense involving prostitution.

(b)    "Prostitution" means to engage in conduct proscribed in BMC 9.24.020.

(c)    "Public place" is an area generally visible to public view, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles, buildings open to the public including those which serve food and/or drink, doorways and entrances to buildings not open to the general public, but which are open to a certain class or group of the general public through the use of club membership or affiliations with a club or organization, including, but not limited to, the United States Armed Forces. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3737 §2, 1992; Ord. 3294 §1, 1976)


9.24.020 PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or agree to engage in, or offer to engage in, sexual conduct with another person in return for any form of compensation.

(b)    For purposes of this chapter "sexual conduct" means sexual intercourse as defined in RCW 9A.44.010(1) or sexual contact as defined in RCW 9A.44.010(2). (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4696, Amended, 03/07/2000; Ord. 4470 §1, 1994; Ord. 3737 §1, 1982; Ord. 3294 §1, 1976)


9.24.040 PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE PROHIBITED.

It is unlawful for any person to patronize a prostitute. A person is guilty of patronizing a prostitute if:

(a)    Pursuant to a prior understanding or agreement he or she pays any form of compensation to another person in exchange for such person, or for a third person, to engage in sexual conduct with him or her; or

(b)    He or she pays or agrees to pay any form of compensation to another person pursuant to an understanding or agreement that, in return therefor, such person will engage in sexual conduct with him or her; or

(c)    He or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or her for any form of compensation. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4696, Amended, 03/07/2000; Ord. 3294 §3, 1976)


9.24.050 PERMITTING PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

It is unlawful for any person to permit prostitution in or on premises which are in his or her possession and/or control. A person is guilty of permitting prostitution if, having possession or control of premises which he or she knows, or should know, are being used for prostitution purposes, he or she fails to make a reasonable effort to halt or abate such use. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3294 §4, 1976)


9.24.060 SOLICITING OR LOITERING FOR PROSTITUTION PROHIBITED.

(a)    Solicitation. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit an act of prostitution. 

(b)    Loitering. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any public place in any manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of committing, or inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to permit an act of prostitution. 

(c)    Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether solicitation or loitering is intended are if the actor:

(1)    Repeatedly beckons to, stops, or attempts to stop, or engages passers-by in conversation; 

(2)    Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles; 

(3)    Is a known prostitute or promoter of prostitution; and/or

(4)    Attempts to detect or identify a police officer, peace officer, or other law enforcement officer, during an investigation into prohibited conduct in this chapter, by any of the following means:

(i)    Exposing or offering to expose one’s breast or breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts;

(ii)    Requesting, asking or encouraging another to touch or fondle one’s breast or breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts; 

(iii)    Touching or requesting to touch the breast, breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts of another;

(iv)    Requesting, asking or encouraging another to expose or show the other’s breasts, buttocks, sexual organs or private body parts;

(v)    Inquiring whether a potential patron, procurer or prostitute is a police officer; or

(vi)    Searching for articles that would identify a police officer. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3294 §5, 1976)


9.24.070 DEFENSE.

It shall not be a defense to any violation of this chapter that the parties or prospective parties to an act of prostitution or contemplated act of prostitution are of the same sex. Further, it shall not be a defense to any violation of this chapter that the person who received, agreed to receive or solicited a fee was male, and the person who paid or agreed to pay such fee was female. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3294 §6, 1976)


9.24.080 STAY OUT OF AREAS OF PROSTITUTION ORDERS.

(a)    Stay Out of Areas of Prostitution orders, hereinafter designated as SOAP orders, may be issued by the Bremerton Municipal Court to anyone charged with any offense defined in this chapter as a condition of pre-trial release.

(1)    Any individual arrested or charged with any offense defined in this chapter shall appear for a hearing before the Bremerton Municipal Court to show cause why a SOAP order should not be issued as a condition of pre-trial release.

(2)    At the time the individual is arrested or charged with any offense under this chapter, the individual shall be issued a RELEASE FROM CUSTODY AFTER ARREST form, to be signed by the individual, acknowledging the following:

(i)    The date and time of hearing;

(ii)    The designated areas of the City the individual will be ordered to stay out of by the SOAP order;

(iii)    The penalties for violating a SOAP order;

(iv)    That if the individual fails to appear at the hearing or fails to show good cause why the order shouldn’t be entered, the SOAP order will be entered.

(3)    Any individual charged with an offense under this chapter shall have the right to a single one (1) week continuance of said hearing for good-cause shown.

(4)    If the individual fails to show cause why the SOAP order should not be entered, the SOAP order shall be entered pending trial.

(5)    If the individual fails to appear at said hearing, the SOAP order shall be entered pending trial.

(b)    SOAP orders may be issued by the Bremerton Municipal Court to anyone convicted of any offense defined in this chapter.

(c)    SOAP orders may order the person named in the order to stay out of the following described areas of the City designated to be anti-prostitution emphasis areas in order to assure elimination of all prostitution and prostitution-related activity within these areas:

(1)    The entire area extending from the 100 block to the 900 block of North Callow Avenue, and one (1) block east and west of this area of North Callow Avenue; and

(2)    The entire area extending from the 100 block to the 2500 block of 6th Street, and one (1) block north and south of this area of 6th Street; and 

(3)    The entire area extending from the 600 block to the 1100 block of Park Avenue, and one (1) block east and west of this area of Park Avenue including Evergreen Park; and

(4)    The entire area extending from the 300 block to the 1100 block of Warren Avenue, and one (1) block east and west of this area of Warren Avenue.

(5)    Any other area found by the Judge of the Municipal Court to warrant designation as an anti-prostitution emphasis area when specifically set forth and identified in a court order naming a particular defendant. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4696, Amended, 03/07/2000; Ord. 4604, Added, 11/27/1997. Formerly 9.24.072)


9.24.090 VIOLATION OF CONDITION OF RELEASE OR PROBATION.

The presence of any person within an anti-prostitution emphasis area in violation of court-imposed conditions of release or conditions of suspension, diversion or deferral of any sentence shall constitute a separate crime hereby designated a gross misdemeanor and any such person may be apprehended and arrested without the necessity for any warrant or additional court order. Upon conviction, any person so violating the conditions of release or conditions of suspension or deferral shall be punished by imprisonment in jail for a maximum term fixed by the court of not more than one (1) year, or by a fine in an amount fixed by the court of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4604, Added, 11/27/1997. Formerly 9.24.074)


9.24.100 VIOLATIONS.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5225 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4470 §3, 1994; Ord. 3294 §8, 1976. Formerly 9.24.080)


Chapter 9.29 NUDITY IN PUBLIC PLACES

Sections:

9.29.010    DEFINITIONS.

9.29.020    NUDITY PROHIBITED.

9.29.030    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

9.29.040    VIOLATION - NUISANCE DECLARED.


9.29.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following words and terms shall have the meanings which follow:

(a)    "Liquor" means as defined by RCW 66.04.010, as now or hereafter amended.

(b)    "Nude condition" means the display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person’s genitals, pubic area, or buttocks or that portion of the breast lower than the upper edge of the areola.

(c)    "Person" means a natural person of either sex or any corporation, partnership or association.

(d)    "Place" means an establishment or function of any sort which is, or required to be, licensed by the Washington State Liquor Control Board pursuant to RCW 66.24. (Ord. 3957 §1, 1985)


9.29.020 NUDITY PROHIBITED.

No person shall appear, cause the appearance, or suffer the appearance in any place where liquor is sold or consumed of any person in a nude condition. (Ord. 3957 §2, 1985)


9.29.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Any person convicted of violating this chapter, or any part hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3957 §3, 1985)


9.29.040 VIOLATION - NUISANCE DECLARED.

Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and, upon any violation thereof, the city attorney may commence an action for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of such nuisance. (Ord. 3957 §4, 1985)


Chapter 9.32 UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING

Sections:

9.32.010    DEFINITIONS.

9.32.020    UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

9.32.030    UNAUTHORIZED STORAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES.

9.32.040    PERMIT.

9.32.050    PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.

9.32.060    RULES AND REGULATIONS.


9.32.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions are applicable in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)    "Camp" means (1) to dwell, reside within or use camping facilities for temporary or permanent habitation or housing; and/or (2) to use camping paraphernalia.

(b)    "Camping facilities" include, but are not limited to, recreational vehicles, motor vehicles, trailers, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

(c)    "Camping paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-City-designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

(d)    "Director" means any Director of a City of Bremerton department having authority over a public place or any other person authorized by the Mayor to exercise such authority or his or her designee.

(e)    "Park" means and includes all City parks, public squares, park drives, parkways, boulevards, golf courses, park museums, zoos, bathing beaches, and play and recreation grounds under the jurisdiction of the City of Bremerton Parks and Recreation Department. 

(f)    "Public place" means and includes streets, ways, boulevards, sidewalks, planting or parking strips, shoulders, squares, triangles, rights-of-way, publicly owned parking lot or publicly owned area, improved or unimproved, and other public places appropriated to the public for public use, including buildings, structures and appurtenances situated thereon.

(g)    "Recreational vehicle" means a travel trailer, motor home, truck camper, or camping trailer that is primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters, is either self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, is transient and is not immobilized or permanently affixed to a mobile home lot.

(h)    "Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

(i)    "Street" means any highway, avenue, lane, road, street, drive, place, boulevard, alley, right-of-way, and every way or place in the City of Bremerton open as a matter of right to public vehicular travel. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


9.32.020 UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

Except as permitted by permit pursuant to BMC 9.32.040 or as otherwise provided by City Code or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any park or other public place. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


9.32.030 UNAUTHORIZED STORAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES. 

Except as permitted by permit pursuant to BMC 9.32.040 or as otherwise provided by City Code or ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, pitch or park camping facilities or to store or pitch camping paraphernalia in any park or other public place. Recreational vehicles may be parked in authorized parking spaces within City public rights-of-way subject to the provisions of Chapter 10.11 BMC. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


9.32.040 PERMIT. 

(a)    The Director is authorized, by permit, to allow persons to camp, occupy camping facilities, or use or store camping paraphernalia within or on any park or other public place that may be designated by the City for such use in the City of Bremerton subject to other applicable codes or ordinances.

(b)    The Director may approve a permit as provided under this section if the Director determines that:

(1)    Adequate trash receptacles, trash collection and sanitary facilities are available;

(2)    The camping activity will not unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort, and repose of property owners in the area; and

(3)    The camping activity is not reasonably likely to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance.

(c)    The Director may place terms and conditions on any permit as he or she finds appropriate for the conditions considering the use and impacts of such use. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


9.32.050 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.

(a)    Civil Infraction. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction subject to a monetary penalty of one hundred five dollars ($105.00). Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.

(b)    Habitual Violators - Misdemeanor. Any person, after receiving three or more infractions, singularly or in combination, for prior violations of this chapter within a two (2) year period found to be committed by the Municipal Court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2) upon a subsequent violation within said two (2) year period. A conviction of a misdemeanor under this subsection shall be considered and counted as an infraction for the purpose of determining whether or not a violator is a habitual violator. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


9.32.060 RULES AND REGULATIONS. 

The Director may promulgate rules and regulations he or she deems necessary and appropriate to implement, administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 4898 §1, 2004)


Chapter 9.34 HOTELS/MOTELS

Sections:

9.34.010    DEFINITIONS.

9.34.020    REGISTER TO BE KEPT.

9.34.030    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


9.34.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the term "hotel/motel" means and includes hotels, motels, roominghouses, lodginghouses, and any building, portion of building or group of buildings used for human habitation containing two (2) or more rooms intended or designed to be used or which may be used for sleeping or living purposes by tourists or temporary guests for periods of less than thirty (30) days which are rented or hired out for compensation as a business. Places where children, elderly people, invalids or convalescents are exclusively accommodated are not to be considered hotels/motels. (Ord. 4859 §4 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4041 §1, 1986. Formerly 5.42.010)


9.34.020 REGISTER TO BE KEPT.

Every person conducting any hotel/motel shall keep a register in which all guests, roomers and lodgers shall be required to register their names and addresses. The person in charge of registering guests shall indicate on the register the date of each registration and time and date of departure, and shall write opposite the name or names of each such guest, roomer or lodger the number of the room or rooms assigned to such guest, roomer or lodger, and the number of any and all rooms to which such guest, roomer or lodger may subsequently be assigned to occupy. Every hotel/motel register shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by law enforcement officers and health officials of the City, the State or other governmental agency during all hours in which the hotel/motel is open for the reception of guests, roomers or lodgers. All such registration books shall be preserved for the period of at least two (2) years. (Ord. 4859 §4 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4041 §7, 1986. Formerly 5.42.090)


9.34.030 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Any violation or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter by any person constitutes a civil infraction as defined in BMC 1.12.020(3) subject to assessment and enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC. (Ord. 4859 §4 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9.37 UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES

Sections:

9.37.010    DECLARATION OF POLICY.

9.37.020    DEFINITIONS.

9.37.030    PROHIBITION.

9.37.040    UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES FORBIDDEN.

9.37.050    EXCLUSIONS.

9.37.060    PENALTY.


9.37.010 DECLARATION OF POLICY.

It is declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health, and general welfare, for the maintenance of business and good government and for the promotion of the city’s trade, commerce and manufacturers to assure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin, and to that end to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person, including real estate brokers, real estate salesmen and agents, owners of real property and lending institutions, to forward the cause of brotherhood, and to secure a reduction of all tensions and discriminations because of race, color, sex, religion or national origin. (Ord. 3542 §1, 1979)


9.37.020 DEFINITIONS.

Definitions as used in this chapter, unless additional meaning clearly appears from the context, shall have the meanings subscribed:

(1)    "Dwelling" includes any building containing one or more dwelling units.

(2)    "Dwelling unit" includes a suite of rooms for occupancy by one family containing space for living, sleeping, and preparation of food, and containing toilet and bathing facilities.

(3)    "Housing accommodations" includes any dwelling, or dwelling unit, rooming unit, roominghouse, lot or parcel of land in the city which is used, intended to be used, or arranged or designed to be used as, or improved with a residential structure for one or more human beings.

(4)    "Lender" includes any bank, insurance company, savings or building and loan association, credit union, trust company, mortgage company, or other person engaged wholly or partly in the business of lending money for the financing or acquisition, construction, repair, or maintenance of a housing accommodation.

(5)    "Occupant" includes any person who has established residence or has the right to occupancy in a housing accommodation.

(6)    "Owners" includes persons who own, lease, sublease, rent, operate, manage, have charge of, control, or have the right of ownership, possession, management, charge, or control of the housing accommodation, on their own behalf or on behalf of another.

(7)    "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, or other organizations, trade or professional associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers.

(8)    "Prospective borrower" includes any person who seeks to borrow money to finance the acquisition, construction, repair, or maintenance of a housing accommodation.

(9)    "Prospective occupant" includes any person who seeks to purchase, lease, sublease or rent a housing accommodation.

(10)    "Real estate agent, salesman or employee" includes any person employed by or associated with a real estate broker to perform or assist in the performance of any or all of the functions of a real estate broker.

(11)    "Real estate broker" includes any person who, for a fee, commission, or other valuable consideration, lists for sale, sells, purchases, exchanges, leases or subleases, rents, or negotiates or offers or attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange, lease, sublease or rental of a housing accommodation of another, or holds himself out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, listing, leasing, subleasing, or renting a housing accommodation of another, or collects the rental for the use of a housing accommodation of another.

(12)    "Rooming unit" includes one or more rooms within a dwelling unit or roominghouse containing space for living and sleeping.

(13)    "Unfair housing practice" means any act prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 3542 §2, 1979)


9.37.030 PROHIBITION.

Unfair housing practices as hereinafter defined in the sale and offering for sale and in the rental and offering for rent of housing accommodations, are contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general welfare and are prohibited by the city in the exercise of its police power. (Ord. 3542 §3, 1979)


9.37.040 UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES FORBIDDEN.

(a)    No owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, real estate broker, real estate salesman, managing agent of, or other person having the right to sell, rent, lease, sublease, assign, transfer, or otherwise dispose of a housing accommodation shall refuse to sell, rent, lease, sublease, assign, transfer, or otherwise deny to, or withhold from, any person or group of persons such housing accommodations, or segregate the use thereof, or represent that such housing accommodations are not available for inspection, when in fact they are so available, or expel or evict an occupant from a housing accommodation because of the race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin of such person or persons, or discriminate against or segregate any person because of his race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin, in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer or other disposition of any such housing accommodations or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.

(b)    A real estate broker, agent, salesman, or employee shall not, because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin of an occupant, purchaser, prospective occupant, or prospective purchaser:

(1)    Refuse or intentionally fail to list or discriminate in listing a housing accommodation for sale, rent, lease or sublease;

(2)    Refuse or intentionally fail to show to a prospective occupant the housing accommodation listed for sale, rental, lease or sublease;

(3)    Refuse or intentionally fail to accept and/or transmit to an owner any reasonable offer to purchase, lease, rent or sublease a housing accommodation;

(4)    Otherwise discriminate against an occupant, prospective occupant, purchaser or prospective purchaser of a housing accommodation.

(c)    No person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance company, or other financial institution or lender, or any agent or employee thereof, to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodation shall:

(1)    Discriminate against any person or group of persons because of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin of such person or group of persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of such real property in the granting, withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the rates, terms, conditions or privileges of, any such financial assistance or in the extension of services in connection therewith; or

(2)    Use any form of application for such financial assistance, or make any record in inquiry in connection with application for such financial assistance which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination on the ground of race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin.

(d)    An owner, person, real estate broker, agent, salesman, employee or lender shall not:

(1)    Publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice advertisement or sign of any kind relating to the sale, rental, lease, sublease, assignment, transfer or listing of a housing accommodation or accommodations which indicate any limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin;

(2)    Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any act defined in this chapter, as an unfair housing practice; or obstruct or discriminate against a person in any manner because he has complied or proposes to comply with the provisions of this chapter or has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this chapter, or any order issued thereunder, or attempt, either directly or indirectly, to commit any act defined in this chapter to be an unfair housing practice or apply any economic sanctions or deny any membership privileges because of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3542 §4, 1979)


9.37.050 EXCLUSIONS.

Nothing in this chapter shall:

(1)    Apply to the renting, subrenting, leasing or subleasing of single-family dwellings, wherein the owners or persons entitled to possession thereof normally maintain, or intend to maintain, their residences, homes or abodes;

(2)    Be interpreted to prohibit any person from making a choice from among prospective purchasers or tenants of property on the basis of factors other than race, color, sex, religion, ancestry or national origin. (Ord. 3542 §7, 1979)


9.37.060 PENALTY.

Any person convicted of violating this chapter, or any part hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3542 §8, 1979)


Chapter 9.39 SOLICITING

Sections:

9.39.030    POSTED PROPERTY.


9.39.030 POSTED PROPERTY.

The posting or placing of a legible sign near the front entrance of any private residence or apartment house within the city of Bremerton, bearing the words, "No Agent," "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Trespassers," or words of similar import, by the owner, owners, occupant or occupants thereof, shall be a good and sufficient legal warning to any solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, transient peddler of merchandise, or any other person, not to trespass or go in, upon or to the premises so posted for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or disposing of, peddling, hawking, demonstrating, or exhibiting the same.

Any person, who willfully goes or remains upon any premises so posted for such purposes, without having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such premises, is guilty of a trespass, and upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 1287 §§1, 2, 1939)


Chapter 9.48 FIREWORKS

Sections:

9.48.010    PERMIT - REQUIRED - FEE.

9.48.020    PERMIT - CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.

9.48.030    STANDS - CONFORMANCE TO REGULATIONS REQUIRED.

9.48.040    HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE AND DISCHARGE.

9.48.050    STATE STATUTE APPLICABILITY.

9.48.060    RECKLESS DISCHARGE OR USE OF FIREWORKS.

9.48.070    PROHIBITION DUE TO EXTREME FIRE DANGER.

9.48.080    ENFORCEMENT.

9.48.090    PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION - AUTHORITY.

9.48.100    PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.


9.48.010 PERMIT - REQUIRED - FEE.

Application for all local fireworks permits including applications for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks required by the state fireworks law, Chapter 70.77 RCW, shall be made to the Fire Marshal. The fees for such permits shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4368 §26, 1992; Ord. 3370 §1, 1977)


9.48.020 PERMIT - CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.

The Fire Chief or his or her designee is responsible for review of any application for a permit for the sale of fireworks or for a public display of fireworks. If the application meets the requirements of state law and this chapter, the Fire Chief or his or her designee is authorized to grant the application and issue a permit.

(a)    Sale of Fireworks. A permit for the sale of fireworks shall be issued only upon the following terms and conditions:

(1)    The applicant shall have a valid and subsisting license issued by the State Fire Marshal authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the retail sale of safe and sane fireworks only.

(2)    The applicant shall have and keep in full force and effect a policy of insurance approved by the City’s Risk Manager saving the City harmless for any acts or failures of the permittee, in accordance with Chapter 70.77 RCW.

(3)    The location of a proposed place of business shall comply with the zoning ordinances of the City.

(4)    The applicant shall provide a land lease agreement for the location of the proposed place of business signed by the land owner or his authorized representative.

(5)    The applicant shall provide a scale drawing of the location of the proposed place of business showing the relationship of the fireworks stand to streets and other buildings.

(6)    The applicant shall submit the name, address and phone number of the person or persons responsible for the fireworks stand.

(7)    The applicant shall submit the address of all storage locations for stock that is kept on reserve and not on display for sale.

(8)    No permit applications shall be processed before the first day of May or accepted after the first day of June of the year of sale.

(9)    The applicant shall post a fifty dollar ($50.00) cash bond conditioned upon the prompt removal of the temporary stand and the cleaning up of all debris from the site. If the permittee removes such temporary stand and cleans up all of the debris before the tenth day of July of the permit year, he shall be entitled to the return of the fifty dollars ($50.00).

(b)    Public Display of Fireworks. A permit for a public display of fireworks shall be issued only upon the terms and conditions as set forth Chapter 70.77 RCW.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or engage in a public display of fireworks within the City without having obtained a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(2)    Permit applications for the public display shall be submitted in full a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled display. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 3370 §2, 1977)


9.48.030 STANDS - CONFORMANCE TO REGULATIONS REQUIRED.

(a)    Only "common fireworks" authorized by Chapter 212-17 WAC, except toy caps, shall be sold only from temporary stands which conform to the written rules and regulations of the Fire Chief of the City. No device, product or effect similar to Chinese lanterns containing an open flame shall be sold, discharged or released at any time. 

(b)    Each fireworks stand shall have an adult (eighteen (18) years of age or older) in attendance at all times. No person under the age of sixteen (16) years old shall be allowed inside the stand.

(c)    A sign stating "NO SALE OF FIREWORKS TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 16 YEARS OLD, PHOTO ID REQUIRED."

(d)    All permittees shall conform to the minimum standards and conditions set forth in the Rules and Regulations for Retail Fireworks Stands by the Fire Chief. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4653, Amended, 07/18/1999; Ord. 3370 §3, 1977)


9.48.040 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE AND DISCHARGE.

(a)    No person shall use or explode any fireworks within the City except from 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on July 4th of any year or as part of a public display authorized pursuant to the laws of the State of Washington and this chapter. It shall not be legal to use or discharge fireworks at any other time, specifically including, without limitation, from 6:00 p.m. on December 31st of any year until 1:00 a.m. on January 1st of the subsequent year. Only "common fireworks" authorized by Chapter 212-17 WAC are to be discharged during the authorized time period.

(b)    Sales of fireworks shall be prohibited except from 12:00 noon to 11:00 p.m. on June 28th; and from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on each day from June 29th through July 4th in any calendar year. Nothing in this provision shall make it illegal to have public displays of fireworks when approved by the Bremerton Fire Department in accordance with the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(c)    The possession of any class or kind of fireworks in violation of the provisions of this chapter is prohibited. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4653, Amended, 07/18/1999; Ord. 4455 §1, 1994; Ord. 4420 §1, 1993; Ord. 4379 §1, 1992; Ord. 3370 §5, 1977. Formerly 9.48.050.)


9.48.050 STATE STATUTE APPLICABILITY.

This chapter is intended to implement Chapter 70.77 RCW, and shall be construed in connection with said laws and all rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 3370 §6, 1977. Formerly 9.48.060.)


9.48.060 RECKLESS DISCHARGE OR USE OF FIREWORKS.

It is unlawful for any person to discharge or use fireworks in a reckless manner which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person or damage to the property of another. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006)


9.48.070 PROHIBITION DUE TO EXTREME FIRE DANGER.

During periods of extreme fire danger, the Fire Chief may prohibit the discharge of all fireworks. For the purpose of this section, "extreme fire danger" means a period of hot, dry weather accompanied by low fuel moistures. It is during this period that wildland fires can be expected and fire growth will be accelerated. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4379 §2, 1992; Ord. 3370 §7, 1977)


9.48.080 ENFORCEMENT.

The Police Chief, or designee, and the Fire Chief, or designee, are authorized to enforce all provisions of this chapter except those provisions where enforcement authority is explicitly provided to the Fire Chief. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4653, Amended, 07/18/1999; Ord. 3370 §8, 1977)


9.48.090 PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION - AUTHORITY.

The Fire Chief or his or her designee may at any time suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, if the permittee has:

(a)    Violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or any of his servants, agents or employees have done so;

(b)    Made any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in connection with obtaining the permit;

(c)    Failed to obtain or has had any license required by the State of Washington to engage in any act prohibited by Chapter 70.77 RCW, or this chapter, to be done without a license, suspended or revoked;

(d)    Has had any insurance coverage required by this chapter canceled, revoked, or lapsed. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015: Ord. 5017 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4973 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4653, Added, 07/18/1999)


9.48.100 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.

(a)    Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, use, transfer, discharge, ignite or otherwise cause to explode common fireworks, or to commit any other violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Civil Infraction. Except for subsection (d) of this section, any violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a civil infraction punishable by a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), not including statutory assessments.

(c)    Misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of subsection (a) of this section by any person within a twelve (12) month period shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2).

(d)    Gross Misdemeanor. Any person violating the provisions of BMC 9.48.060 shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor punishable pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(1). 

(e)    Seizure and Disposal of Fireworks. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the Police Chief, or designee, and the Fire Chief, or designee, may seize and dispose of fireworks that are possessed, sold, purchased, offered for sale, and/or used in violation of this chapter according to the seizure and forfeiture procedures contained in RCW 70.77.435 and 70.77.440. (Ord. 5284 §1 (part), 2015)


Chapter 9.50 SOLVENT INHALATION

Sections:

9.50.010    SALES - RESTRICTION.

9.50.020    SALES - FOR PURPOSES OF INTOXICATION PROHIBITED.

9.50.030    INHALATION FOR PURPOSES OF INTOXICATION PROHIBITED - EXCEPTION.

9.50.040    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.


9.50.010 SALES - RESTRICTION.

No person, except a person who is, at the time of such sale, actually employed by or engaged in operating a bona fide commercial establishment at a fixed location, shall sell to any other person any product containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes, and all sales of such product not made in or from such an establishment are hereby prohibited. (Ord. 2800 §1, 1968)


9.50.020 SALES - FOR PURPOSES OF INTOXICATION PROHIBITED.

No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give away to any person, any substance containing any of the following volatile solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that the substance will be used for the purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes; toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ketone, trichloroethylene, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which will induce symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes. (Ord. 2800 §2, 1968)


9.50.030 INHALATION FOR PURPOSES OF INTOXICATION PROHIBITED - EXCEPTION.

(a)    No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction, or the dulling of his brain or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any substance containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes; provided, That nothing in this section shall be interpreted as applying to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.

(b)    No person shall, for the purpose of violating (a) use, or possess for the purpose of so using, any product containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes. (Ord. 2800 §3, 1968)


9.50.040 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

(a)    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is a disorderly person and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars or more than three hundred dollars for each offense; or

(b)    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2800 §4, 1968)


Chapter 9.88 DRUG OFFENSES

Sections:

9.88.010    DEFINITIONS.

9.88.020    MARIJUANA - POSSESSION.

9.88.030    MARIJUANA - IN VIEW OF GENERAL PUBLIC - INFRACTION.

9.88.040    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - PROHIBITED ACTS.

9.88.050    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - SELLING OR GIVING - INFRACTION.

9.88.060    MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS - MINIMUM PENALTIES FOR MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.

9.88.070    LEGEND DRUGS - POSSESSION WITHOUT PRESCRIPTION.


9.88.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions are hereby adopted:

(a)    RCW 69.50.101 entitled "Definitions" is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full.

(b)    RCW 69.50.102 entitled "Drug paraphernalia - Definitions" is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 4850 §1 (in part), 2003)


9.88.020 MARIJUANA - POSSESSION.

RCW 69.50.4013 and 69.50.4014 and Initiative No. 502 Section 15, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 4850 §1 (in part), 2003)


9.88.030 MARIJUANA - IN VIEW OF GENERAL PUBLIC - INFRACTION.

Chapter 69.50 RCW, Initiative No. 502 Section 21 (Judicial Information System No. 13C3521) relating to the opening, use or consumption of marijuana, usable marijuana or marijuana-infused products in view of the general public is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 3 civil infraction pursuant to RCW 7.80.120(1)(c) as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012)


9.88.040 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - PROHIBITED ACTS.

RCW 69.50.412 is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 4850 §1 (in part), 2003. Formerly 9.88.030)


9.88.050 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA - SELLING OR GIVING - INFRACTION.

RCW 69.50.4121 is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012)


9.88.060 MISDEMEANOR VIOLATIONS - MINIMUM PENALTIES FOR MARIJUANA AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.

RCW 69.50.425 is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. A person who is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of BMC 9.88.020 or 9.88.040 shall be subject to punishment pursuant to RCW 69.50.425. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012: Ord. 4850 §1 (in part), 2003. Formerly 9.88.040)


9.88.070 LEGEND DRUGS - POSSESSION WITHOUT PRESCRIPTION.

RCW 69.41.030, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. For purposes of this section, and as defined in RCW 69.41.010, "legend drugs" means any drugs which are required by state law or regulation of the State Board of Pharmacy to be dispensed on prescription only or are restricted to use by practitioners only. A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor. (Ord. 5204 §1 (part), 2012)


Chapter 9.89 DRUG RELATED LOITERING

Sections:

9.89.010    DRUG RELATED LOITERING.


9.89.010 DRUG RELATED LOITERING.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to remain in a public place for the purpose of soliciting, inducing, enticing or procuring another to sell or purchase a controlled substance as defined in RCW 69.41, 69.50 or 69.52.

(b)    Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the person remains in a public place for the purpose of the acts described above are:

(1)    Such person is seen by the officer to be in possession of drug paraphernalia. "Drug paraphernalia" means drug paraphernalia as the term is defined by RCW 69.50.102.

(2)    Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this chapter a "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" is a person who has, in the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted in any court within this State of any violation of RCW 69.41, 69.50 and 69.52, or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this State or of any other state.

(3)    Such person repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop pedestrians or engages pedestrians in conversation.

(4)    Such person repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture.

(5)    Such person circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts or attempts to stop pedestrians.

(6)    Such person is the subject of a court order prohibiting his presence in a high drug activity geographic area.

(7)    The area involved is a high drug activity geographic area.

(8)    Such person transfers small objects or packages.

(9)    Such person has an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug related activity.

(10)    Any vehicle involved is registered to a "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" as defined in BMC 9.89.010(b)(2).

(c)    A person convicted of drug traffic loitering shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 4310 §1, 1991)


Chapter 9.92 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES

Sections:

9.92.010    PURPOSE.

9.92.020    DEFINITIONS.

9.92.030    VIOLATION.

9.92.040    PROCEDURE.

9.92.050    COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION - ENFORCEMENT.

9.92.060    SUMMARY CLOSURE.

9.92.070    SEVERABILITY.


9.92.010 PURPOSE.

(a)    Chronic nuisance properties present grave health, safety and welfare concerns, where the persons responsible for such properties have failed to take corrective action to abate the nuisance condition. Chronic nuisance properties have a tremendous negative impact upon the quality of life, safety and health of the neighborhoods where they are located. This chapter is enacted to remedy nuisance activities that are particularly disruptive to quality of life and repeatedly occur or exist at properties by providing a process for abatement. This remedy is not an exclusive remedy available under any state or local laws and may be used in conjunction with such other laws.

(b)    Also, chronic nuisance properties are a financial burden to the City by the repeated calls for service to the properties because of the nuisance activities that repeatedly occur or exist on such property. This chapter is a means to ameliorate those conditions and hold accountable those persons responsible for such property. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.020 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning prescribed below:

(a)    "Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable City department director or designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community;

(b)    "Control" means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property; 

(c)    "Chronic nuisance property" means:

(1)    Property that, within any one hundred twenty (120) day period, has three (3) or more nuisance activities; or

(2)    Property that, within any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period, has six (6) or more nuisance activities.

(d)    "Nuisance activity" means any nuisance that occurs or exists upon a property, or if specified in this section, occurs or exists within two hundred (200) feet of a property. To be considered a nuisance activity within two hundred (200) feet of the property, the nuisance activity must involve the person in control of the property and/or any person associated with the person in control of the property. A person is associated with the person in control of the property if he or she is a guest or invitee of the person in control of the property.

Nuisance activity includes:

(1)    Any violation of the following laws and regulations occurring or existing on a property:

(i)    Fire code, Chapter 18.02 BMC;

(ii)    Multi-family requirements, Chapter 18.03 BMC;

(iii)    Building code, Chapter 17.04 BMC, insofar as it relates to the minimum standards of a dwelling unit and habitable spaces.

(2)    Any violation of the following laws and regulations occurring or existing on or within two hundred (200) feet of a property:

(i)    Health and Sanitation, BMC Title 6.

(3)    Criminal conduct occurring or existing on or within two hundred (200) feet of a property as follows:

(i)    Most serious offenses, serious violent offenses, and violent offenses, as defined in RCW 9.94A.030;

(ii)    Burglary and trespass, as defined in Chapter 9A.52 RCW;

(iii)    Theft of a motor vehicle or mail, or possession of a stolen motor vehicle or stolen mail, as defined in Chapter 9A.56 RCW;

(iv)    Stalking, as defined in RCW 9A.46.110;

(v)    Harassment, as defined in RCW 9A.46.020;

(vi)    Failure to disperse, as defined in RCW 9A.84.020;

(vii)    Disorderly conduct, as defined in RCW 9A.84.030;

(viii)    Any level or type of assault, as defined in Chapter 9A.36 RCW;

(ix)    Any domestic violence crime, as defined in RCW 10.99.020;

(x)    Reckless endangerment, as defined in RCW 9A.36.050;

(xi)    Prostitution-related crimes, as defined in Chapter 9.24 BMC;

(xii)    Indecent exposure, as defined in RCW 9A.88.010;

(xiii)    Any firearms/dangerous weapons violation, as defined in BMC 9A.24.010 through 9A.24.220 and Chapter 9.41 RCW;

(xiv)    Drug-related loitering, as defined in BMC 9.89.010;

(xv)     Any dangerous animal violation, as defined in BMC 7.12.040;

(xvi)    Any drug-related activity, which means the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving away of any controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug as defined in Chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance as defined in Chapter 69.52 RCW; and

(xvii)    Any arrest pursuant to a warrant of arrest, where the person in control of the property had prior knowledge of the arrestee’s warrant.

(4)    For purposes of this chapter, "nuisance activity" shall not include conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no control over the criminal act.

(e)    "Person" means natural person, joint venture, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, officer or employee of any of them;

(f)    "Person responsible for property" or "person responsible" means, unless otherwise defined, any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is subject to this chapter; an occupant in control of the property or structure which is subject to this chapter; a developer, builder, or business operator or owner who is developing, building, or operating a business on the property or in a structure which is subject to this chapter; and/or any person who has control over the property and allows a violation of this chapter to continue;

(g)    "Premises" and "property" may be used by this chapter interchangeably and means any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, grounds, vacant lots, facilities, parking area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5154 §1, 2011: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.030 VIOLATION.

(a)    Any property within the City of Bremerton which is a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies; and 

(b)    Any person responsible for property who permits property to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.040 PROCEDURE.

(a)    When the Chief of Police, or his/her designee(s) (hereinafter "Chief"), receives documentation confirming the occurrence of three (3) or more nuisance activities within a one hundred twenty (120) day period or six (6) or more nuisance activities within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period on or near any property, the Chief may review such documentation to determine whether it describes the nuisance activities enumerated in BMC 9.92.020. Upon such a finding, the Chief shall warn the person responsible for such property, in writing, that the property is in danger of being declared a chronic nuisance property.

(b)    The warning shall contain:

(1)    The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property;

(2)    A concise description of the nuisance activities that exist, or that have occurred on the property;

(3)    A demand that the person responsible for such property respond to the Chief within ten (10) days of service of the warning to create a plan for abatement pursuant to subsection (e) of this section; and

(4)    A statement explaining that if legal action is sought and the property is declared a chronic nuisance, the property could be subject to closure; civil penalties could be assessed, up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day from the date of the warning; and/or the City’s costs could be assessed against all persons responsible for the property.

(c)    The Chief shall serve or cause to be served such warning in accordance with the procedures set forth in BMC 1.04.040(e) and (f).

(d)    If the person responsible fails to respond to the warning within the time prescribed, the Chief may issue a notice declaring the property to be a chronic nuisance property and post such notice at the property. The Chief shall then refer the matter to the City Attorney for further action.

(e)    If the person responsible responds as required by the warning and agrees to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief and the person responsible will work out an agreed action plan to abate the nuisance activity within a reasonable amount of time. If the action plan does not result in the abatement of the nuisance activities or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached, the Chief may issue and post a notice as set forth in subsection (d) of this section, and the matter shall be forwarded to the City Attorney for enforcement action. Provided, that in the event the Chief or the City Attorney determines that the person responsible has taken reasonable steps to abate the nuisance activity, the City Attorney shall not commence an enforcement action under this chapter, notwithstanding the continuance of the nuisance activity.

(f)    Regardless of whether the nuisance activities are discontinued pursuant to a warning or action plan, the Chief may refer the matter to the City Attorney for enforcement if, within six (6) months of service of the warning as set forth in this section, the Chief receives additional documentation of the occurrence or existence of a nuisance activity as defined in BMC 9.92.020(d).

(g)    It is a defense to an action for chronic nuisance that the person responsible, at all material times, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.050 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION - ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    Upon referral pursuant to BMC 9.92.040, the City Attorney may initiate an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate a chronic nuisance property, to impose penalties pursuant to this chapter, to seek alternative remedies under City or state laws, and to seek any other relief authorized by law.

(b)    In determining whether a property shall be deemed a chronic nuisance property and subject to the court's jurisdiction, the City shall have the initial burden of proving by a preponderance of evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The City may submit official police reports, reports of other City departments, and other affidavits outlining the information that led to arrest(s), and other chronic nuisance activity. The failure to prosecute an individual or the fact no one has been convicted of a crime is not a defense to a chronic nuisance action.

(c)    Once a court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance under this chapter, the court may impose a civil penalty against any or all of the persons responsible for the property, and may order any other relief deemed appropriate. A civil penalty may be assessed for up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day the nuisance activity continues to occur following the date of the original warning by the Chief, as described in BMC 9.92.040. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the following factors, citing to those found applicable:

(1)    The actions taken by the person responsible to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity;

(2)    The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;

(3)    The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance activity; and

(4)    Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.

(d)    The court which determines the property to be a chronic nuisance property may also assess costs against the person responsible in the amount it costs the City to abate, and/or attempt to abate, the nuisance activity.

(e)    If the court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order the property closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and occupancy for a period up to one (1) year; may make any order that will reasonably abate nuisance activities; may authorize the City to take reasonable action to abate and prevent further nuisance activities; may order that the Chief shall have the right to inspect the property to determine whether the court’s orders have been complied with; and may impose a civil penalty and costs.

(f)    Once a determination has been made by the court that the chronic nuisance property shall be subject to closure the court may authorize the City to physically secure the premises and initiate such closure. Costs for such closure, or any other court-authorized abatement activity by the City, shall be submitted to the court for review. Any civil penalty and/or costs awarded to the City may be filed with the City Treasurer who may cause the same to be filed as a lien on the property with the county treasurer. The City shall file a formal lis pendens notice when an action for abatement is filed in the court.

(g)    The court may retain jurisdiction during any period of closure or abatement of the property. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.060 SUMMARY CLOSURE.

Nothing in this chapter prohibits the City from taking any emergency action for the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. The City may take summary action to close the property without complying with the notification provisions of BMC 9.92.040, but shall provide such notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


9.92.070 SEVERABILITY.

If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any other portion thereof, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. 5325 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5039 §1 (part), 2008)


Title 9A CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9A.04    GENERAL PROVISIONS

9A.08    DEFENSES

9A.12    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

9A.16    ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

9A.20    MINORS

9A.24    FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS

9A.28    GAMBLING

9A.32    ASSAULT

9A.36    THEFT AND ROBBERY

9A.40    OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE

9A.44    PUBLIC DISTURBANCES

9A.48    MALICIOUS PROSECUTION - ABUSE OF PROCESS

9A.52    CONTEMPT


Chapter 9A.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

9A.04.010    APPLICATION OF GENERAL PROVISIONS OF THE CODE.

9A.04.020    PURPOSES - PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION.

9A.04.030    PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT.

9A.04.040    COMMON LAW TO SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES.

9A.04.050    SENDING LETTER, WHEN COMPLETE.

9A.04.060    DEFINITIONS.

9A.04.070    SEVERABILITY.

9A.04.080    DESIGNATION OF CRIMES

9A.04.090    RESERVED.

9A.04.100    ENFORCEMENT.

9A.04.110    RESTITUTION.

9A.04.120    GENERAL REQUIREMENT OF CULPABILITY.

9A.04.130    LIABILITY OF CONDUCT OF ANOTHER, COMPLICITY.

9A.04.140    CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND PERSONS ACTING UNDER A DUTY TO ACT IN THEIR BEHALF.

9A.04.150    OMISSION, WHEN NOT PUNISHABLE.

9A.04.160    PEOPLE CAPABLE OF COMMITTING CRIMES - CHILDREN.

9A.04.170    CITIZEN IMMUNITY IF AIDING OFFICER.


9A.04.010 APPLICATION OF GENERAL PROVISIONS OF THE CODE.

The provisions of BMC 9A.04.020 and 9A.04.110 are applicable to offenses defined by this title unless this title specifically provides otherwise. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.020 PURPOSES - PRINCIPLES OF CONSTRUCTION.

RCW 9A.04.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.030 PROOF BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT.

RCW 9A.04.100 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.040 COMMON LAW TO SUPPLEMENT ORDINANCES.

The provisions of the common law relating to the commission of crime and the punishment thereof, insofar as not inconsistent with the Constitution and statutes of the state, and with the charter and ordinances of the city, shall supplement all ordinances of this title. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.050 SENDING LETTER, WHEN COMPLETE.

RCW 9.01.130 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.060 DEFINITIONS.

RCW 9A.04.110 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.070 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of the criminal code contained in this title or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the title, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected, and to this end the provisions of this title are declared to be severable. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.080 DESIGNATION OF CRIMES

(a)    Misdemeanor. A "misdemeanor" is any crime punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 

(b)    Gross Misdemeanor. A "gross misdemeanor" is any crime punishable by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000), or by imprisonment for not more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 

(c)    Default Penalty. Whenever the performance of any act (or omission) is prohibited by any provision within this criminal code, and no penalty for the violation of such provision is provided, the committing of such act (or omission) shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.090 RESERVED.


9A.04.100 ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    Application. The provisions of this title are applicable to offenses defined by this title or another ordinance, unless this title or such other ordinance specifically provides otherwise.

(b)    Costs of Prosecution. Whenever anyone is convicted of an offense under any section of this penal code or section of any other city ordinance, in addition to the fine imposed, he may be required to pay the costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, he may be imprisoned until such fine is paid or worked out on the basis of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per each day of imprisonment. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.110 RESTITUTION.

In addition to the penalties provided elsewhere in this title, the court, at the court’s discretion, may order the defendant to make restitution to the victim of the ordinance violation. Restitution shall be made by payment of a sufficient sum to the victim to pay the victim for damages and losses caused by the ordinance violation. Such restitution shall be ordered to be paid in a lump sum, forthwith, unless the court finds that the defendant cannot pay the amount in a lump sum, in which case restitution shall be ordered to be paid in installments. A defendant’s poverty shall not prevent the court from ordering restitution, provided that the defendant’s poverty shall be considered in fixing the amounts of monthly payments. If conditions change, the court may order a change in the amounts of installments or in the frequency of payment of installments. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as preventing any victim of a crime from prosecuting a civil suit for damages resulting from a violation of this title. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.120 GENERAL REQUIREMENT OF CULPABILITY.

RCW 9A.08.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.130 LIABILITY OF CONDUCT OF ANOTHER, COMPLICITY.

RCW 9A.08.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.140 CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF CORPORATIONS AND PERSONS ACTING UNDER A DUTY TO ACT IN THEIR BEHALF.

RCW 9A.08.030, with the exception of subsection (5) thereof, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.150 OMISSION, WHEN NOT PUNISHABLE.

RCW 9.01.110 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.160 PEOPLE CAPABLE OF COMMITTING CRIMES - CHILDREN.

RCW 9A.04.050 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.04.170 CITIZEN IMMUNITY IF AIDING OFFICER.

RCW 9.01.055 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.08 DEFENSES

Sections:

9A.08.010    DEFINITIONS.

9A.08.020    USE OF FORCE - WHEN LAWFUL.

9A.08.030    DURESS.

9A.08.040    INSANITY.

9A.08.050    INTOXICATION.

9A.08.060    ENTRAPMENT.

9A.08.070    ACTION FOR BEING DETAINED ON MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT PREMISES FOR INVESTIGATION - REASONABLE GROUNDS AS DEFENSE.

9A.08.080    USE OF FORCE ON CHILDREN - POLICY - ACTIONS PRESUMED UNREASONABLE.


9A.08.010 DEFINITIONS.

RCW 9A.16.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.020 USE OF FORCE - WHEN LAWFUL.

RCW 9A.16.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.030 DURESS.

RCW 9A.16.060 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.040 INSANITY.

RCW 9A.12.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.050 INTOXICATION.

RCW 9A.16.090 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.060 ENTRAPMENT.

RCW 9A.16.070 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.070 ACTION FOR BEING DETAINED ON MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT PREMISES FOR INVESTIGATION - REASONABLE GROUNDS AS DEFENSE.

RCW 9A.16.080 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.08.080 USE OF FORCE ON CHILDREN - POLICY - ACTIONS PRESUMED UNREASONABLE.

RCW 9A.16.100 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

Sections:

9A.12.010    ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL - ENFORCEMENT.

9A.12.020    PUBLIC PLACES - SUPPLEMENTAL DEFINITION.


9A.12.010 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL - ENFORCEMENT.

The following sections of RCW Title 66, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full, and wherever the word "title" or words "this title" are used therein the same shall be construed to mean and refer to RCW Title 66, and "this act" shall mean and refer to the Washington State Liquor Act:

RCW 66.04.010    	Definitions.

RCW 66.04.011    	"Public place" not to include certain parks and picnic areas.

RCW 66.08.010    	Title liberally construed.

RCW 66.20.160    	"Card of identification," "licensee," "store employee" defined for certain purposes.

RCW 66.20.200    	Unlawful acts relating to card identification and certification card.

RCW 66.28.080    	Permit for music and dancing upon licensed premises.

RCW 66.28.090    	Licensed premises open for inspection - Failure to allow.

RCW 66.44.010    	Local officers to enforce law - Authority of board - Liquor enforcement officers.

RCW 66.44.040    	Sufficiency of description of offenses in complaints, informations, process, etc.

RCW 66.44.050    	Description of offense in words of statutes - Proof required.

RCW 66.44.060    	Proof of unlawful sale establishes prima facie intent.

RCW 66.44.070    	Certified analysis is prima facie evidence of alcoholic content.

RCW 66.44.080    	Service of process on corporation.

RCW 66.44.100    	Opening or consuming liquor in public places.

RCW 66.44.130    	Sales of liquor by drink or bottle.

RCW 66.44.150    	Buying liquor illegally.

RCW 66.44.160    	Illegal possession, transportation of alcoholic beverages.

RCW 66.44.170    	Illegal possession of liquor with intent to sell - Prima facie evidence, what is.

RCW 66.44.175    	Violations of law.

RCW 66.44.180    	Jurisdiction.

RCW 66.44.200    	Sales to persons apparently under the influence of liquor.

RCW 66.44.210    	Obtaining liquor for ineligible person.

RCW 66.44.240    	Drinking in public conveyance - Penalty against carrier.

RCW 66.44.250    	Minor applying for permit.

RCW 66.44.270    	Furnishing liquor to minors - Possession, use.

RCW 66.44.280    	Minor applying for permit.

RCW 66.44.290    	Minor purchasing liquor.

RCW 66.44.291    	Minor purchasing or attempting to purchase liquor - Penalty.

RCW 66.44.300    	Treating minor, etc., in public place where liquor sold.

RCW 66.44.310    	Minors frequenting tavern - Misrepresentation of age - Classification of licenses.

RCW 66.44.316    	Musicians eighteen years and older permitted to enter and remain upon licensed premises during employment.

RCW 66.44.320    	Sales of liquor to minors a violation.

RCW 66.44.325    	Unlawful transfer to a minor of an identification of age.

RCW 66.44.340    	Employees eighteen years and over allowed to sell and carry beer and wine for class E and/or F licensed employers.

RCW 66.44.350    	Employees eighteen years and over allowed to serve and carry liquor, clean up, etc., for class A, C, D and/or H licensed employers.

RCW 66.44.370    	Resisting or opposing officers in enforcement of title.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.12.020 PUBLIC PLACES - SUPPLEMENTAL DEFINITION.

For the purpose of RCW 66.44.100, adopted by this chapter, "public place" as defined in RCW 66.04.010, also adopted by this chapter, shall not include any City park where the service and consumption of liquor is authorized pursuant to BMC 13.04.140 or any other public place now or hereinafter specifically exempted by City code or ordinance. (Ord. 5183 §2, 2012: Ord. 5006 §1, 2007)


Chapter 9A.16 ANTICIPATORY OFFENSES

Sections:

9A.16.010    CRIMINAL ATTEMPT.

9A.16.020    CRIMINAL SOLICITATION.

9A.16.030    CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY.


9A.16.010 CRIMINAL ATTEMPT.

RCW 9A.28.020, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.16.020 CRIMINAL SOLICITATION.

RCW 9A.28.030, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.16.030 CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY.

RCW 9A.28.040, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.20 MINORS

Sections:

9A.20.010    DEFINITIONS.

9A.20.020    LEAVING CHILD UNATTENDED IN PARKED AUTOMOBILE.

9A.20.030    SUPPLYING TOBACCO TO MINOR - POSSESSION BY MINOR.

9A.20.050    CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.

9A.20.060    DISRUPTION OF SCHOOL ACTIVITIES - PENALTY.

9A.20.070    SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN.

9A.20.080    SEXUAL MISCONDUCT WITH A MINOR IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

9A.20.090    UNLAWFUL HARBORING OF A MINOR.


9A.20.010 DEFINITIONS.

RCW 13.32A.030 is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.020 LEAVING CHILD UNATTENDED IN PARKED AUTOMOBILE.

RCW 9.91.060, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.030 SUPPLYING TOBACCO TO MINOR - POSSESSION BY MINOR.

It is unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, give, furnish or cause to be furnished to any minor any cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any form or for a minor to possess the same. Every person violating this section shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.050 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.

A person is guilty of contributing to the delinquency of a child if, by act or omission, he knowingly causes or encourages a child to commit or otherwise contributes to a child’s commission of a delinquent act. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.060 DISRUPTION OF SCHOOL ACTIVITIES - PENALTY.

A person is guilty of disruption of school activities if he comes into or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any school ground, or street, sidewalk, or public way adjacent thereto, without lawful reason, and intentionally causes substantial disruption of the activities of the school. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.070 SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF CHILDREN.

The following sections of Chapter 9.68A RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full are adopted by reference:

RCW 9.68A.001    Legislative finding.

RCW 9.68A.011    Definitions.

RCW 9.68A.090    Communicating with minor for immoral purposes.

RCW 9.68A.105    Additional fee assessment.

RCW 9.68A.110    Certain defenses barred, permitted.

RCW 9.68A.150    Allowing minor on premises of live erotic performance.

RCW 9.68A.160    Penalty.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.080 SEXUAL MISCONDUCT WITH A MINOR IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

RCW 9A.44.096, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.20.090 UNLAWFUL HARBORING OF A MINOR.

The following sections of Chapter 13.32A RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 13.32A.030    Definitions.

RCW 13.32A.080    Unlawful harboring of a minor - Penalty - Defense - Prosecution of adult for involving child in commission of offense.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.24 FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS

Sections:

9A.24.010    TERMS DEFINED.

9A.24.020    CARRYING PISTOL.

9A.24.030    EXCEPTION.

9A.24.040    ISSUANCE OF LICENSES TO CARRY.

9A.24.050    DELIVERY TO MINORS AND OTHERS FORBIDDEN.

9A.24.060    SALES REGULATED - APPLICATION TO PURCHASE - GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.

9A.24.070    EXEMPTIONS.

9A.24.080    DENIAL OF APPLICATION - APPEAL.

9A.24.090    FORFEITURE OF FIREARMS, ORDER BY COURTS - RETURN TO OWNER - CONFISCATION BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

9A.24.100    DEALER’S LICENSES, BY WHOM GRANTED AND CONDITION THEREOF - WHOLESALE SALES EXCEPTED - PERMITS PROHIBITED.

9A.24.110    CERTAIN TRANSFERS FORBIDDEN.

9A.24.120    FALSE INFORMATION FORBIDDEN.

9A.24.130    ALTERATION OF IDENTIFYING MARKS PROHIBITED.

9A.24.140    EXCEPTIONS.

9A.24.150    ALIEN’S LICENSE TO CARRY FIREARMS - EXCEPTION.

9A.24.160    AIMING OR DISCHARGING FIREARMS, OR DISCHARGING EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED - PENALTY - EXCEPTIONS.

9A.24.170    USE OF FIREARMS BY MINOR.

9A.24.180    DANGEROUS WEAPONS - EVIDENCE.

9A.24.190    DANGEROUS EXHIBITIONS.

9A.24.200    WEAPONS APPARENTLY CAPABLE OF PRODUCING BODILY HARM, CARRYING, EXHIBITING, DISPLAYING OR DRAWING UNLAWFUL - PENALTY - EXCEPTIONS.

9A.24.210    POSSESSING DANGEROUS WEAPONS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.

9A.24.220    WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.


9A.24.010 TERMS DEFINED.

RCW 9.41.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full, together with the following:

"Air gun" means the following: air guns, air pistol, air rifle, BB gun and toy guns of any kind or nature when so designed, contrived, modified and used to propel, by compressed air or other gas or spring, any pellet, dart, BB, rock or other hard substance a distance of more than twenty-five (25) feet with sufficient force to break windows or injure persons or animals. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.020 CARRYING PISTOL.

RCW 9.41.050, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.030 EXCEPTION.

RCW 9.41.060 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.040 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES TO CARRY.

RCW 9.41.070 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.050 DELIVERY TO MINORS AND OTHERS FORBIDDEN.

RCW 9.41.080, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.060 SALES REGULATED - APPLICATION TO PURCHASE - GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.

RCW 9.41.090 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.070 EXEMPTIONS.

RCW 9.41.093 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.080 DENIAL OF APPLICATION - APPEAL.

RCW 9.41.095 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.090 FORFEITURE OF FIREARMS, ORDER BY COURTS - RETURN TO OWNER - CONFISCATION BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

RCW 9.41.098 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.100 DEALER’S LICENSES, BY WHOM GRANTED AND CONDITION THEREOF - WHOLESALE SALES EXCEPTED - PERMITS PROHIBITED.

RCW 9.41.110 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.110 CERTAIN TRANSFERS FORBIDDEN.

RCW 9.41.120 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.120 FALSE INFORMATION FORBIDDEN.

RCW 9.41.130, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.130 ALTERATION OF IDENTIFYING MARKS PROHIBITED.

RCW 9.41.140, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.140 EXCEPTIONS.

RCW 9.41.150 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.150 ALIEN’S LICENSE TO CARRY FIREARMS - EXCEPTION.

RCW 9.41.170 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.160 AIMING OR DISCHARGING FIREARMS, OR DISCHARGING EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED - PENALTY - EXCEPTIONS.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to:

(1)    Aim any gun, pistol, revolver or other firearm whether loaded or not, at or towards any human being or police animal, or willfully discharge any firearm, air gun, or other weapon, or throw any deadly missile in a public place, or in any place where any person or police animal might be endangered thereby, although no injury results; or

(2)    Fire, discharge, explode or cause to be exploded any object containing gunpowder or other explosive material or fluid, or firecracker in a public place, or in any place where any person or police animal might be endangered thereby.

(b)    Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to or affect the following:

(1)    The aiming or discharge of any firearm, other weapon or explosive described in subsection (a) of this section by a law enforcement officer engaged in the performance of his or her powers or duties; or

(2)    The aiming or discharge of a firearm, as defined in BMC 9A.24.010, or air gun upon a rifle or pistol firing range which has been issued a business license by the City for such purpose; or

(3)    A firearm or other explosive device described in subsection (a) of this section which is discharged within the City where the person so discharging the same has procured, in addition to any license or permit required under Chapter 70.77 RCW, a written permit issued by the chief of police granting such person permission to discharge such firearm or weapon at the time, place, in the manner and for the purpose the permit was issued. Such permit shall not issue unless and until the chief of police finds as fact that:

A.    Such discharge is essential for the protection of a growing or matured crop;

B.    The applicant has not been convicted in the state, or elsewhere, of a crime of violence nor of moral turpitude;

C.    The applicant has a bona fide current permit from the state or from a department of the United States authorizing the applicant to so protect such crop or crops;

D.    Such discharge can reasonably be accomplished without endangering other persons or property.

Such permits may be annual permits which expire on June 30th of each year and upon the payment of a fee therefor in the sum of three dollars ($3.00), shall be limited to the use of birdshot, shall immediately terminate upon any damage, destruction, or undue hazard to other persons or property, or upon violation of the terms of its issue. A permittee under this chapter violating any condition of such permit, or giving false information in application therefor, shall not again be eligible for a permit. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.170 USE OF FIREARMS BY MINOR.

RCW 9.41.240 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.180 DANGEROUS WEAPONS - EVIDENCE.

RCW 9.41.250 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.190 DANGEROUS EXHIBITIONS.

RCW 9.41.260 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.200 WEAPONS APPARENTLY CAPABLE OF PRODUCING BODILY HARM, CARRYING, EXHIBITING, DISPLAYING OR DRAWING UNLAWFUL - PENALTY - EXCEPTIONS.

RCW 9.41.270 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.210 POSSESSING DANGEROUS WEAPONS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.

RCW 9.41.280 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.24.220 WEAPONS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.

(a)    A weapon is defined as follows:

(1)    Any firearm;

(2)    Any dangerous weapon as listed in RCW 9.41.250;

(3)    Any explosive defined in RCW 70.74.010;

(4)    Any devices commonly known as "nun-chu-ka sticks," consisting of two or more lengths of wood, metal, plastic, or similar substance connected with wire, rope or other means; 

(5)    Any device commonly known as "throwing stars," which are multipointed, metal objects designed to embed upon impact from any aspect; or

(6)    Any air gun, including any air pistol or air rifle, designed to propel a BB, pellet, or other projectile by the discharge of compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.

(b)    It is unlawful for any person to enter the following places when he knowingly possesses or knowingly has under his control a weapon:

(1)    A courtroom or judge’s chamber, and areas used in connection with court proceedings, including jury rooms, court offices, waiting areas, and corridors adjacent to the above areas used in connection with court proceedings.

(2)    That portion of an establishment classified by the State Liquor Control Board as off-limits to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.

(c)    Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to:

(1)    Law enforcement personnel; or

(2)    A person engaged in military activities sponsored by the federal or state governments, while engaged in official duties; or

(3)    Security personnel while engaged in official duties; or

(4)    Any person who is involved in a convention, showing, demonstration, lecture, or firearms safety course authorized by school authorities in which the firearms or collectors or instructors are handled or displayed; or

(5)    Any student or employee of a private military academy when on the property of the academy; or

(6)    Any person while the person is participating in a firearms or air gun competition approved by the school or the school district; or

(7)    Any person who has been issued a license under RCW 9.41.070, while picking up or dropping off a student; or

(8)    Any person legally in possession of a firearm or dangerous weapon that is secured within an attended vehicle or concealed from view within a locked unattended vehicle while conducting legitimate business at the school; or

(9)    Any person who is in lawful possession of an unloaded firearm, secured in a vehicle while conducting legitimate business at the school.

(d)    Areas connected with court facilities where weapons are prohibited shall be clearly marked and notices posted at each entrance of the court facility that weapons are prohibited in the restricted areas.

(e)    A stationary locked box shall be provided within the court room building to receive weapons for safekeeping, or the court shall designate an official within the building to receive weapons for safekeeping, during the owner’s visit to restricted areas of the court facility.

(f)    "Weapon-free zone" signs shall be posted around school facilities giving warning of the prohibition of the possession of weapons on school grounds. 

(g)    Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.28 GAMBLING

Sections:

9A.28.010    GAMBLING - PROHIBITIONS.

9A.28.020    GAMBLING - RULES REGARDING.


9A.28.010 GAMBLING - PROHIBITIONS.

The following sections of Chapter 9.46 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 9.46.010    Legislative declaration.

RCW 9.46.020    Definitions.

RCW 9.46.030    Certain gambling activities authorized.

RCW 9.46.110    Taxation of gambling activities - Limitations - Restrictions.

RCW 9.46.113    Taxation of gambling activities - Disbursement.

RCW 9.46.130    Inspection and audit of premises, paraphernalia, books and records - Reports for the commission.

RCW 9.46.150    Injunctions - Voiding of licenses, permits or certificates.

RCW 9.46.170    False or misleading entries or statements, refusal to produce records, as violations - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.185    Causing person to violate chapter as violation - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.190    Violations relating to fraud or deceit - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.192    Cities and towns - Ordinances enacting certain sections of chapter - Limitations - Penalties.

RCW 9.46.193    Cities and towns - Ordinances adopting certain sections of chapter - Jurisdiction of courts.

RCW 9.46.196    Defrauding or cheating other participant or operator as violation - Causing another to do so as violation - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.198    Working in gambling activity without license as violation - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.210    Enforcement - Commission as a law enforcement agency.

RCW 9.46.240    Gambling information, transmitting or receiving as violation - Penalty.

RCW 9.46.285    Chapter as exclusive authority for licensing and regulation of gambling activities.

RCW 9.46.310    Licenses for manufacture, sale, distribution or supply of gambling devices.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.28.020 GAMBLING - RULES REGARDING.

Pursuant to the authority of RCW 35.21.180, Chapter 230 WAC, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.32 ASSAULT

Sections:

9A.32.010    ASSAULT. 

9A.32.020    RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT.

9A.32.030    COERCION.

9A.32.050    HARASSMENT.

9A.32.060    TELEPHONE CALLS TO HARASS, INTIMIDATE, TORMENT OR EMBARRASS.

9A.32.070    DOMESTIC VIOLENCE - STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

9A.32.080    ORDER FOR PROTECTION AND RESTRAINING ORDER - STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

9A.32.090    CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE.

9A.32.100    INTERFERING WITH THE REPORTING OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

9A.32.110    STALKING.

9A.32.120    CRIMINAL MISTREATMENT.

9A.32.130    SEXUAL MOTIVATION.

9A.32.140    CYBERSTALKING.


9A.32.010 ASSAULT.

RCW 9A.36.041 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.020 RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT.

RCW 9A.36.050 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.030 COERCION.

RCW 9A.36.070 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.050 HARASSMENT.

RCW 9A.46.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.060 TELEPHONE CALLS TO HARASS, INTIMIDATE, TORMENT OR EMBARRASS.

The following sections of Chapter 9.61 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 9.61.230    Defined.

RCW 9.61.240    Permitting telephone to be used.

RCW 9.61.250    Offense where deemed committed.

(Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.070 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE - STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

Chapter 10.99 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.080 ORDER FOR PROTECTION AND RESTRAINING ORDER - STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.

RCW 26.09.300 and Chapters 10.14 and 26.50 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.090 CUSTODIAL INTERFERENCE.

The following statutes of the State, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 9A.40.070    Custodial interference in the second degree.

RCW 9A.40.080    Custodian interference - Assessment of costs - Defense - Consent defense, restricted.

(Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.100 INTERFERING WITH THE REPORTING OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

RCW 9A.46.150 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.110 STALKING.

RCW 9A.46.110, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.120 CRIMINAL MISTREATMENT.

The following sections of Chapter 9A.42 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein from which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 9A.42.005    Findings and intent - Christian Science treatment - Rules of evidence.

RCW 9A.42.010    Definitions.

RCW 9A.42.035    Criminal mistreatment in the third degree.

RCW 9A.42.037    Criminal mistreatment in the fourth degree.

RCW 9A.42.040    Withdrawal of life support systems.

RCW 9A.42.045    Palliative care.

RCW 9A.42.050    Defense of financial inability.

RCW 9A.42.080    Abandonment of a dependent person in the third degree - Exception.

RCW 9A.42.090    Abandonment of a dependent person - Defense.

RCW 9A.42.110    Leaving a child in the care of a sex offender.

(Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.32.130 SEXUAL MOTIVATION.

RCW 9.94A.835, entitled "Special allegation - Sexual motivation - Procedures," is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5146 §1, 2011)


9A.32.140 CYBERSTALKING.

RCW 9.61.260, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §1 (part), 2013)


Chapter 9A.36 THEFT AND ROBBERY

Sections:

9A.36.010    DEFINITIONS.

9A.36.020    THEFT - DEFINED.

9A.36.030    THEFT IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

9A.36.040    UNLAWFUL ISSUANCE OF CHECKS OR DRAFTS.

9A.36.050    THEFT OF RENTAL PROPERTY.

9A.36.060    SHOPPING CART THEFT.

9A.36.070    THEFT OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES.

9A.36.080    POSSESSING STOLEN PROPERTY - DEFINITIONS, CREDIT CARDS, PRESUMPTION.

9A.36.090    POSSESSING STOLEN PROPERTY IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

9A.36.100    RESTORATION OF STOLEN PROPERTY - DUTY OF OFFICERS.

9A.36.110    MALICIOUS MISCHIEF IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

9A.36.120    MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND PHYSICAL DAMAGE - DEFINED.

9A.36.130    TRESPASS - DEFINITIONS.

9A.36.140    CRIMINAL TRESPASS IN THE FIRST DEGREE.

9A.36.150    CRIMINAL TRESPASS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

9A.36.160    SURVEILING.

9A.36.170    CRIMINAL TRESPASS - DEFENSES.

9A.36.180    VEHICLE PROWLING.

9A.36.190    COMPUTER TRESPASS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

9A.36.200    COMPUTER TRESPASS - COMMISSION OF OTHER CRIME.

9A.36.210    MAKING OR HAVING BURGLARY TOOLS.

9A.36.220    FAILURE TO PAY FARE - PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.

9A.36.230    OBSTRUCTING IDENTITY OF MACHINE.

9A.36.240    RECKLESS BURNING IN THE SECOND DEGREE.


9A.36.010 DEFINITIONS.

RCW 9A.56.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.020 THEFT - DEFINED.

RCW 9A.56.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.030 THEFT IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

RCW 9A.56.050 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.040 UNLAWFUL ISSUANCE OF CHECKS OR DRAFTS.

RCW 9A.56.060, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.050 THEFT OF RENTAL PROPERTY.

RCW 9A.56.096 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.060 SHOPPING CART THEFT.

RCW 9A.56.270 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.070 THEFT OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES.

RCW 9A.56.220 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.080 POSSESSING STOLEN PROPERTY - DEFINITIONS, CREDIT CARDS, PRESUMPTION.

RCW 9A.56.140 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.090 POSSESSING STOLEN PROPERTY IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

RCW 9A.56.170 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.100 RESTORATION OF STOLEN PROPERTY - DUTY OF OFFICERS.

RCW 9.54.130 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.110 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

RCW 9A.48.090 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.120 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND PHYSICAL DAMAGE - DEFINED.

RCW 9A.48.100(1) is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.130 TRESPASS - DEFINITIONS.

RCW 9A.52.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.140 CRIMINAL TRESPASS IN THE FIRST DEGREE.

RCW 9A.52.070 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.150 CRIMINAL TRESPASS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

RCW 9A.52.080 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.160 SURVEILING.

(a)    Definitions:

(1)    "Building" shall have the same meaning as in RCW 9A.04.110 as now or hereafter amended. Each room shall constitute a separate building. Restrooms, locker rooms and bedrooms are specifically included in this definition.

(2)    "Curtilage" shall be within ten (10) feet from the exterior of the wall of any building, regardless of whether the premises is enclosed.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the curtilage of a building or premises of another for the purposes of observing, photographing, videotaping or filming another person, under circumstances where the other person has a reasonable expectation of privacy.

(c)    Violation of this section shall be a gross misdemeanor. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.170 CRIMINAL TRESPASS - DEFENSES.

RCW 9A.52.090 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.180 VEHICLE PROWLING.

RCW 9A.52.100 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.190 COMPUTER TRESPASS IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

RCW 9A.52.120 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.200 COMPUTER TRESPASS - COMMISSION OF OTHER CRIME.

RCW 9A.52.130 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.210 MAKING OR HAVING BURGLARY TOOLS.

RCW 9A.52.060 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.220 FAILURE TO PAY FARE - PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.

It is unlawful for a person in public to refuse to pay the proper fare in a public conveyance. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.230 OBSTRUCTING IDENTITY OF MACHINE.

RCW 9A.56.180 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.36.240 RECKLESS BURNING IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

The following sections of Chapter 9A.48 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 9A.48.010    Definitions.

RCW 9A.48.050    Reckless burning in the second degree.

RCW 9A.48.060    Reckless burning - Defense.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.40 OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE

Sections:

9A.40.010    DEFINITIONS.

9A.40.020    OBSTRUCTING A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

9A.40.030    REFUSING TO SUMMON AID FOR PEACE OFFICER.

9A.40.040    RESISTING ARREST.

9A.40.050    FALSE REPORTING.

9A.40.060    RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE - DEFINITION OF TERMS.

9A.40.070    RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE - RELATIVE DEFINED.

9A.40.075    RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

9A.40.080    RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

9A.40.090    COMPOUNDING A CRIME.

9A.40.100    ESCAPE IN THE THIRD DEGREE - PENALTY.

9A.40.110    BAIL JUMPING.

9A.40.120    MAKING A FALSE STATEMENT TO A PUBLIC SERVANT.

9A.40.130    FALSE SWEARING.

9A.40.140    JURY TAMPERING.

9A.40.150    TAMPERING WITH PHYSICAL EVIDENCE.


9A.40.010 DEFINITIONS.

RCW 9A.72.010 and RCW 9A.76.010 are adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.020 OBSTRUCTING A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

RCW 9A.76.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.030 REFUSING TO SUMMON AID FOR PEACE OFFICER.

RCW 9A.76.030 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.040 RESISTING ARREST.

RCW 9A.76.040 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.050 FALSE REPORTING.

RCW 9A.84.040 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.060 RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE - DEFINITION OF TERMS.

RCW 9A.76.050 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.070 RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE - RELATIVE DEFINED.

RCW 9A.76.060 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.075 RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE IN THE SECOND DEGREE.

RCW 9A.76.080 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.080 RENDERING CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

RCW 9A.76.090 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.090 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.

RCW 9A.76.100 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.100 ESCAPE IN THE THIRD DEGREE - PENALTY.

RCW 9A.76.130 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.110 BAIL JUMPING.

RCW 9A.76.170, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.120 MAKING A FALSE STATEMENT TO A PUBLIC SERVANT.

RCW 9A.76.175 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.130 FALSE SWEARING.

RCW 9A.72.040 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.140 JURY TAMPERING.

RCW 9A.72.140 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.40.150 TAMPERING WITH PHYSICAL EVIDENCE.

RCW 9A.76.150 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.44 PUBLIC DISTURBANCES

Sections:

9A.44.010    DEFINITIONS.

9A.44.020    DISORDERLY CONDUCT.

9A.44.030    FAILURE TO DISPERSE.

9A.44.040    EXPECTORATING.

9A.44.050    MISCHIEF ON BRIDGES.

9A.44.060    UNLAWFUL TRANSIT CONDUCT.

9A.44.065    URINATING IN PUBLIC.

9A.44.070    INDECENT EXPOSURE.

9A.44.080    INTRODUCING CONTRABAND IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

9A.44.090    RIOT.

9A.44.100    LASERS.

9A.44.110    AGGRESSIVE BEGGING.

9A.44.120    PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR INTERFERENCE.

9A.44.130    UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION IN PROHIBITED ROADWAYS.

9A.44.140    UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION AT DESIGNATED LOCATIONS.


9A.44.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions are applicable in BMC 9A.44.020 through 9A.44.080, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)    "Peace" as used in the phrase "public peace" means the tranquility enjoyed by members of a community where good order presides.

(b)    "Public place" means an area generally visible to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots and buildings open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

(c)    "Unreasonably disrupts" means to substantially impair the conduct of a meeting by intentionally committing acts in violation of implicit customs or usages or of explicit rules for governance of the meeting he or she knew, or as a reasonable man or woman should have known. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.020 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.

RCW 9A.84.030 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.030 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.

RCW 9A.84.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.040 EXPECTORATING.

It is unlawful for a person to expectorate upon the floor, walls or furniture of any public conveyance, public building or any store open to and used by the public. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.050 MISCHIEF ON BRIDGES.

It is unlawful for any person to intentionally:

(a)    Throw, drop or otherwise cause any object or missile to be thrown, dropped or released from any portion of any bridge, including the bridges crossing the Port Washington Narrows, commonly known as the Bremerton-Manette and Warren Avenue Bridges; or

(b)    Jump, leap or go upon with the intent of jumping or leaping from any portion of any bridge, including the Port Washington Narrows, commonly known as the Bremerton-Manette and Warren Avenue Bridges. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.060 UNLAWFUL TRANSIT CONDUCT.

RCW 9.91.025 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.065 URINATING IN PUBLIC.

(a)    A person is guilty of the crime of urinating in public if he or she intentionally urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a washroom or toilet room, or at a place and under circumstances where such act could be observed by any member of the public.

(b)    Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be an infraction, and any person found in violation shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011)


9A.44.070 INDECENT EXPOSURE.

RCW 9A.88.010, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.080 INTRODUCING CONTRABAND IN THE THIRD DEGREE.

RCW 9A.76.160 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.090 RIOT.

RCW 9A.84.010 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5145 §1 (in part), 2011: Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.44.100 LASERS.

Chapter 9A.49 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 5262 §2, 2014: Ord. 5208 §2 (part), 2013: Ord. 5165 §1, 2011. Formerly 9A.44.110)


9A.44.110 AGGRESSIVE BEGGING.

(a)    Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section:

(1)    "Intimidate" means to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled.

(2)    "Beg" means to ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily gestures, signs, or other means.

(3)    "Public place" means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and grounds enclosing them.

(b)    Violation. A person is guilty of aggressive begging if, in a public place, he or she begs with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods.

(c)    Penalty. Aggressive begging is a misdemeanor as defined in BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5262 §4, 2014)


9A.44.120 PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR INTERFERENCE.

(a)    Definitions. The following definition applies in this section:

"Public place" means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and grounds enclosing them.

(b)    Violation. A person is guilty of pedestrian or vehicular interference if, in a public place, he or she intentionally walks, stands, sits, lies, or places an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.

(c)    Exceptions. Acts authorized as an exercise of one’s constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the Bremerton Municipal Code, shall not constitute pedestrian or vehicular interference.

(d)    Penalty. Pedestrian or vehicular interference is a misdemeanor as defined in BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5262 §5, 2014)


9A.44.130 UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION IN PROHIBITED ROADWAYS.

(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the City’s fundamental interest in public peace, health, and safety, by regulating acts of solicitation that occur within certain designated roadways which pose substantial risks to vehicular and pedestrian safety due to high volume traffic, limited or no parking and/or other safety factors.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section:

(1)    "Contact" means actual physical contact or the giving or receiving of any item from one (1) person to another.

(2)    "Enter" means to cross the vertical plane of the edge of a prohibited roadway with any part of a person’s body or any extension thereof.

(3)    "Roadway" means the portion of a street or highway within the City primarily used for vehicular travel including medians, paved shoulders and bike lanes, but does not include the curbs and sidewalks.

(4)    "Solicit" means:

(i)    Either orally or in writing, directly or by implication, to ask, beg, request or plead for employment, goods, services, financial aid, monetary gifts, or any article representing monetary value, for any purpose;

(ii)    Either orally or in writing, to sell or offer for immediate sale goods, services, or publications;

(iii)    To distribute without remuneration goods, services, or publications; or

(iv)    To solicit signatures on a petition or opinions for a survey.

(c)    Violation. A person is guilty of unlawful solicitation in prohibited roadways if he or she solicits from an occupant of any vehicle that is on a prohibited roadway, enters the prohibited roadway before, during or after the solicitation, and contacts an occupant of any vehicle on the prohibited roadway. Prohibited roadway includes the following:

(1)    6th Street.

(2)    11th Street.

(3)    Burwell Street.

(4)    Charleston Boulevard.

(5)    Kitsap Way east of State Highway 3.

(6)    Naval Avenue south of 11th Street.

(7)    Sheridan Road.

(8)    Sylvan Way.

(9)    Warren Avenue.

(10)     Washington Avenue.

(11)     Wheaton Way.

(d)    Exceptions. It is not a violation under this section if the person entering a prohibited roadway:

(1)    Contacts a vehicle occupant when the vehicle is legally parked;

(2)    Is summoning aid in an emergency situation; or

(3)    Is a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties.

(e)    Penalty. Unlawful solicitation in prohibited roadways is a misdemeanor as defined in BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5262 §6, 2014)


9A.44.140 UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION AT DESIGNATED LOCATIONS.

(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the City’s fundamental interest in public peace, health, and safety by regulating acts of solicitation that occur at locations and under circumstances specified herein which pose substantial risks to pedestrian safety, and which harm the efficient movement and personal and financial security of citizens, tourists and other pedestrians. The in-person solicitation of funds combined with the immediate receipt of that money, when directed to someone transacting business at an automated teller machine or preparing to board a bus at a bus stop, creates a risk of fraud and duress and is a public safety concern. It is the purpose of this section to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation while providing safe and appropriate venues for constitutionally protected activity.

(b)    Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section:

(1)    "Automated teller machine (ATM)" means a machine, other than a telephone, whether owned by a financial institution or a third party:

(i)    That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution;

(ii)    By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution directly or indirectly a request to withdraw, deposit, transfer funds, make payment, or otherwise conduct financial business for the customer or for another person; and

(iii)    The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution.

(2)    "Solicit" means requesting an immediate contribution, donation or gift of money from a person or persons unknown to the solicitor.

(c)    Violation. A person is guilty of unlawful solicitation if he or she, in a continuous or repetitive manner, solicits and receives funds:

(1)    Within fifteen (15) feet of an ATM, measured from the solicitor to the nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an ATM is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the ATM; or

(2)    Within fifteen (15) feet of a public bus stop, measured from the solicitor to the nearest part of the bus stop bench, shelter or other structure, or if the bus stop has no bench, shelter or other structure, to the nearest sign or marking designating the area as a bus stop.

The distance between the solicitor and the ATM or the bus stop shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects.

(d)    Penalty. Unlawful solicitation at designated locations is a misdemeanor as defined in BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5262 §7, 2014)


Chapter 9A.48 MALICIOUS PROSECUTION - ABUSE OF PROCESS

Sections:

9A.48.010    MALICIOUS PROSECUTION.

9A.48.020    INSTITUTING SUIT IN NAME OF ANOTHER.

9A.48.030    CRIMINAL IMPERSONATION.


9A.48.010 MALICIOUS PROSECUTION.

RCW 9.62.010, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.48.020 INSTITUTING SUIT IN NAME OF ANOTHER.

RCW 9.62.020 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


9A.48.030 CRIMINAL IMPERSONATION.

RCW 9A.60.045 is adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full. (Ord. 4905 §1, 2004; Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 9A.52 CONTEMPT

Sections:

9A.52.010    CONTEMPT.


9A.52.010 CONTEMPT.

The following sections of Chapters 7.21 and 9.23 RCW, with the exception of those provisions contained therein for which a violation constitutes a felony crime, are hereby adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereinafter amended from time to time, and shall be given the same force and effect as if set forth herein in full:

RCW 7.21.010    Definitions.

RCW 7.21.020    Sanctions - Who may impose.

RCW 7.21.030    Remedial sanctions - Payment for losses.

RCW 7.21.040    Punitive sanctions - Fines.

RCW 7.21.050    Sanctions - Summary imposition - Procedure.

RCW 7.21.060    Administrative or proceedings - Petition to court for imposition of sanctions.

RCW 7.21.070    Appellate review.

RCW 9.23.010    Criminal contempt.

(Ord. 4850 §2 (in part), 2003)


Title 10 TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    STATE STATUTES

10.08    IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES

10.10    PARKING CODE

10.12    SKATEBOARDS

10.13    MOTORIZED WHEELED TRANSPORTATION DEVICES

10.14    BICYCLE SAFETY AND HELMETS

10.16    TURNING MOVEMENTS

10.20    COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION PLAN

10.24    OVERSIZE LOADS

10.36    COMPRESSION BRAKES

10.42    AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERAS


Chapter 10.04 STATE STATUTES

Sections:

10.04.010    MTO - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.

10.04.020    MTO - SECTIONS NOT ADOPTED.

10.04.030    MTO - STATUTES NOT ADOPTED.

10.04.034    INATTENTION TO DRIVING.

10.04.040    FILING OF COPIES FOR PUBLIC USE.

10.04.050    DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES.

10.04.060    OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT.

10.04.070    PENALTIES.


10.04.010 MTO - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.

The Washington Model Traffic Ordinance, Chapter 308-330 WAC, referred to in this chapter as the "MTO," is adopted by reference as currently enacted and hereinafter amended as and for the traffic ordinance of the City as if set forth in full in this chapter, except:

(1)    As provided in BMC 10.04.020 and 10.04.030; and

(2)    Parking on street planting strips is allowed where the City Engineer has determined an area does not pose an unacceptable hazard to motorists or pedestrians, the City Engineer has posted signs authorizing such parking and the vehicle is parked upon such planting strip facing the direction of traffic flow. (Ord. 5138 §1, 2011: Ord. 4465 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4260 §1, 1990; Ord. 4211 §1, 1989; Ord. 3614 §1, 1981)


10.04.020 MTO - SECTIONS NOT ADOPTED.

The following sections of the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted: WAC 308-330-127, 308-330-250, 308-330-275, 308-330-500, 308-330-505, 308-330-510, 308-330-515, 308-330-520, 308-330-525, 308-330-530, 308-330-535, 308-330-540, 308-330-560, and 308-330-650; provided, "Department of Administrative Services" shall be substituted for "Chief of Police" wherever it appears in WAC 308-330-660, SERVICE PARKING. (Ord. 4465 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4211 §2, 1989; Ord. 3614 §2, 1981)


10.04.030 MTO - STATUTES NOT ADOPTED.

The following sections in the Revised Code of Washington which were adopted by reference in the MTO are not adopted by reference and are expressly deleted: RCW 46.16.135, 46.16.140, 46.16.145, 46.16.170, 46.44.090, 46.44.091, 46.44.092, 46.44.093, 46.44.095, 46.44.096, 46.44.120, 46.44.130 and 46.44.140. (Ord. 4465 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 3614 §3, 1981)


10.04.034 INATTENTION TO DRIVING.

(a)    It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in an inattentive manner. For the purposes of this section, "inattentive manner" means the operation of a motor vehicle in such a manner which evidences a lack of the degree of attentiveness required to safely operate the vehicle under the prevailing conditions of the roadway, presence of other traffic, presence of pedestrians, presence of traffic control devices or signage, presence of property, and/or weather conditions.

(b)    The offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner shall be a lesser offense than, but included in, the offense of operating a vehicle in a negligent manner under RCW 46.61.525, and any person charged pursuant to RCW 46.61.525 may be convicted of the lesser offense of operating a vehicle in an inattentive manner.

(c)    Violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction subject to the penalty established in Municipal Court - Rate Table B as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. (Ord. 5286 §1, 2015: Ord. 5182 §1, 2012: Ord. 4314 §1, 1991)


10.04.040 FILING OF COPIES FOR PUBLIC USE.

Incident to the adoption of the MTO by reference by this chapter, copies of the text of the adopted MTO and of other adopted statutes shall be filed as required by RCW 35.21.180 for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 3614 §7, 1981)


10.04.050 DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES.

All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the City. (Ord. 3614 §5, 1981)


10.04.060 OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT.

Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture of bail, either before or after a deposit in the general fund, to comply with the provisions of BMC 10.04.050 shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom, provided appropriate removal action is taken pursuant to state law relating to removal of public officials. (Ord. 3614 §6, 1981)


10.04.070 PENALTIES.

Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law in the MTO or in the statutes that are adopted by reference therein, any person who is convicted of violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 3614 §4, 1981)


Chapter 10.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES

Sections:

10.08.010    PURPOSE.

10.08.020    IMPOUNDMENT BY POLICE OFFICER AUTHORIZED.

10.08.030    IMPOUNDMENTS FOR DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED.

10.08.040    DWLS IMPOUNDMENT PERIODS.

10.08.050    STORAGE AND REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.

10.08.060    HEARING.


10.08.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter identifies the authority for the impoundment of vehicles. Furthermore, this chapter supplements Chapter 46.55 RCW of the Model Traffic Ordinance entitled "Towing and Impoundment" ("MTO"), adopted by the City of Bremerton in BMC 10.04.010, by adding provisions relating to impounds of vehicles for violations of driving while license is suspended or revoked ("DWLS") and redemption of impounded vehicles. In the event that a conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 46.55 RCW, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


10.08.020 IMPOUNDMENT BY POLICE OFFICER AUTHORIZED.

A police officer may impound a vehicle for:

(a)    Incidents and circumstances as set forth in RCW 46.55.113;

(b)    Parking violations set forth in RCW 46.61.570;

(c)    Parking violations set forth in the City’s Parking Code, Chapter 10.10 BMC; and

(d)    Any other violation for which a vehicle impound is authorized by law. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


10.08.030 IMPOUNDMENTS FOR DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED.

(a)    DWLS Impoundment. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is arrested for a violation of driving while license is suspended or revoked pursuant to RCW 46.20.342, or operation of motor vehicle under other license or permit while license is suspended or revoked pursuant to RCW 46.20.345, the vehicle is subject to summary impoundment at the discretion and direction of a law enforcement officer as authorized pursuant to RCW 46.55.113.

(b)    Owner of Vehicle Responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or other person lawfully charged with possession of a vehicle to ensure that any person driving such vehicle has a valid license. It shall not be a defense to impoundment or to the payment of any of the costs of impound that the owner or other person lawfully charged with the vehicle was not aware that the driver’s license was suspended, revoked, or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


10.08.040 DWLS IMPOUNDMENT PERIODS.

(a)    DWLS in Third Degree and Operation under Other License. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the third degree) or RCW 46.20.345 (operation under other license or permit while license suspended or revoked), the vehicle shall be immediately redeemable, pursuant to BMC 10.08.050(b).

(b)    DWLS in First or Second Degree. If a vehicle is impounded because the driver is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(a) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the first degree) or RCW 46.20.342(1)(b) (driving while license suspended or revoked in the second degree), the vehicle shall be impounded for fourteen (14) days.

(c)    Exception to Impound Period. Notwithstanding the fourteen (14) day impoundment period set forth in subsection (b) of this section, an impounded vehicle may be redeemed upon payment of the costs of removal, towing, storage and applicable fees, including the administrative fee set forth in BMC 10.08.050(b)(3), under the following circumstances:

(1)    Due to economic or personal hardship to the spouse or when the owner of the vehicle was not the driver pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(a), as now enacted or hereafter amended;

(2)    A rental car business that owns an impounded vehicle or a motor vehicle dealer or lender with a perfected security interest in an impounded vehicle may immediately redeem the vehicle pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(1)(c) and (d), as now enacted or hereafter amended; or

(3)    An impounded vehicle may also be immediately redeemed as otherwise required by law.

Early redemption of a vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of this subsection may be authorized by the Chief of Police or designee. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


10.08.050 STORAGE AND REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.

(a)    Inventory of Vehicle and Property. A vehicle impounded pursuant to BMC 10.08.020 may be inventoried incident to impoundment pursuant to the laws of the State of Washington and the United States. With the exception of personal property seized by a police officer, personal property contained within an impounded vehicle shall continue to be the responsibility of its owner, or the person driving the vehicle, and shall be dealt with pursuant to the requirements of RCW 46.55.090 and other applicable statutes as now enacted or hereafter amended.

(b)    Redemption of Vehicle. The redemption of impounded vehicles shall be as set forth in RCW 46.55.120, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. An impounded vehicle may be redeemed as follows:

(1)    Redemption. At the conclusion of the applicable period of impoundment, if any, the registered owner, a person authorized by the registered owner, or one (1) who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner, who produces proof of ownership or authorization and signs a receipt therefor, may redeem an impounded vehicle. A towing contractor may use any reasonable means necessary to confirm that the person redeeming the vehicle is authorized to redeem the vehicle, and neither the City nor the tow company shall be responsible for any loss resulting from a delay during the time in which the towing contractor is confirming authorization.

(2)    Payment of Impound Costs. Prior to redeeming the impounded vehicle, any person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall pay the towing contractor for the costs of impoundment, including removal, towing, and storage fees accrued as a result of the impoundment. The towing contractor shall accept payment as provided in RCW 46.55.120 and other applicable statutes as currently enacted or hereafter amended.

(3)    Administrative Fee and Costs - DWLS Impounds. Any person redeeming a vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of BMC 10.08.030(a) (DWLS Impoundment) shall pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the City prior to the redemption of the vehicle. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


10.08.060 HEARING.

Any person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle under this chapter has a right to a hearing in the Bremerton Municipal Court to contest the validity of the impound or the amount of towing or storage charges pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2), as now enacted or hereafter amended. Any request for a hearing shall be made within ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing pursuant to RCW 46.55.120(2)(b). A vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded for the required impound period regardless of the filing of a request for a hearing, unless otherwise released by the Chief of Police or the Bremerton Municipal Court. (Ord. 5216 §1 (part), 2013)


Chapter 10.10 PARKING CODE

Sections:

10.10.010    DEFINITIONS.

10.10.020    PARKING ADMINISTRATION.

10.10.030    NONRESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.

10.10.040    RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.

10.10.050    PARKING PERMITS.

10.10.060    PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS.

10.10.070    PARKING VIOLATIONS.

10.10.080    ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.

10.10.090    FINES AND PENALTIES.

10.10.100    FAILURE TO RESPOND - ADDITIONAL PENALTY.

10.10.110    VEHICLE IMPOUND - OTHER ENFORCEMENT.

10.10.120    COSTS OF IMPOUND.

10.10.130    ENFORCEMENT - EXEMPT PERIODS.

10.10.140    APPEAL.


10.10.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section are defined as follows:

"Block" means the area comprised of properties along each side of a street between two (2) intersections or an intersection and a road end.

"BMC" means Bremerton Municipal Code.

"Boat or vessel" means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the water including marine vehicle (trailered or nontrailered).

"City parking facility" means City-owned or City-controlled parking facility, including parking garages and parking lots, whether paid or unpaid parking.

"Department" means the Department of Financial Services, unless another department is referenced.

"Director" means Director of Financial Services or other department director authorized by the Mayor to enforce this chapter, or their designee, including, but not limited to, parking enforcement officer, unless another director is referenced.

"Downtown core" means that area in downtown Bremerton from and including Warren Avenue east to the waterfront and from and including 6th Street south to the waterfront and the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard.

"Motor vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle such as a car, truck, van, motorcycle, or any other similar self-propelled vehicle.

"Paid parking zone" means the street, or part thereof, within the City where parking spaces are restricted to paid parking.

"Parking generator" means anything that significantly increases commuter parking demand. Examples include, but are not limited to: ferry terminals, schools, hospitals, business districts, and military installations.

"Parking permit" means a permit issued by the City that exempts the permit holder, when displayed properly, from the timed parking restriction in effect in the permit holder’s restricted parking zone.

"Passenger load only zone" means a parking space reserved for active passenger loading or unloading only. These spaces will be marked with the time restriction applicable to them.

"Peak parking hours" means those hours in a day where a particular vicinity experiences the greatest demand for parking.

"Permit only zone" means a prescribed area where on-street parking is reserved for the exclusive use of the permit holders in the prescribed vicinity and their visitors holding a permit.

"RCW" means Revised Code of Washington.

"Recreational vehicle" means a travel trailer, motor home, truck camper, or camping trailer that is primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters, is either self-propelled or mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, is transient and is not immobilized or permanently affixed to a mobile home lot and further includes a dune buggy or off-road vehicle (trailered or nontrailered).

"Resident," as used in this chapter, refers to an individual living in a dwelling unit or a business owner operating a business on property owned or leased by the business owner.

"Resident vehicle" means a motor vehicle parked in a prescribed residential area by a resident of the area.

"Residential area" means a contiguous area containing public rights-of-way or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential property or residential use.

"Residential permit identification number" means a residential permit identification number assigned to (1) a specific vehicle license plate number, and (2) a dwelling unit and/or business location.

"Residential restricted parking zone" means a restricted parking zone in a residential area.

"Restricted parking zone" means an area of the City subject to parking restrictions including time limits or other restrictions contained in this chapter including paid parking zones, passenger load only zones, permit only zones and other restricted parking areas or spaces both in residential and nonresidential areas.

"Street" means any right-of-way, highway, avenue, lane, road, drive, place, boulevard, alley, way, sidewalk, planting or parking strip, shoulder and every way or place in the City of Bremerton open as a matter of right to public vehicular travel or parking or other similar public use.

"Trailer" means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a hitch or other connector, and ordinarily used for transporting items upon public rights-of-way.

"Vehicle" means motor vehicle, car, truck, vehicle, van, tractor, bus, trailer (including boat trailer with or without a boat situated thereon), recreational vehicle, tractor or semi-trailer, motorcycle or boat or vessel (trailered or nontrailered), whether licensed or unlicensed, or motorized or nonmotorized, unless otherwise defined.

"Visitor vehicle" means a motor vehicle parked by a person who is visiting a resident within a residential restricted parking zone. (Ord. 5392 §1, 2019: Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.020 PARKING ADMINISTRATION.

Collection of parking fees, maintenance of parking meters or other collection devices, and the issuance of parking permits shall be administered by the Department of Financial Services, which shall promulgate procedures to administer permits as authorized in this chapter, including processes for establishing proof of residency; vehicle ownership, use or control; and for the revocation of permits for misuse. Appropriate parking fee schedules, permit fees and related services as well as fines and penalties for violations shall be set by the City Council and are set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC. Fees may be collected by the use of parking meters, pay boxes or other devices and through the issuance of parking permits authorized by this chapter. The Director shall, in a manner consistent with this chapter, establish, locate and post parking restrictions within the City rights-of-way where required to regulate parking. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.030 NONRESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.

The creation, deletion or boundary changes of restricted parking zones as defined in BMC 10.10.010 in nonresidential areas may be initiated either:

(1)    By the decision of the Director following a finding by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, or designee, that the change is in the best interest of the community and will improve the health, safety or welfare of the community; or

(2)    By motion, resolution or ordinance of the City Council as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.040 RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.

(a)    Creation. The creation, deletion or boundary changes or time change of residential restricted parking zones as defined in BMC 10.10.010 may be initiated either:

(1)    By a verified petition of property owners as provided for in subsection (b) of this section for either a one (1), two (2), three (3), or four (4) hour parking restriction time period; or

(2)    By the decision of the Director following a finding by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, or designee, that the change is in the best interest of the community and will improve the health, safety or welfare of the community; or

(3)    By motion, resolution or ordinance of the City Council as deemed appropriate.

The City Council may, at any time, create a residential restricted parking zone or it may delete or change the boundary of a residential restricted parking zone created pursuant to subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section.

(b)    Petitions. Property owners in a residential area as defined in BMC 10.10.010 may seek to create, delete or change the boundary of a residential restricted parking zone or to change a parking restriction time period to a new parking restriction time period that is authorized in subsection (a)(1) of this section by submitting a verified petition of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the property owners of each parcel of property located within the block indicating support for the change. Upon submittal of a verified petition, the Director of Public Works and Utilities must make a finding that:

(1)    There is an identifiable parking generator;

(2)    It appears that seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the parking spaces located on the petitioning block are being used at peak parking hours;

(3)    The conditions described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this subsection exist on at least three (3) contiguous blocks;

(4)    Whether the proposed parking restriction time period is appropriate; and

(5)    The parking restriction time period being changed has been in effect for at least one year.

(c)    Appeal. Appeals relating to the creation, deletion, boundary change or change of a parking restriction time period to a new parking restriction time period of a residential restricted parking zone may be made by a property owner within the designated permit area to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 10.10.140. The right to appeal exists only when such creation, deletion, boundary change or time change was completed under subsection (a)(1) of this section by a verified petition or subsection (a)(2) of this section by a Director’s decision. If such creation, deletion, boundary change or time change is subject to appeal, the City Clerk shall post notice in the particular residential area of the future location and boundaries of the proposed residential restricted parking zone and of the right of the property owner to appeal the designation within seven (7) working days. A timely appeal will stay the action until the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner’s review and decision. The Hearing Examiner shall be authorized to deny the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change if he/she determines that significant errors were made in the process that created a substantial likelihood that the creation, deletion, boundary or time change would have failed had proper procedures been followed or if he/she determines that the creation, deletion or boundary change is not in the best interest of the community.

The change shall be enforceable following the expiration of the appeal period or at such time as any appeal filed is denied. Until such time, the parking restriction previously in place, if any, shall continue.

(d)    Posting.

(1)    If the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change is subject to appeal under subsection (c) of this section, the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change shall become effective at such time as notice is posted in the affected area of the location and boundaries of the residential restricted parking zone, and either:

(i)    The seven (7) working day appeal period has expired without an appeal being filed; or

(ii)    At such time as a decision of the Hearing Examiner is issued on an appeal filed under subsection (b) of this section.

(2)    If the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change is not subject to appeal under subsection (c) of this section, the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change shall become effective upon posting of applicable parking restriction signage in the residential restricted parking zone.

(e)    Permit Only Zone. Effective April 1, 2013, permit only zones cannot be created nor can their boundaries be changed by petition. Permit only zones in effect on January 1, 2013, are grandfathered and may remain in effect or be deleted by petition. The City Council may, at any time, create, delete or change the boundary of a permit only zone. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.050 PARKING PERMITS.

(a)    Residential Parking Permits. Residential parking permits may be issued to park in a residential restricted parking zone as follows:

(1)    Residential parking permits will only be issued to applicants who are:

(i)    A legal resident of the residential restricted parking zone who has a motor vehicle registered in his or her name, or who has a motor vehicle for his or her exclusive use and under his or her control; or

(ii)    A person who owns or leases commercial property and actively engages in business activity within a residential restricted parking zone;

(2)    Residential parking permits may be issued for motor vehicles not exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length or having a maximum gross vehicle weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds;

(3)    Parking in a residential restricted parking zone is restricted to parking within two (2) blocks of the dwelling unit or business location assigned to the residential permit or to any other area as designated by the Director; and

(4)    Permits will be issued for one (1) year terms and be renewed upon expiration conditioned upon meeting the residency requirements for a permit. There shall be a limit of two (2) residential parking permits issued per dwelling unit/business location, unless parking availability allows a greater number not to exceed four (4) permits per dwelling unit as determined by the Director in his or her sole discretion.

(b)    Visitor Parking Permits. Visitor parking permits are authorized for residents of a residential restricted parking zone for bona fide transient use for visitors to the residence. No dwelling unit or place of business located in a residential restricted parking zone shall be issued more than one (1) visitor permit. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to control the use of the permit. Bona fide transient uses include: visiting guests, babysitters, repair persons and other similar visitors. The following is prohibited:

(1)    Parking in excess of seven (7) days within any thirty (30) day period unless approved administratively prior to such use; or

(2)    Parking more than one (1) block from the permitted residence; or

(3)    Use of visitor permits by residents for the residents’ vehicles. Visitor permits shall only be used for visitor vehicles.

(c)    Service Parking Permits. Service parking permits may be issued, on a short term temporary basis, for parking of vehicles on a street for a period of time exceeding a parking restriction time period established in BMC 10.10.030 and 10.10.040(a) when necessary. Service parking permits may be issued to landlords or their contractors for building improvements, individuals working in a home service industry (home health care, etc.), or for other short-term use for the providing of services to a residence or to a business in a residential restricted parking zone or a nonresidential restricted parking zone. Service parking permits, and any extensions thereto, shall be issued for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days unless the Director determines that a longer period is warranted. The City may require proof of ongoing continuous work and of a City business or landlord license, as applicable, as a condition to maintaining or extending a valid permit. The following is prohibited:

(1)    Parking more than two (2) blocks from the permitted dwelling unit.

(d)    Recreational Vehicles. Residential permits may be issued for recreational vehicle parking as follows:

(1)    The parking permit shall be valid for a period of time not exceeding forty-five (45) days during a calendar year;

(2)    Parking during the permit term shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days in the same location; and

(3)    Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking more than two (2) blocks from the permitted dwelling unit.

(e)    Display. Parking permits shall state thereon the restricted parking zone, the permit holder’s residential permit identification number and the expiration date. Permits shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the rear window of the vehicle on the left side thereof or the front windshield on the left side when necessary. A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within the designated residential parking area.

(f)    The Director may establish policies for the issuance of parking permits. Parking permits may be issued throughout different times of the year based on zones or other criteria.

(g)    Permits issued pursuant to this section are not subject to the parking restriction time periods such as one (1), two (2), three (3), or four (4) hour parking set forth in BMC 10.10.030 and 10.10.040(a); however, they are subject to the five (5) day parking restriction set forth in BMC 10.10.070(b)(1) unless otherwise permitted with a temporary parking permit pursuant to BMC 10.10.070(b)(4). (Ord. 5392 §2, 2019: Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.060 PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS.

(a)    As authorized pursuant to RCW 46.61.582, a person who has received a current and valid special disabled person’s card, decal or license plate from the Washington State Department of Licensing under RCW 46.19.050 shall be allowed to park a vehicle being used to transport such person in parking meter spaces free of charge and in nonmetered spaces for unlimited periods of time in parking zones or areas which are otherwise restricted as to the length of time parking is permitted except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section. This section shall have no application to those zones or areas in which the stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles is prohibited or which are reserved for special types of vehicles. Such person shall not be permitted the foregoing privilege unless the person obtains and displays a distinguishing card, decal, or license plate issued pursuant to RCW 46.19.050.

(b)    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a parking space reserved for disabled persons provided on street or on private property without charge without obtaining and displaying a special license plate, card, or decal issued pursuant to RCW 46.19.050, provided, pursuant to RCW 46.19.050, a time limitation of four (4) hours is imposed on the use of such parking spaces for on-street parking when so signed and a time restriction of four (4) hours is imposed on the use of nonreserved, on-street parking spaces by vehicles displaying the special parking placards when such time restriction is clearly posted.

(c)    A parking space or stall for a disabled person shall be identified as described in RCW 46.61.581, including fine, time limitation (if applicable), and tow-away information. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter, in accordance with RCW 46.61.581, failure of the person owning or controlling the property where required parking spaces are located to erect and maintain the sign is a Class 2 civil infraction under Chapter 7.80 RCW for each parking space that should be so designated. The person owning or controlling the property where the required parking spaces are located shall ensure that the parking spaces are not blocked or made inaccessible, and failure to do so is a Class 2 civil infraction.

(d)    No person shall make inaccessible the access aisle located next to a space reserved for physically disabled persons.

(e)    Special Plate, Card or Decal Issued by Another Jurisdiction. RCW 46.61.583 is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.070 PARKING VIOLATIONS.

In addition to those statutes set forth in the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC restricting standing, stopping and parking of vehicles, it shall be unlawful and punishable as a civil infraction for any person to commit any of the following actions:

(a)    Parking in Time Limit and No Repark Zones.

(1)    Downtown Core. Where a time limit and no reparking is established by official signs, no vehicle may be reparked on either side of the same named street (i.e., Pacific Avenue or 5th Street) in the downtown core during the same calendar day after the expiration of the posted time limit. For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed to be reparked and in violation of this section even if the vehicle is moved prior to the expiration of the posted time limit and is reparked on either side of the same named street.

(2)    Residential. Where posted, it is unlawful for a vehicle to remain parked, or to be reparked within four (4) blocks of the original parking location within a restricted parking zone, if the parking time or combined parking time for the vehicle exceeds the time limitations of the parking zone. Vehicles issued permits under Chapter 10.10 BMC shall be exempt from posted time limits according to the terms of the permit; however, they will not be exempt from the time restrictions set forth in subsections (b)(1), (2) and (3) of this section.

(b)    Parking or Storage of Vehicles within Street. Except when otherwise provided by subsection (b)(4) of this section, the parking or storage of vehicles within any street shall be subject to the following parking restrictions in addition to other parking restrictions set forth in this chapter:

(1)    Time Restriction – No Repark. The parking or storage of any vehicle in the same parking location on a street in excess of five (5) consecutive calendar days without movement shall be unlawful. If any time after the initial five (5) consecutive calendar day period the vehicle is still parked in the same location on the street in violation of the five (5) day parking restriction and is then reparked on the same street within the same block for any period of time up to twenty-four (24) hours, it shall be considered to be parked in the same location within the street and therefore still in violation of the five (5) day parking restriction.

(2)    Recreational Vehicles, Boats or Vessels, and Trailers – Additional Restrictions. No person shall park any recreational vehicle, boat or vessel, or trailer, as defined in BMC 10.10.010 on any street for longer than twenty-four (24) hours, unless such activity is authorized pursuant to a temporary permit pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section or to a residential permit pursuant to BMC 10.10.050(d). If any time after the initial unpermitted twenty-four (24) hour period the vehicle is still parked in the same location on the street in violation of the twenty-four (24) hour parking restriction and is then reparked on the same street within the same block for any period of time up to twenty-four (24) hours, it shall be considered to be parked in the same location within the street and therefore still in violation of the twenty-four (24) hour parking restriction.

(3)    Oversized Vehicles – Additional Restrictions. The City Council finds that the parking and storage of commercial trucks, vans, tractor trailers, and semi-trailers, or combination thereof, exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length (including any attached trailer) or with a maximum gross vehicle weight exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds presents unacceptable risks and hazards to public health, safety, and welfare when such vehicles are parked or stored on any street at times when such vehicles are not engaged in business or commercial activity. Accordingly, no commercial truck, vehicle, van, trailer, or semi-trailer, or combination thereof exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in length (including any attached trailer) or with a maximum gross vehicle weight exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds, whether licensed or unlicensed, may be stored or parked upon any street for longer than twenty-four (24) hours, unless such activity is authorized pursuant to a temporary permit pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(4)    Temporary Parking Permits – Exception to Time Restrictions. A vehicle may park on a street for a period of time that exceeds the time restrictions set forth in this section, as well as any parking restriction time period established in BMC 10.10.030 and 10.10.040(a) if it has been specifically permitted, on a temporary short-term limited basis and for the period of time permitted. Such a permit may be issued:

(i)    To a resident when necessary such as when the resident will be out of town or some other similar short term use;

(ii)    With a public works right-of-way permit or other similar City or state authorization for construction or other related public purpose; or

(iii)    When otherwise authorized by the Director for good reason.

(c)    Unauthorized Disabled Parking. It is a traffic infraction for any person to park a vehicle in a public place provided on private property without charge or on public property reserved for physically disabled persons without a placard or special license plate as provided for in BMC 10.10.060 and RCW 46.19.050. If a person is charged with a violation, the person shall not be determined to have committed an infraction if the person produces in court or before the court appearance the placard or special license plate required under this section. Additionally, it is a traffic infraction pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for any vehicle displaying the placard or special license plate as provided for in BMC 10.10.060 and RCW 46.19.050 to violate any time restrictions imposed on nonmetered, on-street parking places reserved for persons with physical disabilities as well as nonreserved, on-street parking spaces.

(d)    Parking on City Property. A motor vehicle parking or standing on property owned, leased, or operated by the City is subject to the following restrictions:

(1)    Only motor vehicles belonging to persons who work for the City, who are transacting business with the City or who otherwise have specific permission from the City may be parked upon such property; and

(2)    Where pavement markings or signs designate parking stalls on such property, all motor vehicles must be parked within such stalls and not elsewhere on such property, unless otherwise authorized by the City; and

(3)    Where a parking stall or stalls are designated by pavement markings or signage, any motor vehicle parked in these stalls must be parked within the designated limits of the parking space as indicated.

(e)    Parking against Traffic. Except when otherwise provided by City code, ordinance or resolution, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop or park on a street unless:

(1)    Stopped or parked parallel (or at an angle when authorized) to the traveled portion of the street;

(2)    In the direction of authorized traffic movement of the street immediately adjacent thereto; and

(3)    Within twelve (12) inches of the curb or as close as practicable to the edge of the shoulder.

In the event of a conflict between the provisions of subsection (m) of this section and RCW 46.61.575 adopted as part of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC, the provisions of this subsection shall apply.

(f)    Expired Registration. It is unlawful to park any vehicle on a street or on public property without valid, current vehicle license plates or registration tab displayed according to law.

(g)    Inoperable Motor Vehicle. It is unlawful to park or store an inoperable motor vehicle on a street or on public property. For purposes of this subsection, an "inoperable motor vehicle" is defined as a motor vehicle which is:

(1)    By any reason of dismantling, disrepair, or other cause is incapable of being propelled under its own power;

(2)    Unsafe for operation on the streets and highways of this state due to inability to comply with the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC; or

(3)    Damaged to such extent as to render it illegal for operation on any street, including but not limited to any of the following: broken head or taillights, broken or missing mirrors, cracked or missing window or windshield, deflated tires, missing seats or steering wheel or other general conditions that would render a vehicle incapable of being driven on a public highway.

(h)    Junk and Abandoned Vehicles. Enforcement of junk and abandoned vehicles may be pursuant to Chapter 46.55 RCW adopted as part of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC.

(i)    Counterfeit Permits. It is unlawful for any person to copy, reproduce, or otherwise counterfeit a parking permit or to possess any counterfeit copy or facsimile of a City parking permit.

(j)    Unauthorized Use of Permit. It is unlawful for any person issued a parking permit by the City to:

(1)    Lend, sell or assign said permit to another;

(2)    Display any permit issued to another; or

(3)    Display any permit issued when the recipient of the permit is no longer eligible pursuant to this chapter.

(k)    Tampering with Parking Meters or Collection Devices. No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter or collection device.

(l)    Unlawful Parking in City Lot. In addition to other enforcement remedies, it is unlawful to park any vehicle on a City-owned parking lot or structure without paying the posted fee or parking in excess of posted time limits or in violation of use restrictions.

(m)    Obliterating Tire Markings. It is unlawful to conceal, obliterate, or erase markings on vehicle tires made by a parking enforcement officer for the purpose of recording parking time.

(n)    False Application. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally provide false or misleading information on any application for a parking permit.

(o)    Failure to Surrender Permit. The Director is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of its intended use. Upon written notification of permit revocation by the Director, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to surrender a parking permit as directed.

(p)    Parking Fee – Nonpayment. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any parking space monitored by a parking fee collection device, including parking meters, without payment as indicated on the collection device.

(q)    Parking Fee – Time Permitted. It is unlawful to park a vehicle in any parking space monitored by a collection device, including parking meters, for a consecutive period of time longer than that limited period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in the time zone, irrespective of the amount of money deposited in such collection device.

(r)    Habitation in Vehicles. No person shall park and/or occupy any vehicle on any street for the purpose of habitation in such vehicle. For purpose of this section, habitation means to camp, live or occupy within such vehicle for residential purposes. (Ord. 5392 §3, 2019: Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.080 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.

(a)    Enforcement Officer. The parking regulations set forth in this chapter and the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC shall be enforced by the:

(1)    City’s police officers and other law enforcement officers; and/or

(2)    City’s parking enforcement officers, as applicable.

The City’s parking enforcement officers include parking enforcement officers with limited commission as set forth in subsection (d) of this section and those City officials authorized by the Director of Financial Services or by the Director of Public Works and Utilities to enforce provisions of this chapter.

(b)    Notice of Infraction. If any vehicle is found parked, standing, or stopped in violation of this chapter, or otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a notice of parking infraction. A notice of parking infraction represents a determination that a parking infraction has been committed.

(c)    Registered Owner - Responsible for Violation. In any parking violation case involving an infraction relating to the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the violation unless the registered owner can provide proof that the vehicle was sold or stolen or other similar event in which the registered owner had no direct or indirect control of the vehicle.

(d)    Limited Commission Officers. The City’s Police Department is authorized to appoint parking enforcement officers with a limited commission to issue notices of infractions for violations of the City’s parking regulations. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.090 FINES AND PENALTIES.

Unless specifically set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the fines and penalties for parking violations of the provisions of this chapter and provisions of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC, defined as an infraction, shall be pursuant to Chapters 3.01 and 10.04 BMC. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.100 FAILURE TO RESPOND - ADDITIONAL PENALTY.

Any person who has been issued a notice of infraction relating to parking pursuant to BMC 10.10.080(b) and who fails to respond as provided in RCW 46.63.110, as adopted by the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC, shall pay an additional penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), regardless of the disposition of the notice of infraction. This enhanced penalty shall be in addition to a misdemeanor citation which may be issued for failure to respond to a notice of infraction. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.110 VEHICLE IMPOUND - OTHER ENFORCEMENT.

Any vehicle parked and/or used in violation of this chapter or any regulation or restriction established thereunder, or any other applicable provision of the Bremerton City Code or of any ordinance, is an unauthorized vehicle declared to be a nuisance which may be summarily abated by the impounding and removal of the vehicle as follows:

(a)    Impound with Notice. As authorized pursuant to RCW 46.55.080(1), an unauthorized vehicle left within a street may be impounded under the direction of a police officer or parking enforcement officer after notice of such proposed impoundment has been securely attached to and conspicuously displayed on the vehicle for a period of twenty-four (24) hours prior to such impoundment pursuant to RCW 46.55.085 under the following circumstances:

(1)    Violations of Parking Code. When such vehicle is parked and/or used in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law, ordinance or regulation; or

(2)    Chronic Nuisance. A vehicle is hereby declared to be a chronic nuisance and subject to impound as provided herein when:

(i)    Outstanding Infractions. When a vehicle is parked on any street or City parking facility within the City and there are three (3) or more outstanding parking infractions issued against the vehicle for each of which a person has failed to respond, failed to appear at a requested hearing, or failed to pay a parking infraction for at least forty-five (45) days from the date of the filing of the notice of infraction.

(ii)    Multiple Infractions. When a vehicle is parked on any street within the downtown core as defined in BMC 10.10.010 and said vehicle has been issued six (6) or more parking infractions while parked on any street within the City, whether paid or unpaid, within the preceding ninety (90) days. Furthermore, such vehicle may not park on any street within the downtown core for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the notice of impoundment.

(b)    Impound Without Notice. As authorized pursuant to RCW 46.55.080(1), a vehicle may be impounded under the direction of a police officer or parking enforcement officer, with or without citation and without giving prior notice to its owner as required in subsection (a) of this section, only under the following circumstances:

(1)    Public Safety. When a vehicle is unattended upon a street where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or jeopardizes public safety as defined in RCW 46.55.113; or

(2)    City Parking Facility. When an unauthorized vehicle is parked in a City owned or controlled parking facility which is properly posted with parking restrictions pursuant to RCW 46.55.070.

(c)    Other Impoundment. In addition to the impound provisions set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section and those penalties established pursuant to this chapter, a vehicle in violation of any of the parking regulations established herein may be impounded by a registered tow truck operator at the direction of a police officer pursuant to those requirements established in WAC 308-330-406 and other related sections of the Washington Model Traffic Ordinance as adopted pursuant to Chapter 10.04 BMC. (See RCW 46.55.113)

(d)    Immobilization of Vehicle. In lieu of impoundment, a vehicle may be immobilized with a restraining device (i.e., boot). A vehicle that has been immobilized for forty-eight (48) or more hours may be impounded, unless the vehicle needs to be towed sooner for public safety reasons as set forth is subsection (b)(1) of this section as determined by the police officer or parking enforcement officer. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.120 COSTS OF IMPOUND.

(a)    The registered owner shall be responsible for all towing and storage costs relating to impounds of a nuisance vehicle. If the vehicle is immobilized pursuant to this chapter, the Police Department shall affix to said vehicle a notice setting forth procedures for release and directing, that in addition to the payment of fines or posting bail, the owner shall pay an administrative immobilization fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) before the vehicle may be released.

(b)    If impounded or immobilized, the vehicle shall not be released until the Police Department, or its designee, parking enforcement officer or towing company, as applicable, receives a receipt or other notice from the court showing that all infractions and crimes relating to standing, stopping or parking the vehicle have been paid or otherwise resolved unless such release is otherwise approved by the Police Department, or its designee or parking enforcement officer for good reason. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.130 ENFORCEMENT - EXEMPT PERIODS.

Time restrictions on parking, as set forth in this chapter, shall not be effective on City holidays identified in BMC 1.02.020 or such additional days specifically exempted by Council resolution, except that enforcement in residential restricted parking zones shall be at the times posted. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


10.10.140 APPEAL.

Appeals relating to the creation, deletion, boundary change or time change of a restricted parking zone pursuant to BMC 10.10.040(c) and appeals of parking infractions and impoundments pursuant to this chapter shall be filed with and heard by the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner pursuant to BMC 2.62.045. Failure to appear at the scheduled hearing will be deemed a waiver of any rights to contest the declaration. (Ord. 5206 §2 (part), 2013)


Chapter 10.12 SKATEBOARDS

Sections:

10.12.010    SKATEBOARDS - RESTRICTIONS.

10.12.020    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


10.12.010 SKATEBOARDS - RESTRICTIONS.

It shall be a civil infraction for any person to use a skateboard in violation of the provisions of this section.

(a)    No person shall ride a skateboard on the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, walkways, docks, buildings or parks, including but not limited to the Louis Mentor Board Walk and any extensions or additions thereto, the Kitsap Conference Center Plaza and staircases, and the Harborside Fountain Park, within the central business district defined as the area bounded by 6th Street, Warren Avenue and Sinclair Inlet or the business district within one block of Callow Avenue between 11th Street and 1st Street or on arterial streets.

(b)    Whenever any person is riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk of the City which is not in an area prohibited by subsection (a) of this section, such person shall at all times exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian and shall operate the same in a careful and prudent manner at a rate of speed no greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the width and condition of the surface. When riding a skateboard would endanger or unreasonably inconvenience pedestrians, such person shall stop and carry the skateboard.

(c)    Whenever any person is riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk of the City, such person shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and shall maintain foot control with the pavement within ten (10) feet of any pedestrian.

(d)    No person shall leave a skateboard upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic emerging from alleys or driveways. (Ord. 5121 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5005 §1, 2007; Ord. 4268 §1 1990; Ord. 4133 §1, 1987. Formerly 10.12.030)


10.12.020 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

Any person violating any of the provisions of BMC 10.12.010 is guilty of a civil infraction and subject to a base penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC. (Ord. 5121 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 4466 §1, 1994; Ord. 4133 §1, 1987. Formerly 10.12.040)


Chapter 10.13 MOTORIZED WHEELED TRANSPORTATION DEVICES

Sections:

10.13.010    DEFINITIONS.

10.13.020    DUTY TO OBEY TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND RULES OF THE ROAD.

10.13.030    NEGLIGENT OPERATION - PROHIBITED. 

10.13.040    PROHIBITED AREAS. 

10.13.050    PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.

10.13.060    MINIMUM AGE AND HOURS OF OPERATION.

10.13.070    HELMET, REFLECTORS, LIGHTS.

10.13.080    BRAKES REQUIRED.

10.13.090    NOISE. 

10.13.100    NO MORE THAN ONE (1) PERSON PERMITTED - TOWING OR PULLING PROHIBITED. 

10.13.110    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


10.13.010 DEFINITIONS.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

(a)    "Motorized wheeled transportation device" shall mean any device which is not required to be licensed pursuant to RCW 46.16.010, and is propelled by an electric motor or liquid fuel engine, and is intended to transport a person on or across land. A motorized wheeled transportation device shall include, but shall not be limited to, a "motorized foot scooter" as that term is defined in RCW 46.04.336 and any electric or gas powered scooter, powered board, motor powered skateboard, or other similar motorized wheeled device, regardless of the manner in which the device is designed; provided, that a motorized wheeled transportation device shall not include any motorized wheeled device defined as follows: 

	Electric-assisted bicycle	RCW 46.04.169

	Electric personal assistive mobility device	RCW 46.04.1695

	Motorcycle	RCW 46.04.330

	Moped	RCW 46.04.304

	Motor-driven cycle	RCW 46.04.332

	Power wheelchair	RCW 46.04.415

	Wheelchair conveyance	RCW 46.04.710

Motorized wheeled transportation device does not include any vehicle that is prohibited by State law from being operated or used in or upon a street or sidewalk. 

(b)    "Park" means and includes all City parks, public squares, park drives, parkways, boulevards, golf courses, and play and recreation grounds under the jurisdiction of the City of Bremerton parks and recreation department.

(c)    "Public place" means and includes publicly owned, leased or operated parking lots or publicly owned, leased or operated real property, and any public places appropriated to the public for public use, whether improved or unimproved.

(d)    "Right-of-way" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and including the sidewalks and shoulder areas.

(e)    "Sidewalk" means that portion of a right-of-way that excludes the street but includes the sidewalk and shoulder area, whether improved or unimproved.

(f)    "Street" means that portion of any right-of-way including any highway, avenue, lane, road, street, drive, place, boulevard, alley, and every way or place in the City of Bremerton open as a matter of right to public vehicular travel. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.020 DUTY TO OBEY TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND RULES OF THE ROAD.

Except as provided in this chapter, every person operating a motorized wheeled transportation device upon a street shall have the same rights and duties as operators of bicycles. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.030 NEGLIGENT OPERATION - PROHIBITED. 

The negligent operation of a motorized wheeled transportation device on any street shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, the term "negligent" shall mean the failure to exercise ordinary care, and is the doing of some act that a reasonably careful person would not do under the same or similar circumstances or the failure to do something that a reasonably careful person would do under the same or similar circumstances. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.040 PROHIBITED AREAS. 

The operation or use of motorized wheeled transportation devices shall not be permitted, regardless of the age of the operator, in or upon the following areas:

(a)     Sidewalks while under power, however, motorized wheeled transportation devices are permitted in or upon public sidewalks under manual power. "Manual power" means that the drive wheel is disengaged from and not propelled by the electric or liquid fuel power source (in neutral) and that the liquid fuel source (combustion engine) is turned off. 

(b)    Improved or natural surface recreational trails or pathways.

(c)    Parks.

(d)    Public places.

(e)    Streets with a maximum speed limit in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.050 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.

A parent or guardian who has custody of any child or ward under the age of eighteen (18) shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.060 MINIMUM AGE AND HOURS OF OPERATION.

(a)    No motorized wheeled transportation device shall be operated on any street unless the operator is at least fourteen (14) years of age. 

(b)     A motorized wheeled transportation device shall not be operated on any street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.070 HELMET, REFLECTORS, LIGHTS.

The following equipment shall be required whenever a motorized wheeled transportation device is operated on any street within the City:

(a)    Helmet Required. Any person operating or riding upon any motorized wheeled transportation device shall, at all times, wear a "motorcycle helmet" as that term is defined in RCW 46.37.530 or an approved bicycle helmet certified by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), or the Snell Foundation, and such helmet shall be worn on the head and shall have the chin strap fastened securely while the motorized wheeled transportation device is in motion.

(b)    Lights and Reflectors Required. Every motorized wheeled transportation device when in use during the "hours of darkness" as defined in RCW 46.04.200 shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a red reflector or light on the rear of the motorized wheeled transportation device visible from a distance of up to five hundred (500) feet from the rear of the device. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.080 BRAKES REQUIRED.

Motorized wheeled transportation devices shall be equipped with brakes that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.090 NOISE. 

(a)    The operation of a motorized wheeled transportation device shall be subject to the provisions of BMC 6.32.110, entitled "Public Disturbance Noises."

(b)    No motorized wheeled transportation device powered by a liquid fuel motor shall be operated unless such device is equipped with a properly working muffler that is designed to reduce the noise produced by the device. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.100 NO MORE THAN ONE (1) PERSON PERMITTED - TOWING OR PULLING PROHIBITED. 

(a)    No more than one (1) person shall operate or ride upon a motorized wheeled transportation device at the same time. In the event that more than one (1) person operates or rides upon a device at the same time, each person operating or riding the device shall be in violation of this section.

(b)    No person operating a motorized wheeled transportation device shall tow or pull another person behind such device. In the event that a person is towed or pulled behind a motorized wheeled transportation device, the person operating the motorized wheeled transportation device and the person being towed or pulled shall each be in violation of this section. (Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


10.13.110 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any person violating any provision of this chapter, except for BMC 10.13.070(a), shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be liable for monetary penalties not to exceed forty dollars ($40.00), exclusive of statutory assessments, provided, conduct that constitutes a criminal offense may be charged as such and is subject to the maximum penalties allowed for such offenses. Community service hours may be imposed in lieu of a monetary penalty. 

(b)    Any person violating BMC 10.13.070(a) shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be liable for monetary penalties as set forth in Chapter 7.80 RCW not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) exclusive of statutory assessments.

(c)    Bremerton Municipal Court - Jurisdiction. The Bremerton Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate, in accordance with applicable laws, any violation of this chapter; provided, that in the event jurisdiction over a juvenile lies with another court, that other court shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate the offense. (Ord. 4927 §1, 2005; Ord. 4915 §1, 2004)


Chapter 10.14 BICYCLE SAFETY AND HELMETS

Sections:

10.14.010    PURPOSE AND POLICY.

10.14.020    DEFINITIONS.

10.14.030    BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.

10.14.040    BICYCLE RACES AND EVENTS - BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.

10.14.050    HELMET SALES - SAFETY STANDARDS.

10.14.060    PENALTIES - CIVIL INFRACTION.

10.14.070    ENFORCEMENT.

10.14.080    SEVERABILITY.


10.14.010 PURPOSE AND POLICY.

A.    This chapter is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the City of Bremerton to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.

B.    It is the express purpose of this chapter to provide for and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of this chapter.

C.    It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with its requirements upon any person included within its scope, and no provision of, or term used in, this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the City of Bremerton or any its officers or employees, for whom the implementation or enforcement of this chapter shall be discretionary and not mandatory.

D.    Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be, or shall be, construed to create or to form the basis for liability on the part of the City of Bremerton or its officers, employees, or agents, for any inquiry or damage resulting from the failure of any person to comply with this chapter.

(Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.020 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

A.    "Bicycle" means every device propelled solely by human power upon which a person or persons may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is 16 inches or more in diameter, or three wheels, any one of which is more than 20 inches in diameter, and within this chapter shall include any attached trailers, side cars, and/or other device being towed by a bicycle.

B.    "Guardian" means a parent, legal guardian, adult with custody, or temporary guardian, who maintains responsibility, whether voluntary or otherwise, for the safety and welfare of a person under the age of 18 years.

C.    "Helmet" means a head covering designed for safety that meets or exceeds safety standards adopted by U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission standard (CPSC), or such subsequently nationally recognized standard for bicycle helmet performance as the City Council may adopt.

D.    "Public Area" means public roadways, bicycle paths, parks, or any right-of-way, publicly owned property within the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.030 BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.

A.    Any person operating a bicycle in motion, riding a bicycle, or in tow of a bicycle, in or upon any public area shall wear a helmet, and shall have either the neck or chin strap of the helmet fastened securely while the bicycle is in motion.

B.    No person shall transport another person on or tow another person on a bicycle in or upon any public area, unless that person is wearing a helmet.

C.    A parent or guardian is responsible for requiring that a child under the age of 16 years wear a helmet, the neck or chin strap of which is fastened securely, while upon a bicycle in motion, or bicycling or riding as a passenger on a bicycle in any public area. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.040 BICYCLE RACES AND EVENTS - BICYCLE HELMET REQUIRED.

A.    Any person or organization managing a bicycle race, an organized event involving bicycling, or a bicycle tour, which will take place in whole or in part in any public area, shall notify participants of the requirement to wear a helmet during the event, race, or tour, and such persons and organizations may reject participants who fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The person or organization managing any such event, race, or tour shall include the helmet requirement in any promotional brochures and on registration materials. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.050 HELMET SALES - SAFETY STANDARDS.

A.    No person shall sell or offer for sale a helmet that does not meet or exceed the safety standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.060 PENALTIES - CIVIL INFRACTION.

A.    Any person or organization violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall have committed an infraction and shall be liable for monetary penalties as set forth in Chapter 7.80 RCW, not to exceed $25.00 exclusive of statutory assessments.

B.    The court may waive, reduce or suspend the penalty and dismiss the notice of violation as a warning for an individual who has not received a notice of violation of this chapter within one (1) year after the first court appearance for a violation, and provides proof that he or she has acquired a helmet.

C.    In order to educate the public concerning the provisions of this chapter, during the first year following the effective date of this chapter, a person violating section 10.14.030 will not be subject to a civil infraction monetary penalty, though a written warning of the violation may be issued. Following the first year from the effective date of this chapter, a violator may be issued a regular notice of civil infraction. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.070 ENFORCEMENT.

A.    The Bremerton Police Department within the City of Bremerton shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


10.14.080 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 4717, Added, 09/01/2000)


Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS

Sections:

10.16.010    U-TURNS PROHIBITED - EXCEPTION - PENALTY.


10.16.010 U-TURNS PROHIBITED - EXCEPTION - PENALTY.

No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street or highway of the City excepting at street intersections within the City where U-turns are not specifically prohibited by sign or other traffic control device.

It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate this provision and upon conviction thereof said person shall be fined pursuant to BMC Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 2878 §§1, 2, 1970)


Chapter 10.20 COMMUTE TRIP REDUCTION PLAN

Sections:

10.20.010    PURPOSE.

10.20.020    DEFINITIONS.

10.20.030    RESPONSIBLE AGENCY.

10.20.040    THE CITY OF BREMERTON’S CTR PLAN.

10.20.050    CTR GOALS.

10.20.060    APPLICABILITY.

10.20.070    REQUIREMENTS FOR AFFECTED EMPLOYERS.

10.20.080    RECORD KEEPING.

10.20.090    CTR PROGRAM ACCEPTANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION.

10.20.100    COMPLIANCE AND VIOLATIONS.

10.20.110    EXEMPTIONS AND GOAL MODIFICATIONS.

10.20.120    APPEALS.


10.20.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish commute trip reduction program requirements for affected employers within the City of Bremerton as required by RCW 70.94.527. These requirements will promote alternative commute modes and reduce the total number of drive alone commute trips, and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee, thereby decreasing traffic congestion, automobile related air pollution, and energy use within the City of Bremerton. The City of Bremerton recognizes the importance of increasing individual citizens’ awareness of air quality, energy consumption, and traffic congestion and the contribution individual actions can make toward addressing these issues. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.020 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:

(a)    (1)	"Affected employee" means a full-time employee who begins his or her regular work day at a single worksite covered by the commute trip reduction plan between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two (2) or more weekdays per week for at least twelve (12) continuous months who is not an independent contractor. Seasonal agriculture employees, including seasonal employees of processors of agriculture products are excluded from the count of affected employees.

(2)    "Affected employer" means an employer that employs one hundred (100) or more affected employees at a single worksite covered by the commute trip reduction plan who scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive) on two (2) or more weekdays for at least twelve (12) continuous months. Construction worksites, when the expected duration of the construction is less than two (2) years, are excluded from this definition. (Also see definition of "employer.")

(3)    "Alternative mode" means any means of commute transportation other than that in which the single-occupant motor vehicle is the dominant mode, including telecommuting and compressed work week schedules if they result in reducing commute trips.

(4)    "Alternative work schedules" means programs such as compressed work week schedules that eliminate work trips by affected employees.

(b)    (1)	"Base year" means the twelve (12) month period which commences when a major employer is determined by the jurisdiction to be participating within the CTR program. The City uses this twelve (12) month period as the basis upon which it develops commute trip reduction goals.

(2)    "Baseline measurement" means the survey, during the base year, of employees at a major employer worksite to determine the drive alone rate and vehicle miles traveled per employee at the worksite. The jurisdiction uses this measurement to develop commute trip reduction goals for the major employer. The baseline measurement must be implemented in a manner that meets the requirements specified by Kitsap Transit.

(c)    (1)	"Carpool" means any motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, occupied by two (2) to six (6) people of at least sixteen (16) years of age traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one (1) motor vehicle commute trip.

(2)    "Commute trips" means trips made from a worker’s home to a worksite (inclusive) on weekdays.

(3)    "CTR" is the abbreviation of commute trip reduction.

(4)    "Commute trip reduction (CTR) plan" means the goals established for the City and affected employers.

(5)    "Commute trip reduction (CTR) program" means an employer’s strategies to reduce employees’ drive alone commutes and average VMT per employee.

(6)    "Commute trip vehicle miles traveled per employee" means the sum of individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles over a set period divided by the number of full-time employees during that period.

(7)    "Compressed work week" means an alternative work schedule, in accordance with employer policy, that regularly allows a full-time employee to eliminate at least one (1) work day every two (2) weeks by working longer hours during the remaining days, resulting in fewer commute trips by the employee. This definition is primarily intended to include weekly and bi-weekly arrangements, the most typical being four (4) ten (10) hour days or eighty (80) hours in nine (9) days, but may also include other arrangements.

(8)    "Custom bus/buspool" means a commuter bus service arranged specifically to transport employees to work.

(d)    (1)	"Dominant mode" means the mode of travel used for the greatest distance of a commute trip.

(2)    "Drive alone" means a motor vehicle occupied by one (1) employee for commute purposes, including a motorcycle.

(3)    "Drive alone trips" means commute trips made by employees in single occupant vehicles.

(e)    (1)	"Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)" means a person who is designated as responsible for the development, implementation, and monitoring of an employer’s CTR program.

(2)    "Employer" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual or entity, whether public, nonprofit, or private, that employs workers.

(3)    "Exemption" means a waiver from any or all CTR program requirements granted to an employer by the City of Bremerton based on unique conditions that apply to the employer or employment site.

(f)    (1)	"Flex-time" is an employer policy that provides work schedules allowing individual employees some flexibility in choosing the start and end time but not the number of their working hours.

(2)    "Full-time employee" means a person, other than an independent contractor, whose position is scheduled on a continuous basis for fifty-two (52) weeks for an average of at least thirty-five (35) hours per week.

(g)    (1)	"Good faith effort" means that an employer has met the minimum requirements identified in this chapter and in RCW 70.94.531, and is working collaboratively with Kitsap Transit to continue its existing CTR program or is developing and implementing program modifications likely to result in improvements to its CTR program over an agreed upon length of time.

(i)    (1)	"Implementation" or "implement" means active pursuit by an employer of the CTR goals of RCW 70.94.521 through 70.94.551 and this chapter as evidenced by appointment of an employee transportation coordinator (ETC), distribution of information to employees regarding alternatives to drive alone commuting, and commencement of other measures according to its improved CTR program and schedule.

(m)    (1)	"A major employer" means a private or public employer, including state agencies, that employs one hundred (100) or more full-time employees at a single worksite who are scheduled to begin their regular work day between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays for at least twelve (12) continuous months.

(2)    "Major employer worksite" or "affected employer worksite" or "worksite" means the physical location occupied by a major employer, as determined by the local jurisdiction.

(3)    "Major employment installation" means a military base or federal reservation, excluding tribal reservations, or other locations as designated by the City of Bremerton, at which there are one hundred (100) or more affected employees.

(4)    "Mode" refers to the means of transportation used by employees, such as single-occupant motor vehicle, rideshare vehicle (carpool or vanpool), transit, ferry, bicycle, walking, compressed work week schedule and telecommuting.

(n)    (1)	"Notice" means written communication delivered via the United States Postal Service with receipt deemed accepted three (3) days following the day on which the notice was deposited with the Postal Service unless the third day falls on a weekend or legal holiday in which case the notice is deemed accepted the day after the weekend or legal holiday.

(p)    (1)	"Peak period" means the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(2)    "Peak period trip" means any commute trip that delivers the employee to begin his or her regular workday between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. (inclusive), Monday through Friday, except legal holidays.

(3)    "Proportion of drive alone trips" or "drive alone rate" means the number of commute trips over a set period made by employees in single occupancy vehicles divided by the number of potential trips taken by employees working during that period.

(r)    (1)	"Ride matching service" means a system which assists in matching commuters for the purpose of commuting together.

(t)    (1)	"Teleworking" or "telecommuting" means the use of telephones, computers, or other similar technology to permit an employee to work at home eliminating a commute trip, or to work from a work place closer to home, reducing the distance traveled in a commute trip by at least half.

(2)    "Transit" means a multiple-occupant vehicle operated on a for-hire, shared-ride basis, including bus, passenger ferry, shared-ride taxi, shuttle bus, or vanpool.

(3)    "Transportation demand management (TDM)" means a broad range of strategies that are primarily intended to reduce and reshape demand on the transportation system.

(4)    "Transportation management association (TMA)" means a group of employers or an association representing a group of employers in a defined geographic area. A TMA may represent employers within specific city limits or may have a sphere of influence that extends beyond city limits.

(v)    (1)	"Vanpool" means a vehicle occupied by from five (5) to fifteen (15) people traveling together for their commute trip, resulting in the reduction of a minimum of one (1) motor vehicle trip.

(2)    "Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) per employee" means the sum of the individual vehicle commute trip lengths in miles made by employees over a set period divided by the number of employees during that period.

(w)    (1)	"Week" means a seven (7) day calendar period, starting on Monday and continuing through Sunday.

(2)    "Weekday" means any day of the week except Saturday or Sunday.

(3)    "Writing," "written," or "in writing" means original signed and dated documents. Facsimile (fax) and email transmissions are a temporary notice of action that must be followed via mail or delivery of the original signed and dated document. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.030 RESPONSIBLE AGENCY.

The City of Bremerton has entered into an interlocal agreement with Kitsap Transit pursuant to Chapter 39.34 RCW and RCW 70.94.527(5) whereby Kitsap Transit is the agency responsible for implementing and administering the City of Bremerton’s CTR plan and this chapter. Kitsap Transit is located at: 

60 Washington Avenue, Ste. 200

Bremerton, Washington 98337

(Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.040 THE CITY OF BREMERTON’S CTR PLAN.

The goals established for the jurisdiction and affected employers in the City of Bremerton are set forth in the City’s commute trip reduction plan ("CTR plan") as currently enacted and hereinafter amended by the City, incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.050 CTR GOALS.

(a)    Commute Trip Reduction Goals.

(1)    The City of Bremerton’s goals for reductions in the proportions of drive alone commute trips and vehicle miles traveled per employee by affected employers in the City of Bremerton’s jurisdiction, major employment installations, and other areas designated by the City of Bremerton are hereby established by the City of Bremerton’s CTR plan incorporated by BMC 10.20.040. These goals establish the desired level of performance for the CTR program in its entirety in the City of Bremerton.

(2)    Kitsap Transit will set the individual worksite goals for affected employers based on how the worksite can contribute to the City of Bremerton’s overall goal established in the CTR plan. The goals will appear as a component of the affected employer’s approved implementation plan outlined in BMC 10.20.070.

(b)    Commute Trip Reduction Goals for Affected Employers.

(1)    The drive alone and VMT goals for affected employers in the City of Bremerton are hereby established as set forth in the CTR plan incorporated by BMC 10.20.040.

(2)    If the goals for an affected employer or newly affected employer are not listed in the CTR plan, they will be established by Kitsap Transit at a level designed to achieve the City of Bremerton’s overall goals for the jurisdiction and other areas as designated by the City of Bremerton. Kitsap Transit shall provide written notification of the goals for each affected employer worksite by providing the information when Kitsap Transit reviews the employer’s proposed program and incorporating the goals into the program approval issued by Kitsap Transit. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.060 APPLICABILITY.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any affected employer within the geographic limits of the CTR plan adopted in BMC 10.20.040.

(a)    Notice of Applicability. 

(1)    Publication of Notice. Notice of the ordinance adopting this chapter shall be published in accordance with the City of Bremerton’s established public notification procedures for adoption of an ordinance or an amendment to an ordinance.

(2)    Affected employers located in the City of Bremerton shall receive written notification from Kitsap Transit that they are subject to this chapter. Such notices shall be by certified mail or delivery, return receipt, addressed to the employer’s chief executive officer, senior official, CTR program manager, or registered agent at the worksite. Such notification shall provide ninety (90) days for the affected employer to perform a baseline measurement as defined in BMC 10.20.020. Kitsap Transit shall also send to all known affected employers notice of any amendments to this chapter. 

(3)    Affected employers who, for whatever reason, do not receive notification within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and are either notified or identify themselves to Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter will be granted an extension up to ninety (90) days within which to perform a baseline measurement specified by Kitsap Transit. 

(4)    Affected employers that have not been identified or do not identify themselves within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

(5)    If an affected employer has already performed a baseline measurement, or an alternative acceptable to Kitsap Transit, under previous iterations of this chapter, the employer is not required to perform another baseline measurement.

(b)    Newly Affected Employers.

(1)    Employers meeting the definition of "affected employer" in this chapter shall identify themselves to Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days of either moving into the boundaries outlined in the CTR plan adopted in BMC 10.20.040 or growing in employment at a work site to one hundred (100) or more affected employees. Employers who do not identify themselves within ninety (90) days are in violation of this chapter.

(2)    Newly affected employers identified as such shall be given ninety (90) days to perform a baseline measurement consistent with the measurement requirements specified by Kitsap Transit. Employers who do not perform a baseline measurement within ninety (90) days of receiving written notification that they are subject to this chapter are in violation of this chapter.

(3)    Not more than ninety (90) days after receiving written notification of the results of the baseline measurement, the newly affected employer shall develop and submit a commute trip reduction program ("CTR program") to Kitsap Transit. The program will be developed in consultation with Kitsap Transit staff listed in BMC 10.20.030 to be consistent with the goals of the CTR plan adopted in BMC 10.20.040. Employers who do not implement an approved CTR program according to this schedule are in violation of this chapter.

(c)    Change in Status as an Affected Employer. Any of the following changes in an affected employer’s status may change the employer’s CTR program requirements:

(1)    If an employer initially designated as an affected employer no longer employs one hundred (100) or more affected employees and expects not to employ one hundred (100) or more affected employees for the next twelve (12) months, that employer is no longer considered an affected employer. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify Kitsap Transit, in writing, that it is no longer an affected employer, the burden of proof lies with the employer;

(2)    If the same employer returns to the level of one hundred (100) or more affected employees within the same twelve (12) months, that employer will be considered an affected employer for the entire twelve (12) months, and will be subject to the same CTR program requirements as other affected employers. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify Kitsap Transit, in writing, that it has become an affected employer; and

(3)    If the same employer returns to the level of one hundred (100) or more affected employees twelve (12) or more months after its change in status to an "unaffected" employer, that employer shall be treated as a newly affected employer, and will be subject to the same CTR program requirements as other newly affected employers. It is the responsibility of the employer to notify Kitsap Transit, in writing that it has become an affected employer. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.070 REQUIREMENTS FOR AFFECTED EMPLOYERS.

An affected employer is required to make a good faith effort, as defined in RCW 70.94.534(2) and this chapter, to develop and implement a CTR program that will encourage its employees to reduce VMT per employee and drive alone commute trips. The CTR program must include the mandatory elements as described below.

(a)    Mandatory Program Elements.

(1)    Employee Transportation Coordinator. The name of the employer’s designated employee transportation coordinator (ETC) to administer the CTR program. The ETC and/or designee’s name, location, and telephone number must be physically or electronically prominently displayed at each affected worksite. The ETC shall oversee all elements of the employer’s CTR program and act as liaison between the employer and Kitsap Transit. The objective is to have an effective transportation coordinator presence at each worksite; an affected employer with multiple sites may have one (1) ETC for all sites.

(2)    Information Distribution. Information about alternatives to drive alone commuting as well as a summary of the employer’s CTR program shall be provided to employees at least once a year and to new employees at the time of hire. The summary of the employer’s CTR program shall also be submitted to Kitsap Transit with the employer’s program description and regular report.

(b)    Additional Program Elements. In addition to specific program elements described above, the employer’s CTR program shall include additional elements as needed to meet CTR goals. Elements may include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following:

(1)    A provision for preferential parking or reduced parking charges, or both, for high-occupancy vehicles;

(2)    Instituting or increasing parking charges for drive alone commuters;

(3)    A provision for commuter ride matching services to facilitate employee ride-sharing for commute trips;

(4)    A provision for subsidies for rail, transit, or vanpool fares and/or transit passes;

(5)    A provision for vans or buses for use as vanpools or custom bus/buspools (Kitsap Transit’s worker/driver buses) for employee ride-sharing;

(6)    A provision for subsidies for carpools, vanpools, walking, bicycling, teleworking, or compressed schedules;

(7)    A provision of incentives for employees that do not drive alone to work;

(8)    Permitting the use of the employer’s vehicles for carpooling or vanpooling;

(9)    Permitting flexible work schedules to facilitate employees’ use of transit, carpools, or vanpools;

(10)    Cooperation with transportation providers to provide additional regular or express service to the worksite;

(11)    Construction of special loading and unloading facilities for transit, carpool, and vanpool users;

(12)    A provision for bicycle parking facilities, lockers, changing areas, and showers for employees who bicycle or walk to work;

(13)    A provision for a program of parking incentives such as a rebate for employees who do not use the parking facilities;

(14)    Establishment of a telecommuting program to permit employees to work part- or full-time at home or at an alternative worksite closer to their homes;

(15)    Establishment of a program of alternative work schedules such as a compressed work week which reduces commuting;

(16)    Implementation of other measures designed to facilitate the use of high-occupancy vehicles, such as on-site day care facilities, emergency taxi services, or guaranteed ride home programs;

(17)    Charging employees for parking, and/or the elimination of free parking; and

(18)    Other measures that the employer believes will reduce the number and length of commute trips made to the site.

(c)    CTR Program Report and Description.

(1)    Affected employers shall review their program and file a regular progress report with Kitsap Transit in accordance with the format provided by Kitsap Transit.

(2)    The CTR program report and description outlines the strategies to be undertaken by an employer to achieve the commute trip reduction goals for the reporting period. Employers are encouraged to consider innovative strategies and combine program elements in a manner that will best suit their location, site characteristics, business type, and employees’ commuting needs. Employers are further encouraged to cooperate with each other to implement program elements.

(3)    At a minimum the employer’s CTR program report and description must include:

(i)    A general description of the employment site location, transportation characteristics, employee parking availability, on-site amenities, and surrounding services;

(ii)    The number of employees affected by the CTR program and the total number of employees at the site;

(iii)    Documentation on compliance with the mandatory CTR program elements as described in subsection (a) of this section;

(iv)    A description of any additional elements included in the employer’s CTR program as described in subsection (b) of this section;

(v)    A statement of organizational commitment to provide appropriate resources to the program to meet the employer’s established goals.

(d)    Biennial Measure of Employee Commute Behavior. In addition to the baseline measurement, employers shall conduct a program evaluation as a means of determining worksite progress toward meeting CTR goals. As part of the program evaluation, the employer shall distribute and collect CTR program employee questionnaires (surveys) at least once every two (2) years, and strive to achieve at least a seventy (70) percent response rate from employees at the worksite. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.080 RECORD KEEPING.

Affected employers shall maintain a copy of their approved CTR program description and report, their CTR program employee questionnaire results, and all supporting documentation for the descriptions and assertions made in any CTR report to Kitsap Transit for a minimum of forty-eight (48) months. Kitsap Transit and the affected employer shall agree in writing on the record keeping requirements as part of the affected employer’s accepted CTR program. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.090 CTR PROGRAM ACCEPTANCE AND IMPLEMENTATION.

(a)    Document Review.

(1)    Kitsap Transit shall provide the employer with written notification if the employer’s CTR program is deemed acceptable. The notification must give cause for any rejection. Such notification shall be by certified mail or delivery, return receipt, addressed to the employer’s employee transportation coordinator. If the employer receives no written notification of extension of the review period or comment on the CTR program or annual report within ninety (90) days of submission, the employer’s CTR program or annual report shall be deemed accepted. Kitsap Transit may extend the review period up to ninety (90) days. The implementation date for the employer’s CTR program will be extended an equivalent number of days.

(b)    Schedule. Upon review on an employer’s initial CTR program, Kitsap Transit shall establish the employer’s regular reporting date. This report will be provided in a form provided by Kitsap Transit consistent with BMC 10.20.070(c).

(c)    Modification of CTR Program Elements. An affected employer may request a modification of the CTR program elements. This request must be in writing and delivered to Kitsap Transit. Such request may be granted by Kitsap Transit if one (1) of the following conditions exist:

(1)    Beyond Control. The affected employer can demonstrate it would be unable to comply with the CTR program element(s), for which the affected employer seeks an exemption, for reasons beyond the control of the employer; or

(2)    Undue Hardship. The affected employer can demonstrate that compliance with the CTR program element(s) would constitute an undue hardship.

Kitsap Transit may ask the affected employer to substitute a program element of similar trip reduction potential rather than grant the employer’s request.

(d)    Extensions. An affected employer may request from Kitsap Transit additional time to submit a CTR program description and report, or to implement or modify a CTR program. Such requests shall be made in writing and delivered by certified mail to Kitsap Transit no less than thirty (30) days before the due date for which the extension is being requested. Extensions not to exceed ninety (90) days may be considered for reasonable cause. Kitsap Transit shall grant or deny the employer’s extension request by certified letter, return receipt within ten (10) days of receiving the request. If there is no response issued to the employer, an extension is automatically granted for thirty (30) days. Extension shall not exempt an employer from any responsibility in meeting the CTR program goals. Extensions granted due to delays or difficulties with any CTR program element(s) shall not be cause for discontinuing or failing to implement other program elements. An employer’s annual reporting date shall not be adjusted permanently as a result of these extensions. An employer’s annual reporting date may be extended at the discretion of Kitsap Transit.

(e)    Implementation of Employer’s CTR Program. Unless extensions are granted, employer shall implement its approved CTR program, including approved program modifications, not more than ninety (90) days after receiving written notice for Kitsap Transit that the program has been approved or with the expiration of the program review period without receiving notice from Kitsap Transit. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.100 COMPLIANCE AND VIOLATIONS.

(a)    Compliance. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, compliance shall mean:

(1)    Fully implementing in good faith all mandatory program elements as well as provisions in an approved CTR program description and report and satisfying the requirements of this chapter;

(2)    Providing a complete CTR program description and report on the regular reporting date; and

(3)    Distributing and collecting the CTR program employee questionnaire during the scheduled survey time period.

(b)    Program Modification Criteria. Kitsap Transit shall use the following criteria for achieving goals for VMT per employee and proportion of drive alone trips shall be applied in determining requirements for employer CTR program modifications:

(1)    If an employer meets either or both goals, the employer has satisfied the objectives of the CTR plan and will not be required to modify its CTR program.

(2)    If an employer makes a good faith effort, as defined in this chapter and in RCW 70.94.534(2), but has not met or is not likely to meet the applicable drive alone or VMT goal, no additional modifications are required.

(3)    If an employer fails to make a good faith effort, as defined in this chapter and in RCW 70.94.534(2), and fails to meet either the applicable drive alone or VMT reduction goal, Kitsap Transit shall direct the employer to revise its program within thirty (30) days to come into compliance with the measures defined in RCW 70.94.534(2), including specific recommended program modifications. In response to the recommended modifications, the employer shall submit a revised CTR program description and report, including the requested modifications or equivalent measures, within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice to revise its program. Kitsap Transit shall review the revisions and notify the employer of acceptance or rejection of the revised program. If a revised program is not accepted, Kitsap Transit will send written notice to that effect to the employer within thirty (30) days and, if necessary, require the employer to attend a conference with program review staff for the purpose of reaching a consensus on the required program. A final decision on the required program will be issued in writing by Kitsap Transit within ten (10) working days of the conference.

(c)    Violations. The following constitute violations of this chapter:

(1)    Failure to self-identify as an affected employer;

(2)    Failure to perform a baseline measurement, including:

(i)    Affected employers notified or that have identified themselves to Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and that do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days from the notification or self-identification; and

(ii)    Affected employers not identified or self-identified within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that do not perform a baseline measurement consistent with the requirements specified by Kitsap Transit within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(3)    Failure to develop and/or submit a complete CTR program by the applicable deadlines as stated in this chapter;

(4)    Failure to implement an approved CTR program, unless the program elements that are carried out can be shown through quantifiable evidence to meet or exceed VMT and drive alone goals as specified in this chapter;

(5)    Intentionally submitting false or fraudulent date in response to survey requirements;

(6)    Failure to make a good faith effort, as defined in this chapter and in RCW 70.94.534; or

(7)    Failure to modify an unacceptable CTR program by the applicable deadlines as stated in this chapter.

(d)    Penalties. As authorized by RCW 70.94.534(5), civil penalties may be imposed as follows:

(1)    Class I Civil Infraction. Any affected employer violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a Class I civil infraction, and submit to civil penalties pursuant to RCW 7.80.120;

(2)    Separate Offenses. Such affected employer shall be liable for a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued and shall be subject to civil penalties as herein provided; and

(3)    Union Agreements. An employer shall not be liable for civil penalties if failure to implement an element of a CTR program was the result of an inability to reach agreement with a certified collective bargaining agent under applicable laws where the issue was raised by the employer and pursued in good faith. Unionized employers shall be presumed to act in good faith compliance if they:

(i)    Propose to a recognized union any provision of the employer’s CTR program that is subject to bargaining as defined by the National Labor Relations Act; and

(ii)    Advise the union of the existence of the Washington State CTR Law, this chapter, and the mandates of the CTR program approved by Kitsap Transit and advise the union that the proposal being made is necessary for compliance with this chapter and state law (RCW 70.94.531).

(4)    Failure to Reach Goals. No affected employer with an approved CTR program may be held liable for failure to reach the applicable SOV or VMT goals. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.110 EXEMPTIONS AND GOAL MODIFICATIONS.

(a)    Worksite Exemptions. An affected employer may submit a request to Kitsap Transit to grant an exemption from all CTR program requirements for a particular worksite. The employer must demonstrate that it would experience undue hardship in complying with the requirements of this chapter as a result of the characteristics of its business, its work force, or its location(s). An exemption may be granted if and only if the affected employer demonstrates that it faces extraordinary circumstances, such as bankruptcy, and is unable to implement any measures that could reduce the proportion of drive alone trips and VMT per employee. Exemptions may be granted by Kitsap Transit at any time based on written notice provided by the affected employer. The notice should clearly explain the conditions for which the affected employer is seeking an exemption from the requirements of the CTR program. Kitsap Transit shall grant or deny the request within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. Kitsap Transit shall review annually all employers receiving exemptions and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(b)    Employee Exemptions. Specific employees or groups of employees who are required to drive alone to work as a condition of employment may be exempted from a worksite’s CTR program. Exemptions may also be granted for employees who work variable shifts throughout the year and who do not rotate as a group to identical shifts. Kitsap Transit will use the criteria identified in the CTR Board Administrative Guidelines to assess the validity of employee exemption request. Kitsap Transit shall grant or deny the request within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. Kitsap Transit shall review annually all employee exemption requests, and shall determine whether the exemption will be in effect during the following program year.

(c)    Modification of CTR Program Goals.

(1)    An affected employer may request that Kitsap Transit modify the employer’s CTR goals. Such request shall be filed in writing at least sixty (60) days prior to the date the worksite is required to submit its program description and annual report. The goal modification request must clearly explain why the worksite is unable to achieve the applicable goal. The worksite must also demonstrate that it has implemented all the elements contained in its approved CTR program.

(2)    Kitsap Transit will review and grant or deny requests for goal modifications in accordance with procedures and criteria identified in the CTR Board Guidelines. An employer may not request a modification of the applicable goals until one (1) year after Kitsap Transit has approved the employer’s initial program description or annual report. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


10.20.120 APPEALS.

(a)    Appeal of the Assessment of Penalties. An assessment of penalties pursuant to BMC 10.20.100(d) may be appealed to the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.62 BMC.

(b)    Appeal of Final Administrative Decision. A final administrative decision of Kitsap Transit relating to the acceptance, modification or exemption of an affected employer’s CTR program may be appealed using the administrative appellate procedures as follows:

(1)    Kitsap Transit shall hire and pay for a Hearing Examiner for the sole purpose of hearing appeals brought pursuant to this chapter.

(2)    Appeals shall be heard within sixty (60) days of the date the notice of appeal is received by the presiding officer; however, no appeal shall be set less than fifteen (15) days after notice of the date for the appeal is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party seeking review.

(3)    The Hearing Examiner will evaluate employers’ appeals of administrative decisions by determining if the decisions were consistent with this chapter, the Washington State CTR Law and the CTR Task Force Guidelines. Appeals may be granted by the CTR Hearing Examiner if the employer can show the violations for which the penalties were imposed occurred for the reasons beyond the control of the employer, or the penalties were imposed for the failure of the employer to revise its CTR program as directed by Kitsap Transit and the employer can demonstrate that measures Kitsap Transit directed the employer to incorporate in its CTR program are unlikely to reduce the proportion of SOV commute trips and/or VMT per employee.

(c)    Decision. The decision of the Hearing Examiner shall be final. (Ord. 5223 §1 (part), 2013)


Chapter 10.24 OVERSIZE LOADS

Sections:

10.24.010    PERMIT REQUIRED.

10.24.020    APPLICATION AND REQUIREMENTS.

10.24.030    PERMIT FEE.

10.24.040    AUTHORITY TO SET HOURS.

10.24.050    PERMIT ISSUANCE.

10.24.060    SPECIAL ESCORT.

10.24.070    EXEMPTIONS.


10.24.010 PERMIT REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to move upon or across any road, city street, or city right-of-way any load having an overall width in excess of fourteen feet (14’) or an overall height in excess of fourteen feet (14’) above the level surface upon which the loaded vehicle stands, or load requiring the use of dollies without first obtaining a special oversize load permit. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to issue such permit. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1 (part), 1979)


10.24.020 APPLICATION AND REQUIREMENTS.

Before a permit is issued, the mover shall:

(a)    Submit an application to the Public Works Department two (2) weeks in advance of the planned move containing the following information:

(1)    Present location of the load to be moved;

(2)    Proposed new location of the load;

(3)    Dimensions of the load when loaded;

(4)    Proposed route over which the load is to be moved;

(5)    Evidence of notification to all public and private utility companies, including railroad companies having facilities over, along or across the proposed route of travel which may be in conflict with or endangered by the loaded vehicle proposed to be moved. Such notification shall be given to a responsible member of each company at least forty-eight (48) hours before starting the proposed move;

(6)    Evidence of notification to the City Clerk, police/traffic, communications, City Engineer, building official, county engineer, fire department, and Washington State Patrol of the date, time, and route of move; and

(7)    Such other information as the City Engineer may require.

(b)    Deposit or have on deposit with the City Clerk a bond in the amount of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) executed by the applicant, as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Washington, guaranteeing:

(1)    To indemnify the City of Bremerton for damages to any of its property resulting from the activities by the permit holder in moving oversize loads; and

(2)    To make just compensation to the utility companies for making temporary or permanent arrangements of their property to accommodate the oversize load movement.

(c)    Agree to defend the City of Bremerton, at mover’s own expense, in the event that any action is brought against the City as a result of any act or activity of the City or its agents or employees because of, or in any way arising out of, the moving operation.

(d)    Procure and maintain in full force and effect, the City to be named as an additional insured, public liability insurance in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with not less than thirty (30) days notice to the City before cancellation of said insurance. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(I), 1979)


10.24.030 PERMIT FEE.

There will be charged a permit fee, plus an additional sum to reimburse the City for any and all expenses incurs in conjunction with such moving, including the expense of moving its apparatus and equipment, such as traffic lights and police and fire signals, for the passage of such building. (Ord. 4368 §27, 1992; Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(II), 1979)


10.24.040 AUTHORITY TO SET HOURS.

The City Engineer shall have the authority to set reasonable days and hours for the movement of oversize loads. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(III), 1979)


10.24.050 PERMIT ISSUANCE.

Oversize load permits shall be issued after a reasonable time for inspection and approval of the proposed route and payment of fee. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(IV), 1979)


10.24.060 SPECIAL ESCORT.

Special escort or other precautions may be imposed by the City Engineer to assure movement is under the safest possible conditions. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(V), 1979)


10.24.070 EXEMPTIONS.

(a)    The requirements of this chapter may be altered at the discretion of the City Engineer upon certification by military officials or by utility officials that the movement or action is a necessary emergency movement and the structures and highway surfaces of the routes involved are determined to be capable of sustaining heights in excess of such limitation.

(b)    This chapter shall not apply to farmers moving farm machinery between farms during daylight hours if the movement does not pass along and upon any primary or secondary highway for a distance greater than thirty-five (35) miles, if properly patrolled and flagged. (Ord. 4186, 1989; Ord. 3564 §1(VI), 1979)


Chapter 10.36 COMPRESSION BRAKES

Sections:

10.36.010    COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.

10.36.020    VIOLATIONS - PENALTY.

10.36.030    AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS.


10.36.010 COMPRESSION BRAKES PROHIBITED.

No person shall use motor vehicle brakes within the city limits of the City of Bremerton which are in any way activated or operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any unit or part thereof. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that said compression brakes were applied in an emergency and were necessary for the protection of persons and/or property. (Ord. 4294 §1 (in part), 1991)


10.36.020 VIOLATIONS - PENALTY.

Any person violating the provisions of BMC 10.36.010 shall have committed a traffic infraction and a maximum penalty of $250.00 shall be imposed. (Ord. 4294 §1 (in part), 1991)


10.36.030 AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS.

The City Engineer is authorized and directed to post appropriate signs consistent with the provisions of BMC 10.36. (Ord. 4294 §1 (in part), 1991)


Chapter 10.42 AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERAS

Sections:

10.42.010    AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERAS AUTHORIZED.

10.42.020    NOTICE OF INFRACTION.

10.42.030    TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS DETECTED THROUGH THE USE OF AN AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERA.

10.42.040    MONETARY PENALTIES.

10.42.050    SIGNAGE.

10.42.060    ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES.


10.42.010 AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERAS AUTHORIZED.

The use of automated traffic safety cameras to detect violations of WAC 308-330-408 and 308-330-423, which the City has adopted by reference as sections of the Model Traffic Ordinance, is authorized at intersections where two (2) arterial roadways intersect and in school speed zones, subject to the restrictions specified in State law (RCW 46.63.170). (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


10.42.020 NOTICE OF INFRACTION. 

A police officer or other authorized representative of the City has the authority to issue a notice of traffic infraction when the infraction is detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera under this chapter. (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


10.42.030 TRAFFIC INFRACTIONS DETECTED THROUGH THE USE OF AN AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SAFETY CAMERA.

(a)    A notice of infraction based on evidence detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle within fourteen (14) days of the violation, or to the renter of a vehicle within fourteen (14) days of establishing the renter’s name and address under subsection (c)(1) of this section. The police officer or other authorized representative of the City issuing the notice of infraction shall include with it a certificate or facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images produced by an automated traffic safety camera, stating the facts supporting the notice of infraction. This certificate or facsimile is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it and is admissible in a proceeding charging a violation of WAC 308-330-408 or 308-330-423. The photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images evidencing the violation must be available for inspection and admission into evidence in a proceeding to adjudicate the liability for the infraction. 

(b)    A person receiving such a notice of infraction may respond to the notice by mail. The registered owner of a vehicle is responsible for such an infraction unless the registered owner overcomes the presumption in subsection (e) of this section, or, in the case of a rental car business, satisfies the conditions under subsection (c) of this section. If appropriate under the circumstances, a renter identified under subsection (c)(1) of this section is responsible for such an infraction.

(c)    If the registered owner of the vehicle is a rental car business, the peace officer shall, before such a notice of infraction is issued, provide a written notice to the rental car business that a notice of infraction may be issued to the rental car business if the rental car business does not, within thirty (30) days of receiving the written notice, provide to the peace officer by return mail:

(1)    A statement under oath stating the name and known mailing address of the individual driving or renting the vehicle when the infraction occurred; or

(2)    A statement under oath that the business is unable to determine who was driving or renting the vehicle at the time the infraction occurred because the vehicle was stolen at the time of the infraction. A statement provided under this subsection must be accompanied by a copy of a filed police report regarding the vehicle theft; or

(3)    In lieu of identifying the vehicle operator, the rental car business may pay the applicable penalty.

Timely mailing of this statement to the peace officer relieves a rental car business of any liability under this chapter for the notice of infraction.

(d)    For the purposes of this chapter, "automated traffic safety camera" means a device that uses a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an intersection traffic control system, or a speed measuring device, and a camera synchronized to automatically record one (1) or more sequenced photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images of the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop when facing a steady red traffic control signal or an activated railroad grade crossing control signal, or exceeds a speed limit in a school speed zone as detected by a speed measuring device.

(e)    In a traffic infraction case involving an infraction detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera, proof that the particular vehicle described in the notice of traffic infraction was in violation of WAC 308-330-408 or 308-330-423, together with proof that the person named in the notice of traffic infraction was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle, constitutes in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person in control of the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. This presumption may be overcome only if the registered owner states, under oath, in a written statement to the court or in testimony before the court that the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody, or control of some person other than the registered owner (RCW 46.63.075 and 46.63.170). (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


10.42.040 MONETARY PENALTIES. 

A traffic infraction for violations of WAC 308-330-408 or 308-330-423 detected through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall be processed in the same manner as a parking infraction. The base monetary penalty for a violation of either WAC 308-330-408 or 308-330-423 shall be the same as the fine established for each pursuant to State or local law, including statutory assessments. However, the amount of the fine issued for an infraction generated through the use of an automated traffic safety camera shall not exceed the amount of a fine issued for parking infractions within the City, including disabled parking infractions. (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


10.42.050 SIGNAGE.

All locations where an automated traffic safety camera is used shall be clearly marked by placing signs in locations that clearly indicate to a driver that he or she is entering a zone where traffic laws are enforced by an automated traffic safety camera. (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


10.42.060 ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES.

In connection with the photo enforcement program as set forth in this chapter, the Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to utilize electronic signatures in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.34 RCW. (Ord. 5018 §2 (part), 2007)


Title 11 STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Chapters:

11.01    GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

11.02    RIGHT-OF-WAY USE

11.03    SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS

11.04    LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

11.05    PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

11.06    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

11.08    SIDEWALK AND STREET FRONTAGE

11.10    COMPLETE STREETS PROGRAM

11.12    TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT CODE

11.15    ON STREET PAID PARKING

11.18    ADDRESSING

11.20    VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

11.25    ASSUMPTION OF TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT


Chapter 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

Sections:

11.01.010    PURPOSE.

11.01.020    POLICY GUIDELINES.

11.01.030    DEFINITIONS.

11.01.040    MASTER PERMIT REQUIRED.

11.01.050    GENERAL CONDITIONS UPON USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

11.01.060    TAXES AND FEES.

11.01.070    PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND RESIDENTS.

11.01.080    ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.


11.01.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this Title is to:

A.    Establish a local policy concerning communications systems, and private communications systems for use of the Public Rights-of-Way;

B.    Establish a policy that promotes availability of high-quality and diverse communications services to City residents, businesses, the City, and other public institutions; promotes the availability of diverse, multimedia information resources to the community; provides for the development of a communications infrastructure that provides opportunities for more open government, enhancing educational opportunities throughout the community, providing public access to the communications infrastructure, and building a stronger community; while ensuring that the City has the authority to act to protect the public, safety, and welfare in the face of a rapidly-changing industry that is placing increasing demand on public resources;

C.    Establish clear and nondiscriminatory local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of the use of Public Rights-of-Way by communications operators, private communication operators, and resellers, and their respective facilities and licenses;

D.    Promote competition in communications;

E.    Minimize unnecessary local regulation of providers and services;

F.    Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive communications, on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the City;

G.    Permit and manage reasonable access to the Public Rights-of-Way of the City for communications purposes on a competitively neutral basis, to the extent required by law;

H.    Conserve the limited physical capacity of the Public Rights-of-Way held in public trust by the City;

I.    Assure that the City’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the Public Rights-of-Way are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

J.    Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City, in a non-discriminatory manner, for permitting private use of the Public Rights-of-Way;

K.    To encourage economic development while preserving aesthetic and other community values and preventing proliferation of above ground facilities;

L.    Assure that all persons providing communications services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City;

M.    Ensure the ability of the City to obtain sufficient information from persons subject to its jurisdiction to enable effective decisions regarding their access to City rights-of-way and effective management of activity in the rights-of-way;

N.    Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;

O.    Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development; and

P.    Reserve to the City and provide for the fullest exercise possible of the authority and discretion of the City to require that: (1) facilities are installed and maintained within the public rights-of-way in such manner and at such points so as not to inconvenience the public use of the public rights-of-way or to adversely affect the public, safety and welfare; (2) all non-city users of the rights-of-way shall be required to reimburse and hold harmless the City for the actual costs incurred by the City by reason of the construction or presence in the public rights-of-way of the Facilities of such other users. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.020 POLICY GUIDELINES.

The administration of this Title shall be governed by the following communications policy guidelines.

A.    The City of Bremerton supports efforts to establish an open, competitive marketplace for communications services. The City promotes and encourages competition for voice, data, video, and video programming services that make the latest and best technology available and keep service prices affordable for all City residents and businesses. An integral component of this open marketplace is the consistent application of regulations to all communications providers and the preservation of local authority over matters of local impact.

B.    The following policy guidelines express the commitment of the City to support communications services and to manage its rights-of-way proactively while balancing the interests and needs of the community:

1.    The City will manage access to the Public Rights-of-Way for communications purposes in a non-discriminatory, competitively neutral and non-exclusive way to the extent required under applicable law and, to the extent allowed under applicable law, to receive fair compensation. The public interest will be protected by collecting associated fees, taxes, administrative costs, and construction costs for use of the rights-of-way.

2.    Communications Master Permits will be managed to preserve the integrity of the City’s infrastructure, ensure efficient use of City property and ensure compliance with City ordinances, rules and regulations.

3.    In order to effectively manage and regulate the use of public rights-of-way by private entities in the best interests of the City and its citizens it is necessary for the City to reserve and exercise all legislative, administrative and discretionary authority it may have to the full extent allowed or not prohibited by law and nothing in this Title shall be construed to diminish or in any way to limit the discretionary, administrative or legislative authority of the City and its officials as respects the management and use of the City’s public rights-of-way or in respect to the granting, delaying, or denying any Master Permit, ROW Permit or License. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.030 DEFINITIONS.

A.    "Administrator" means the Master Permit Administrator or designee.

B.    "Affiliate" means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another person.

C.    "Application Fee" means the charge specified in Section 11.03.020 and designed to recover the City’s actual costs in processing applications for Master Permits, Use Permits or Licenses, including applications for transfer thereof.

D.    "Cable Television Service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of the video programming or other programming service.

E.    "City" means the City of Bremerton and all departments, divisions, and agencies thereof.

F.    "Communications facility" means a device which alone or as part of an aggregation of devices is capable of transmitting signals from place to place.

G.    "Communications system" refers to a communications system.

H.    "Construction, operation or repair" and similar formulations of that term means the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready and excavation.

I.    "Generally." For the purposes of this Title, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this Title shall be construed consistent with Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereafter enacted or amended.

J.    "Grantee" refers to a Person holding a Master Permit.

K.    "Gross Revenues" means any and all revenue, of any kind, nature or form, as more particularly defined under Bremerton Municipal Code Chapter 5.02.

L.    "License" refers to the legal authorization, terminable at will to use a particular, discrete, and limited portion of the public rights-of-way to construct, operate, or repair a Communications Facility or a Private Communications System. The term License shall not mean or include.

1.    any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the City;

2.    any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with operations on public streets or property, including by way of example and not limitation, street cut permits;

3.    any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the City or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the License including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the City or a private entity; or

4.    the right to place devices in the right of way, such as pay telephones, for end user use in originating and terminating transmissions.

M.    "Master Permit" refers to the authorization granted by the City to an Operator of a Communications System, under this Title giving the Operator the non-exclusive right to occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over any Public Right-of-Way in the City, to provide a specified service within a Master Permit area. Such Master Permit shall not include or be a substitute for:

1.    any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City required by the ordinances and laws of the City;

2.    any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public streets or property, including by way of example and not limitation, street cut permits;

3.    any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the City or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the Master Permit including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, other structures, or railroad easements, whether owned by the City, or a private entity; or

4.    the right to place devices in the right-of-way, such as pay telephones, for end user use in terminating or originating transmissions.

By way of example, and without limiting the foregoing, this Title shall not be read to diminish or in any way affect the authority of the City to control the use of the City’s real estate, fixtures or personal property. Therefore, any Person who desires to use such property must obtain additional approvals, or agreements for that purpose, as may be required by the City.

N.    "Master Permit Area" means the area of the City that a Grantee is authorized to serve by the terms of its Master Permit or by operation of law.

O.    "Operator" when used with reference to a system, refers to a Person (1) who provides service over a Communications System and directly or through one or more Affiliates owns a significant interest in such facility; or (2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a facility. A Person that operates under agreement a Communications System or a specific portion of a Communications System to provide Communications Services shall be treated as an Operator for purposes of this Title.

P.    "Overhead Facilities" refers to communications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

Q.    "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, Joint Stock Company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.

R.    "Private Communications System" means a facility placed in whole or in part in the Public Rights-of-Way for the provision of communications in connection with a Person’s business, but not encompassing in any respect the provision of Communications Services.

S.    "Private Communications System Owner" means a Person that owns or leases a Private Communications System.

T.    "Public Rights-of-Way" mean land acquired or dedicated for public roads and streets which under the applicable ordinances and laws the City has authority to grant Master Permits, ROW permits or licenses for use thereof or has regulatory authority thereover and as may be more specifically defined in the Master Permit, ROW permit or license granting any right to or use thereof but for purposes of this Title does not include (1) state highways, (2) land dedicated for roads, streets and highways not open and not improved for motor vehicle use by the public; (3) structures such as, but not limited to, poles and conduits located within the right-of-way; (4) parks and open space; and (5) publicly owned shorelines or harbor areas.

U.    "Reseller" refers to any Person who resells a Communications Service, for which he makes a separate charge, provided over a Communications System, where that Person does not own or lease the underlying Communications System used for the transmission.

V.    "Communications Service" means the transmission for hire of information in electronic or optical form, including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. Communications Service includes telephone service but does not include Cable Service or over-the-air broadcasts to the public-at-large from facilities licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.

W.    "Communications System" means a tangible facility that is used to provide one or more Communications Services, any portion of which occupies Public Rights-of-Way. The term Communications System by way of example, and not limitation, includes wires, equipment cabinets, guys, conduit, radio transmitting towers, poles, other supporting structures, and associated and appurtenant facilities used to transmit communications signals. The term Communications System includes all devices mounted on light poles in the Public Rights-of-Way through which Communications Services are originated or terminated.

X.    "Title" when used in the context of referring to this Title of the Bremerton Municipal Code, shall mean Title 11 of the Bremerton Municipal Code and Chapters 11.01, 11.03, 11.05 and 11.06.

Y.    "Underground Facilities" refers to all utilities and communications and cable facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for Overhead Facilities.

Z.    "Use Permit" means the authorization in whatever form whereby a city or town may grant permission to a service provider to enter and use the specified right-of-way for the purpose of installing, maintaining, repairing, or removing identified facilities.

AA.    "Wireless Communications Services Facilities." Wireless communications facilities are those facilities that the City has authorized to be placed in the public rights-of-way and which are necessary for the provision of personal wireless services. Personal wireless services means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as defined by Federal law and regulations. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.040 MASTER PERMIT REQUIRED.

A.    Master Permit requirement. An Operator of a communications facility must obtain a Master Permit prior to constructing a communications facility or providing Communications Services. The fact that a particular Master Permitted Communications Facility may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a Master Permit for other purposes unless applicable federal or state law prohibits the City from requiring such additional Master Permit. No Master Permit shall become effective without the Grantee signing an acceptance of the Master Permit.

B.    Exceptions. Subject to the requirements of applicable law, a Master Permit requirement may be waived in whole or in part for a Communications System where the City determines the use of the Public Rights-of-Way is de minimus (i.e. uses only a short distance of street or occupies only a small isolated area of a specific street). For such facilities, the City may issue a License. In addition, every Private Communications System Owner must obtain a License. Every License shall include or be read to include, as if stated therein, a reservation of rights by the City to require the Licensee to obtain a Master Permit if the City determines that the Licensees use of the public rights of way has increased substantially and is no longer de minimus use.

C.    Additional Exceptions. The City does hereby request that any Operator now providing communications service within the City over an existing communications system within the public rights-of-way of the City without having a Master Permit from the City granting and allowing such use at the time this provision becomes effective apply for a Master Permit from the City for such use of the public rights-of-way. In the event such Operator fails to request a Master Permit within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance and such Operator submits evidence satisfactory to the City that it is involved in pending litigation wherein the Operator claims the Operator has an existing state-wide grant to occupy the public right-of-way or the Operator otherwise submits a non-frivolous and documented claim that it has an existing state-wide grant to occupy public right-of-way, including streets in the City of Bremerton, then in such event the requirement for obtaining a Master Permit for the continued use of public right-of-way in Bremerton for existing wireline facilities will be suspended until there is a final judicial decision resolving the issue or the City by decision of its City Council determines that the best interests of the City will be served by terminating the suspension of the requirement to obtain a Master Permit. The suspension of any master Permit required hereunder shall not constitute a consent or permission by the City to occupy the public right-of-way by the Operator for any use, nor shall it be construed as a waiver of any right of the City to require the Operator to hereafter at any time to obtain a Master Permit or to remove any or all of its facilities in the public right-of-way at any time upon its failure to obtain a Master Permit. In the event an Operator fails to obtain a Master Permit as herein requested and the Master Permit requirement is suspended as herein provided then the Operator shall be required to apply for a City ROW Permit prior to constructing or placing any wireline communications facility in the public right-of-way.

D.    Nature of grant. Neither a master Permit nor a License shall convey title, equitable or legal, in the Public Rights-of-Way. The right granted is only the right to occupy those portions of the Public Rights-of-Way to which the City has the right to grant access, for the purposes and for the period stated in the Master Permit or License, and, subject to the limitations in this section and elsewhere in this Title, the right may not be subdivided or subleased. A Master Permit, ROW Permit or License shall not grant a vested right for any facility to be located or to remain at any specific location in the public right-of-way and any right, permission or consent to occupy any location in the public right-of-way shall be revocable and terminable at the discretion of the City and the facility therein removed at the cost of the Operator in order to allow free and unencumbered use of the public right-of-way for public work or other public purpose as may be in the best public or municipal interest as determined by the City. 

Every Master Permit shall be:

1.    Deemed to include all of the provisions that are required to be in a Master Permit under this title, as if fully set forth in the Master Permit.

2.    Deemed to provide for forfeiture under the circumstances set forth in the provisions of this Title and any Master Permit thereunder; and

3.    Construed to exclude the grant of any rights in any easement granted for or in favor of any city or public utility facilities or operations, unless the Master Permit or License shall expressly state otherwise.

No reference herein, or in any Master Permit, ROW Permit or License, to a public Right-of-Way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and a Master Permit shall be deemed to grant no more than those rights which the City may have the undisputed right and power to give. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.050 GENERAL CONDITIONS UPON USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

A.    Responsibility for costs. Except as expressly provided otherwise, any act that a Communications System Operator, its contractors or subcontractors are required to perform under this Section 11.01.050 shall be performed at their cost. If a Communications System Operator fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance, the City may perform the work and bill the Communications System Operator therefor. The Communications System Operator shall pay the amounts billed within thirty (30) days.

B.    Construction Procedures and Placement of Facilities - Obligation to Minimize Interference With Use of Public Rights-of-Way.

1.    The construction, operation, and repair of communications facilities are subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the City that have jurisdiction in such matters and shall be performed in compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules and regulations and practices affecting such system. By way of example, and not limitation, this includes zoning codes and safety codes and current City standards, including the most current version of the Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge and Municipal Construction, as prepared by the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) and the Washington State Chapter of American Public Works Association (APWA); the most current version of the APWA Amendments to Division One, and the most current version of the City of Bremerton Amendments thereto. In addition, the construction, operation, and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent with high industry standards. Persons engaged in the construction, operation, or repair or communications facilities shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of all their activities and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.

2.    Construction, operation, or repair of a communications system shall not commence until all required permits have been properly filed for and obtained from the proper City officials and all required permits and associated fees paid. In any permit so issued, the City may impose as a condition of the granting of the permit such conditions and regulations as may be necessary to the management of the rights-of-way, including, by way of example and not limitation, for the purpose of protecting any structures in the Public Rights-of-Way, for the proper restoration of such Public Rights-of-Way and structures, and for the protection of the City and the public and the continuity of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A Master Permit, License or ROW Permit or other applicable provision of the Bremerton Municipal Code may provide for the conditions under which certain emergency work may be undertaken prior to obtaining certain permits where such work is necessary to immediately remedy an emergency situation involving an imminent danger to health, safety or property or to temporarily restore communications system services which have been disrupted by storms, earthquakes, riots or other unexpected accidents or phenomenon. Provided, however that the communications system operator undertaking such emergency work shall be required (a) to give notice to the City of the commencement of the emergency work as quickly as practical, (b) to apply for the permits which would otherwise be required for such work by the next business day from the commencement of such work; and (c) to conform any work performed prior to the approval of the required permit and to carry out any other work in the area involved in accordance with the requirements of the permit. Sub-contractors are prohibited from liening public property or any facilities placed in the public right-of-way.

3.    Operators of communications systems must follow City-established requirements for placement of facilities in Public Rights-of-Way, including the specific location of facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, and must in any event install facilities in a manner that minimizes interference with the use of the Public Rights-of-Way by others, including others that may be installing communications facilities. The City may require that facilities be installed at a particular time, at a specific place, or in a particular manner as a condition of access to a particular right-of-way; may deny access if an Operator is not willing to comply with the City’s requirements; and may remove, or require removal of, any facility that is not installed in compliance with the requirements established by the City, or which is installed without prior City approval of the time, place, or manner of installation and charge the Operator of the facility for all the costs associated with removal; and may require a Person using the rights-of-way to cooperate with others to minimize adverse impacts on the rights-of-way through joint trenching, joint use of facilities and other arrangements.

4.    Upon order of the Administrator, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans or specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Title or other applicable law shall be removed.

5.    Unless otherwise agreed or provided in a Master Permit, License or ROW permit a communications systems operator shall be required to reimburse and hold harmless the City for any cost or expense reasonably incurred by the City in the planning, construction, installing, altering, or implementing any public work as a result of the construction or the presence in the public right-of-way of the facility of such communications system operator.

6.    No new poles or extenders on poles to increase capacity shall be allowed in the public rights-of-way and all new overhead facilities of any nature are prohibited unless specifically allowed under this chapter or other applicable provisions of the Bremerton Municipal Code or applicable City policies, procedures and current standards.

7.    The specific location within the right-of-way and the method of installing facilities underground or overhead will be subject to approval by the Public Works Director/City Engineer. Cutting of pavement in the public right-of-way shall be prohibited where the Public Works Director/City Engineer approves locating underground facilities in the unimproved portions of the right-of-way or in the sidewalk areas or requires alternative methods for undergrounding not requiring trenching or the cutting of pavement.

8.    Cutting of pavement shall be prohibited in any event in a newly constructed or reconstructed street for a period of five (5) years from the paving of such street or in a street where a trench was previously available for a period of three (3) years from the date the trench was available. The City may require as a condition to the occupancy of the rights-of-way that communications facilities be located within existing underground ducts or conduits wherever the capacity exists. Provided, however, the Public Works Director/City Engineer may in his or her discretion permit pot-holing (subject to conditions to alleviate the harmful effects) where conduit is to be placed underground by means of directional boring and the person seeking permission has provided evidence satisfactory to the Public Works Director/City Engineer that (a) such pot-holing is necessary to avoid interference with existing utilities; (b) such pot-holing is the only reasonable alternative available to locate existing utilities and (c) such pot-holing will result in little or no visual or other detrimental impact to the street.

9.    Any and all Public Rights-of-Way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, repair or removal of a Communications Facility shall be promptly repaired by the Communications System Operator that disturbed or damaged the Public Rights-of-Way, public property or private property. Public property and public right-of-way must be restored to the satisfaction of the City and to a condition as good or better than before the disturbance or damage occurred. A communications system operator shall continue to maintain the restored street area, which may consist of curb, gutter, sidewalk, pavement, or other restored appurtenances, in a condition as good as or better than the condition of the adjacent undisturbed area of the street for the life of the street (to the extent such maintenance or restoration is required, (a) as a result of the restored street area being defective or otherwise inferior to the adjacent undisturbed area of the street or (b) as a result of the presence of the facilities of the communications system operator), until the restored area is repaved or reconstructed by a different party, except when such repaving or reconstruction is a result of enforcement action by the City for the lack of such maintenance activity; unless (a) the assessment of the Impact Assessment under this Title provides for an exemption; or (b) a Master Permit, License or Permit specifically exempts the communications system operator from such obligation.

10.    No tree trimming shall be performed without the permission of the City and other affected authorities, and tree trimming must be performed in strict accordance with the City Code.

11.    Within forty-eight (48) hours after notice from the City, a Communications System operator shall remove any graffiti on any part of its Communications System in the public rights-of-way (including by way of example and not limitation) equipment cabinets. If the operator fails to do so, the City may remove the graffiti and bill the operator for the cost thereof.

C.    Relocation and Abandonment of facilities.

1.    A Communications System Operator shall, by a time specified by the City, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions; public, safety; public right-of-way construction; public right-of-way repair (including resurfacing or widening); change of public right-of-way grade; construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of government-owned Communications System, public work, public facility or improvement, or any government-owned utility; public right-of-way vacation; or for any other purpose where the work involved would be aided by the removal or relocation of the Communications Facility. Collectively, such matters are referred to below as the "public work".

(a)    Except in the case of emergencies, the City shall provide written notice describing where the public work is to be performed as soon as practical but at least thirty (30) days prior to the deadline by which a Communications System Operator must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities. A Communications System Operator may seek an extension of the time to perform such tasks where they cannot be performed in thirty (30) days or by the completion time specified even with the exercise of its best efforts, and such request for an extension shall not be unreasonably refused.

(b)    In the event of an emergency, or where a Communications Facility creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the City may protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any or all parts of the Communications Facility without prior notice, and charge the Communications System Operator for costs incurred.

(c)    If a Communications System Operator does not comply with the requirements of this Title and the applicable Master Permit, License or ROW Permit does not provide otherwise and if not prohibited by applicable law the City shall have the right to revoke any right of a Communications System Operator to have its facilities remain at specific location in the public right-of-way at any time the City determines that the Facilities of such communications system operator must be removed from their present location or from the street in order to facilitate a public work in the public right-of-way and upon such revocation of the Master Permit, License or ROW Permit of the Communications System Operator as to the affected designated facilities the Communications System Operator shall remove the same and restore the street at its cost.

2.    If any Person that is authorized to place facilities in the rights-of-way requests another Communications System Operator receiving the request to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate its facilities to accommodate the Construction, Operation, or Repair of the facilities of such other Person, the Communications System Operator shall, after thirty (30) days’ advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes requested. Unless the matter is governed by a valid contract or a state or federal law or regulation, or unless the Communications Facility that is being requested to move was not properly installed, the reasonable cost of the same shall be borne by the Person requesting the protection, support, temporary disconnection, removal, or relocation and at no charge to the City, even if the City makes the request for such action.

3.    A Communications System Operator shall, on the request of any Person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the Person requesting the same. A Communications System Operator shall be given not less than seven (7) days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

4.    Grantee may abandon and surrender its Master Permit to the City upon six (6) months written notice to the Administrator, with copies thereof served upon the Mayor and City Attorney. Abandonment shall be subject to acceptance by the City, by a resolution of acceptance adopted by the City Council. Upon abandonment, non-renewal, revocation or expiration of this Master Permit, and if no extension is granted, Grantee may, at the discretion of the Administrator, be required in part or entirely, to remove all its fiber, wire, poles, fixtures, and other facilities or equipment installed or used in the enjoyment of the Master Permit. Alternatively, the Administrator may direct, limit or condition Grantee’s removal, sale or continued use or abandonment of Grantee’s facilities and equipment, either by agreement or through means of any other lawful municipal power or right. The City may continue to invoke any provision of this Master Permit against Grantee or any successor entity enjoying de facto Master Permit privileges after revocation or expiration. The City may take all other actions deemed necessary and proper by the City to accommodate the transition to any successor as may be in the best interests of the City and its residents.

D.    Facility subject to inspection; operator must provide information. Every Communications Facility shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this Title, a Master Permit or License agreement, or other applicable law. The City shall have the right, upon request, to be notified and present when the Communications System is inspected by the Operator to determine compliance with the provisions of this Title; a Master Permit, License or ROW Permit; or applicable law where the City has enforcement authority. Each Operator must respond to requests for information regarding its system and plans for the system as the City may from time to time issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for construction, operation and repair and the purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated, or repaired to the extent such plant is or will be in the public right-of-way or has been or will be provided under any Master Permit, License or ROW Permit granted by or requested from the City.

E.    Underground services alert. Each Operator of a Communications System that places facilities underground shall be a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (Underground Services Alert) and shall field mark the locations of its underground communications facilities upon request. The Operator shall locate its facilities for the City at no charge. Grantee promises to reasonably cooperate with City initiatives to coordinate underground fixture locations and installations. Grantee is familiar with Chapter 19.122 RCW, Washington State’s "Underground Utilities" statute. Grantee certifies it understands local procedures, custom and practice relating to facilities locating, and will see to it that its contractors or others working in the right-of-way on Grantee’s behalf are similarly well informed.

F.    Undergrounding of lines. The Grantee recognizes the City’s right to preserve and control of the public right-of-way, particularly with respect to policies regarding the undergrounding of overhead lines for aesthetic reasons. Consistent with any general municipal undergrounding policy or program now or hereafter developed, the City reserves the right to require Grantee’s participation in municipally imposed undergrounding or related requirements as may now or hereafter arise, as a condition of Grantee’s new installation or major maintenance or restoration construction activities of overhead facilities under this franchise. Grantee agrees to coordinate its underground installation and planning activities with the City’s underground plan and policies; provided, in no event shall any third party beneficiary rights be implied or created. Nothing in this section shall be permitted in conflict with RCW 35.99.060, and the provisions of this section shall be applied in conformity thereto.

G.    Plans for and publicizing work.

1.    Work shall be publicized as the City may direct from time to time. The publication of work may be used to notify the public and operators of other communications systems, of the impending work, in order to minimize inconvenience and disruption to the public and to allow joint use by others.

2.    Each Communications System owner shall provide the City a plan for any initial system construction, or for any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its facility, which shall show its timetable for construction of each phase of the project, and the areas of the City that will be affected.

3.    Grantee promises to supply and maintain updated, at no cost, any information requested by the Administrator to coordinate municipal functions with Grantee’s activities and fulfill any municipal obligations under state law. Said information may include an installation inventory, location of existing or planned facilities, maps, plans, and as-built drawings of Grantee’s installations within the City. Said information may be requested either in hard copy and/or electronic format compatible with the City’s data base system, as now or hereafter existing. Grantee shall keep the Administrator informed of its long-range plans for coordination with the City’s long-range plans.

4.    Each Communications Facility Operator shall maintain accurate maps and improvements plans which show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities installed in the Public Rights-of-Way and any power supply sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-construction inspection to verify location. The Operator of each Communications Facility shall provide a map (on 24" x 36" Mylar) to the City showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be directed by the City Engineer. New system maps shall be promptly submitted to the City when the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided on disk, in a commercially available electronic format specified by the City Engineer or in such alternate form as approved by the City Engineer.

5.    The Administrator may from time to time, when the City receives application for a permit to use a particular route, or upon the Administrator’s own initiative, designate by published order a route or proposed route for installation of Communications Facilities and may (1) require all persons who wish to place Underground Facilities along that route or any part thereof to install them during a specified period and (2) otherwise prohibit placement of such facilities along the route or any part thereof for thirty-six (36) months or for such other, longer period as is necessary to protect the public. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.060 TAXES AND FEES.

A.    No franchise fee shall be charged to the Grantee for its operation of communications facilities in the right of way, whether as a lessor of the facilities to third parties or as a direct provider of communications services. Nothing in this Master Permit shall limit the City’s power of taxation, as may now or hereafter exist.

B.    Consistent with RCW 35.21.860 (1) (b), nothing in this Master Permit shall prohibit the City from charging a fee to recover the actual administrative expenses it incurs that are directly related to receiving and approving a Master Permit, License, and ROW Permit, to inspecting plans and construction, or to the preparation of a detailed statement pursuant to chapter 43.21C RCW. Upon request of Grantee, the City will submit proof of any charges or expenses incurred. For any project or time frame, Grantee can also request a written estimate from the Administrator, in advance of costs planned to be expended by the City, and Grantee may object to any costs as provided hereafter in the case of a challenged cost billed by the City. Except as otherwise provided, said fees must be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the City’s billing. Grantee will pay all other taxes applicable to its operations or activities within the City of Bremerton, all such obligations also being a condition of this Master Permit.

C.    Grantee shall make any required payments in the form, intervals and manner requested by the City Administrator, and furnish him/her any information related to his/her revenue collection functions reasonably requested. In case of audit, the Administrator may require Grantee to furnish a verified statement of compliance with Grantee’s obligations or in response to any questions, verified by an officer of the Grantee. All audits will take place on Grantee’s premises or offices furnished by Grantee, which shall be a location within the City of Bremerton. Grantee agrees, upon request of the City Auditor, to provide copies of all documents filed with any federal, state, or local regulatory agency, to be mailed to the City Auditor on the same day as filed, postage prepaid, affecting any of Grantee’s facilities or business operations in the State of Washington. (Ord. 4777, Added, 

10/25/2001)


11.01.070 PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND RESIDENTS.

A.    Indemnification. No Master Permit or other authorization to use the rights-of-way issued to a Communications System Operator or a Private Communications System Owner shall be valid or effective until and unless the City obtains an adequate indemnity from such Operator. Unless otherwise agreed, in writing, adequate indemnity must at least include the following:

1.    Release the City from and against any and all liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or maintenance of the Communications Facility in the public right-of-way by the Communications Facility Operator. Each Communications Facility Operator must further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from City in connection with the above-mentioned matters;

2.    Indemnify and hold harmless the City, its trustees, elected and appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands, or causes of action of whatsoever kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys’ fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees, sustained by the City or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of the acts, errors, or omissions of the Communications System Operator, or its agents, independent contractors or employees related to or in any way arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the facility in the public rights-of-way.

3.    Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the indemnification provision shall survive the term of any Master Permit or other authorization and continue in full force and effect as to the party’s responsibility to indemnify.

B.    Insurance. No Master Permit or other authorization to use the rights-of-way issued to a Communications System Operator or a Private Communications System Owner shall be valid or effective until and unless the City obtains assurance that such Operator (and those acting on its behalf) have adequate insurance. Unless otherwise agreed, in writing, adequate insurance must at least meet the following requirements:

1.    A Communications System Operator shall not commence construction or operation of the facility without obtaining all insurance required under this paragraph and approval of such insurance by the City, nor shall a Communications System Operator allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or sub-contract until all similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the Communications System Operator has facilities in the rights-of-way, and for a period thereafter as specified in the minimum coverages described below. If the Operator, its contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the City may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved.

2.    Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance and naming the City as an additional insured, shall be filed with the City’s Risk Manager. For entities that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. For entities that have facilities in the rights-of-way as of the effective date of this Title, the certificate shall be filed within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Title, annually thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage, unless a pre-existing Master Permit provides for filing of certificates in a different manner.

3.    These certificates shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least thirty (30) days’ prior written notice has been given to the City. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Washington. Financial Ratings must be no less than "A" in the latest edition of "Bests key Rating Guide", published by A.M. Best Guide.

4.    In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of the Master Permit or License, then in that event, the Communications System Operator shall furnish, at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage has been or will be obtained prior to any such lapse or termination during the balance of the period of the Master Permit or License under which the Communications System operates.

5.    A Communications System owner or Operator, and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on the Operator’s behalf in, on, under or over Public Rights-of-Way, shall maintain the following minimum insurance. The City shall be named as an additional insured on the general liability and automotive policies.

(a)    Comprehensive General Liability insurance to cover liability bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises, operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability:

	(i)	Bodily Injury	 

	 	Each Occurrence	$1,000,000

	 	Annual Aggregate	3,000,000

	(ii)	Property Damage	 

	 	Each Occurrence	$1,000,000

	 	Annual Aggregate	3,000,000

	(iii)	Personal Injury	 

	 	Annual Aggregate	$3,000,000

(iv)    Completed Operations and Products Liability shall be maintained for two (2) years after the termination of the Master Permit or License (in the case of the Communications System owner or Operator) or completion of the work for the Communications System owner or Operator (in the case of a contractor or subcontractor).

(v)    Property Damage Liability Insurance shall include coverage for the following hazards - X – Explosion, C – Collapse, U – Underground.

(b)    Workers’ Compensation insurance shall be maintained during the life of this contract to comply with statutory limits for all employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each Communications System Operator shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide workers’ compensation insurance for all the latter’s employees unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by each Communications System Operator. Each Communications System Operator and its contractors and subcontractors shall maintain during the life of this policy employers liability insurance. The following minimum limits must be maintained:

	 	(i)	Workers’ Compensation	Statutory

	 	(ii)	Employer’s Liability	$ 500,000

	 	 	per occurrence

	(c)	Comprehensive Auto Liability

	 	(i)	Bodily Injury	 

	 	 	Each Occurrence	$1,000,000

	 	 	Annual Aggregate	3,000,000

	 	(ii)	Property Damage	 

	 	 	Each Occurrence	$1,000,000

	 	 	Annual Aggregate	3,000,000

Coverage shall include owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles.

6.    Each Communications System Operator shall hold the City, its agents, and employees, harmless on account of claims for damages to persons, property or premises arising out of its construction, operation or repair of its Communications System and name the City as an additional insured.

7.    In every Master Permit or License agreement, the City shall reserve the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary depending upon the exposures.

C.    Performance/payment bonds. Every Operator of a Communications Facility may be required to obtain performance bonds and, if necessary, payment bonds to ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities under this Title and any Master Permit, ROW Permit or License, including a sufficient amount to cover removal of facilities and/or restoration of City facilities within right-of-way. The amount of the performance and payment bonds shall be set by the Administrator or may be set in a Master Permit in light of the nature of the work to be performed and is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required through the permitting process. The bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. The City may from time to time increase or decrease the amount of the required performance bond to reflect changes in risks to the City and to the public. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.01.080 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.

A.    Administrator responsible for administration. The Administrator is responsible for enforcing and administering this Title, and the Administrator is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any Master Permit, including by way of example and not limitation, a notice required under 47 U.S.C. § 546. The Administrator is also authorized to seek information from any Communications System Operator, and to take all other actions necessary or appropriate to the administration of this Title or any Master Permit. Master Permits may only be denied, issued or revoked by action of the City Council.

B.    Minimum contents of every Master Permit or License. In addition to satisfying the other applicable requirements of this Chapter, every Master Permit or License for a Communications System shall contain the following provisions:

1.    The Master Permit or License shall provide that neither the granting of any Master Permit or License, or any provision thereof, shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power, police power, or regulatory power of the City as may exist at the time the Master Permit or License is issued or thereafter be obtained.

2.    The Master Permit or License shall only authorize occupancy of the right-of-way to provide the services and for the purposes described in the Master Permit or License.

3.    A Master Permit or License shall be a privilege that is held in the public trust and personal to the original Grantee. The Master Permit or License shall ensure that no transfer of the master Permit or License may occur, directly or indirectly, without the prior consent of the City.

4.    The Master Permit or License shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Title.

5.    The Master Permit or License shall be for a specified term, set forth in the Master Permit or License. No Master Permit issued under this Title shall be for a term of longer than ten (10) years, unless the Council determines that a longer period would be in the City’s interest. No License issued under this Title shall be for a term of longer than five (5) years.

C.    Penalties. Any person found to have occupied or carried out activities in the public rights-of-way without first having obtained or having in effect a valid Master Permit, License, or ROW permit as required by this Title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any such occupancy or activity shall continue in violation of this Title shall constitute a separate offense.

D.    Revocation, reduction of term, or forfeiture of Master Permit or License.

1.    Licenses shall be revocable at will.

2.    This Master Permit may be revoked for violation of any terms and conditions of the Master Permit or other city ordinances, resolutions or policy including but not limited to the following.

(a)    Construction or operation in the public rights-of-way of the City or upon City property in a manner in violation of this Master Permit;

(b)    Construction or operation at an unauthorized location in the public rights-of-way of the City or upon City property;

(c)    Misrepresentation by or on behalf of Grantee in any material respect in any application or written statements or documents to the City upon which the City relies in making the decision to grant, review, or amend this Master Permit. 

(d)    Abandonment of communications facilities in the public ways or upon City property;

(e)    Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required by this Ordinance or Master Permit;

(f)    Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees, or costs when and as due the City under this Ordinance;

(g)    Insolvency or bankruptcy of Grantee;

(h)    Violation of any material provision of this Ordinance or Master Permit, which is not timely, cured upon notice to Grantee by the City.

3.    In the event that the City believes that grounds exist for revocation of the Master Permit, Grantee shall be given written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, which notice shall provide the Grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days to furnish evidence:

(a)    That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;

(b)    That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; or

(c)    That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.

4.    In the event that Grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Administrator, the Administrator shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the City Council or Hearings Examiner. The City Council or Hearings Examiner shall provide the Grantee with reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. 

5.    General administration of this Master Permit for the City is through the office of the Administrator. However, the Administrator may delegate his/her authority and responsibility to other agents of the City. All questions of application, interpretation, conflict or ambiguity arising out of or in connection with this Master Permit may be determined through communications with the Administrator, except where otherwise specifically stated. 

6.    Grantee may appeal any decision of the Administrator to the City Council or Hearings Examiner by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance of the Administrator’s decision, with copies also sent to the Mayor, Administrator and City Attorney. The notice of appeal must include a copy of the Administrator’s decision and a complete record originally submitted to the Administrator by Grantee. The Administrator shall submit any additional response to the City Council or Hearings Examiner within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The City Council or Hearings Examiner shall schedule a hearing within a reasonable period of time but not to exceed sixty (60) days from filing of the Notice of Appeal and decide the question submitted. No opportunity to cure is allowed for fraud, which shall be deemed incurable. 

7.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may declare a Master Permit forfeited without opportunity to cure or the notice required by Section 3 where the Grantee fails to begin to exercise its rights under the Master Permit within a period specified in the Master Permit. However, a Grantee shall have the right to receive thirty (30) days’ prior notice of intent to declare a Master Permit forfeited, and shall have the opportunity to show cause why the Master Permit should not be forfeited.

8.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Master Permit or License will automatically terminate by force of law one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the Grantee or Licensee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding. However, the Master Permit or License may be reinstated within that 120 day period, if: (1) such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or (2) such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this Title and the Master Permit or License and has executed an agreement, approved by any court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this title and the Master Permit or License. However, in the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a Grantee or Licensee, the City may revoke the Master Permit or License, following a public hearing before the City Council, by serving notice upon the Grantee or Licensee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the Master Permit or License and all rights and privileges of the Master Permit or License will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless: (1) the City has approved the transfer of the Master Permit or License to the successful bidder; and (2) the successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the Master Permit or License and this Title.

E.    Sale, Lease, Assignment. 

1.    This Master Permit or License shall not be sold, leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the City, and no rule of estoppel shall be invoked against the City in case the City shall assert the invalidity of any attempted transfer in violation of this section. The City agrees not to withhold consent where Grantee demonstrates that the requested assignment is in the nature of a change of name or a change in the nature of a reorganization or merger of or with an entity controlled by, controlling, or under the common control of the Grantee, there being no other change in the resulting entity’s ability to meet its Master Permit or License obligations.

2.    The City reserves the right to invoke any or all provisions of this Master Permit or License upon the Grantee’s successors or assigns, judgment creditors, or distributes of facilities or property used in enjoyment of privileges conferred herein, whether or not stated elsewhere, all without waiver of the right to withhold consent not expressly given of any such transfer and/or require a new Master permit or License.

3.    Grantee will not permit installations by others in the permitted areas, without written approval from the Administrator. Such approval shall not be in lieu of a Master Permit or License or other requirements of the City. Whether or not permitted, Grantee remains responsible for all third party users permitted or allowed by Grantee for compliance with this Master Permit or License. The intent of this provision is so third parties who might otherwise desire to use Grantee’s facilities are also required to comply with City requirements regarding Master Permit or License, as may apply.

F.    Effect of termination or forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of a License or Master Permit, whether by action of the City as provided above, or by passage of time, the Grantee or Licensee shall be obligated to cease using the Communications System for the purposes authorized by the Master Permit. The City may either take possession of some or all of the Licensee’s or Grantee’s facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way or require the Licensee or Grantee or its bonding company to remove some or all of the Licensee’s or Grantee’s facilities from the Public Rights-of-Way and restore the Public Rights-of-Way to its same, or better, condition. Should the Grantee or Licensee neglect, refuse, or fail to remove such facility, the City may remove the facility at the expense of the Grantee or Licensee. The obligation of the Licensee or Grantee to remove shall survive the termination of the Master Permit of License for a period of two (2) years; provided that, this provision does not permit the City to take possession of, or require the Grantee or Licensee to remove, any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the Grantee holds a valid Master Permit or License issued by the City.

G.    Remedies cumulative. All remedies under this Title and any Master Permit or License are cumulative unless otherwise expressly stated. The exercise of one remedy shall not foreclose use of another, nor shall the exercise of a remedy or the payment of liquidated damages or penalties relieve a Communications System Operator of its obligations to comply with its Master Permit or License. Remedies may be used singly or in combination; in addition, the City may exercise any rights it has at law or equity. Recovery by the City of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond, the security fund or letter of credit, or otherwise, does not limit a Communications System Operator’s duty to indemnify the City in any way; nor shall such recovery relieve a Communications System Operator of its obligations under a Master Permit, ROW Permit or License, limit the amounts owed to the City, or in any respect prevent the City from exercising any other right or remedy it may have.

H.    Compliance with laws. Each Grantee and Licensee shall comply with all applicable laws heretofore and hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of its Master Permit, Permit or License.

I.    Reservation of authority. The City may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Title.

J.    No waiver. The failure of the City to insist on timely performance or compliance by any Person holding a License, ROW Permit or Master Permit shall not constitute a waiver of the City’s right to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that Person or any other Person holding such a License, ROW Permit or Master Permit.

K.    Title not a contract. The City expressly reserves the right to amend this Title and any Master Permit, ROW Permit or License hereunder from time-to-time in the exercise of its lawful powers. The provisions of this Title shall not be construed to create to be a contract.

L.    No waiver. The failure of the City to enforce any provision of this Title on any occasion shall not operate as a waiver or estoppel of this right to enforce any provision of this Title on any other occasion, nor shall the failure to enforce any prior ordinance, law or contractual provision affecting communications facilities or Communications System operators act as a waiver or estoppel against application of this Title or any other provision of applicable law. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


Chapter 11.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE

Sections:

11.02.010    PURPOSE.

11.02.020    TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

11.02.030    CONSTRUCTION - INTENT.

11.02.040    DEFINITIONS.

11.02.050    POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.

11.02.060    PERMIT REQUIRED.

11.02.070    ADDITIONAL PERMITS.

11.02.080    RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMITS.

11.02.090    APPLICATIONS AND PROCESSING OF PERMITS.

11.02.100    RENEWAL OF PERMITS.

11.02.110    PERMIT EXCEPTION.

11.02.120    PERMIT FEES AND CHARGES.

11.02.130    SPECIFICATIONS.

11.02.140    NOTICE OF INTENT TO START WORK.

11.02.150    INSPECTIONS.

11.02.160    COMPLETION OF WORK.

11.02.170    SHARED USE OF EXCAVATIONS.

11.02.180    UNDERGROUND UTILITY LOCATION REQUIRED.

11.02.190    WARNING AND SAFETY DEVICES.

11.02.200    TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTION NOTIFICATION.

11.02.210    MATERIALS TESTING.

11.02.220    PERFORMANCE AND WARRANTY DEPOSITS.

11.02.230    INSURANCE.

11.02.240    HOLD HARMLESS.

11.02.250    CORRECTION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF UNSAFE, NONCONFORMING, OR UNAUTHORIZED CONDITIONS.

11.02.260    NUISANCE IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.

11.02.270    NUISANCE UTILITY FACILITIES.

11.02.280    REVOCATION OF PERMITS.

11.02.290    STOP WORK ORDERS.

11.02.300    ADOPTION OF POLICIES.

11.02.310    APPEALS.

11.02.320    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


11.02.010 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the issuance of right-of-way use permits in order to regulate activities within the rights-of-way in the City of Bremerton in the interest of public health, safety and welfare; and to provide for the fees, charges, performance and warranty deposits, warranties, and procedures required to administer the permit process. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.020 TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

This chapter and the procedures adopted hereunder shall be in effect throughout the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.030 CONSTRUCTION - INTENT.

A.    This chapter is enacted to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.

B.    It is expressly the purpose of this chapter and any procedures adopted hereunder to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder.

C.    It is the specific intent of this chapter and any procedures adopted hereunder to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter upon the permittee, and no provision is intended to impose any duty upon the City of Bremerton, or any of its officers, employees or agents. Nothing contained in this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the City of Bremerton, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder by the City of Bremerton, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.040 DEFINITIONS.

The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

A.    "Citation and notice" means a written document initiating a proceeding pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC.

B.    "City Inspector" means the designated employee(s) of the Department of Public Works and Utilities assigned to inspecting the permitted work.

C.    "City" means the City of Bremerton, Washington.

D.    "Complaint" means a written document initiating a procedure pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC.

E.    "Department" means the Public Works and Utilities Department or other Department designated by the Mayor.

F.    "Director" means the Director of Public Works and Utilities or his/her designated representative.

G.    "Emergency" means a condition of imminent danger to the health, safety, and welfare of property or persons located within the City including, but not limited to, damage to persons or property from natural or manmade consequences, such as storms, earthquakes, riots or wars.

H.    "Enforcement Officer" means the Director or his/her designated representative.

I.    "Engineering Division" means the Engineering Division of the Department.

J.    "Franchised utilities" means utilities that have City approval to use City rights-of-way for the purpose of providing their services within or beyond the City, whether by written franchise granted by the City, state tariff or other similar City authorization.

K.    "Low impact development (LID)" shall mean a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.

L.    "Low impact development best management practices (LID BMPs)" shall mean distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited to, bioretention/rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, minimal excavation foundations, vegetated roofs, and water reuse.

M.    "Notice of violation" means a document mailed to a permittee or unauthorized user and posted at the site of a nonconforming or unsafe condition.

N.    "Oral directive" means a directive given orally by City personnel designated by the Director to correct or discontinue a specific condition.

O.    "Permit" means a document issued by the City granting permission to engage in an activity not allowed without a permit.

P.    "Permit center" means the location for applying for permits.

Q.    "Permittee" means the person so designated on the permit application, or designee.

R.    "Person" means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.

S.    "Private use" means use of the public right-of-way for the benefit of a person, partnership, group, organization, company, or corporation, other than as a thoroughfare for any type of vehicles, pedestrians or equestrians.

T.    "Policy" means a policy adopted by the Director to implement this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this chapter or by other codes, ordinances, or resolutions of the City or other agencies.

U.    "Revocation" means the cancellation of a permit.

V.    "Right-of-way" means all public streets and property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for street purposes, together with public property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for walkways, sidewalks, LID BMPs, planter strips and vegetated LID facilities, bikeways, parking, and horse trails, whether improved or unimproved, including the air rights, subsurface rights and easements related thereto.

W.    "Stop work order" means an oral directive or a written notice posted at the site of activity that requires all work to be stopped until the City approves continuation of work.

X.    "Suspension" means the temporary stay of a permit.

Y.    "Underground location service" means the underground utilities location center that will locate all underground utilities prior to an excavation.

Z.    "Unsafe condition" means any condition which the Director determines is a hazard to health, or endangers the safe use of the right-of-way by the public, or does or may impair or impede the operation or functioning of any portion of the right-of-way, or which may cause damage thereto. (Ord. 5308 §1, 2016: Ord. 5023 §1, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.050 POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.

The Director shall have the power to:

A.    Administer the provisions of this chapter including but not limited to interpreting the chapter and issuing rules and procedures necessary for its administration.

B.    Issue permits relating to use of the rights-of-way in accordance with this chapter.

C.    Administer and coordinate the enforcement of this chapter and all policies adopted hereunder relating to the use of rights-of-way.

D.    Advise the City Council, Mayor and other City Departments on matters relating to use of the rights-of-way.

E.    Carry out such other responsibilities as required by this chapter or other codes, ordinances, policies or procedures of the City.

F.    Adjust the amount of fees required by this chapter to be proportional to any increased scope of work for which the permit is required.

G.    Request the assistance of other City Departments to administer and enforce this chapter.

H.    Assign the responsibility for interpretation, application and enforcement of specified procedures to Department staff. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.060 PERMIT REQUIRED.

A.    It is unlawful for anyone to make private use of any public right-of-way without first having obtained a right-of-way use permit issued by the City or to use any right-of-way without complying with all the provisions of such right-of-way use permit issued by the City.

B.    The City does not waive its right to use the right-of-way by issuance of any permit. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.070 ADDITIONAL PERMITS.

Additional permits for any use of the right-of-way may be required by other City codes. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.080 RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMITS.

The following types of right-of-way use permits are established:

A.    Type A - Short-Term Use.

1.    Type A Permits may be used for use of right-of-way for up to four (4) weeks for purposes which do not involve the physical disturbance of the right-of-way.

2.    This type of use may involve disruption of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and may require inspections, cleanup and traffic control. For periods longer than four (4) weeks these uses will be considered Type C, long-term use.

3.    Type A Permits include but are not limited to the following:

a.    Temporary street and sidewalk closures.

b.    Temporary blockage of streets and sidewalk, for uses such as dumpsters and scaffolding.

B.    Type B - Disturbance of the Right-of-Way.

1.    Type B Permits may be issued for activities that alter the appearance or disturb the surface, or disturb the subsurface of the right-of-way on a temporary or permanent basis. Type B Permits are also required for the initial construction of improvements within rights-of-way and private streets required to conform to City standards. Type B Permits may be issued for up to one hundred twenty (120) days.

2.    Type B Permits include, but are not limited to, construction activities associated with:

a.    Boring, jacking or pushing;

b.    Construction adjacent to the right-of-way that may physically impact the right-of-way;

c.    Culverts;

d.    Curb cuts, handicap ramps and driveway approaches;

e.    Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks;

f.    Drainage facilities;

g.    Installation of landscaping;

h.    Painting;

i.    Paving;

j.    Street trenching;

k.    Utility installation.

C.    Type C - Long-Term Use.

1.    Type C Permits may be issued for right-of-way use for activities for extended periods of time which will not further physically disturb the right-of-way once in place. This may include structures, facilities, and uses that involve capital expenditures and long-term commitment of use. The Type C Permit shall be a revocable permit. Type C Permits may be issued for a term of up to five (5) years except as provided for in subsection (c)(7) of this section.

2.    A Type B Permit may be required for construction activities in conjunction with a Type C use.

3.    Type C Permits include but are not limited to:

a.    Accessory business activity such as: parking, displays and signage;

b.    Air rights;

c.    Bus shelters/stops;

d.    Construction site/haul roads;

e.    Fences;

f.    Recycle receptacles, dumpsters, and facilities;

g.    Special and unique structures such as: fountains, clocks, flagpoles, benches, kiosks, banners, street furniture, decorations, etc.;

h.    Underground rights;

i.    Utility facilities;

j.    Waste facilities.

4.    Utility facilities placed in the right-of-way under the authority of a franchised utility as defined in this chapter are exempt from the requirement to obtain a Type C Permit.

5.    Type A uses that exceed four (4) weeks duration will be treated as Type C uses.

6.    Upon termination of a Type C Permit, for which the permittee does not obtain a new permit, any improvements constructed in the right-of-way must be removed by the permittee and the area restored to its original condition or better.

7.    Type C Permits may be issued for right-of-way use for an extended term not to exceed ten (10) years for activities which will not further physically disturb the right-of-way once in place such as the installation and maintenance of structures, facilities, and uses that involve capital expenditures and long-term commitment of use. Type C Permits may be issued for an extended term under the following conditions:

a.    At the end of the permit period, the permit may be renewed upon request by the permittee and acceptance by the City for additional terms not to exceed ten (10) years. If the use of the right-of-way under the jurisdiction of a Type C Permit is changed so as to affect the installation permitted, the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall require the permittee to remove the installation or modify the installation to accommodate the new use of the right-of-way. The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall set the time for removal or modification. The time for removal or modification shall be at least ninety (90) days after the date the request for removal or modification is submitted, unless the Director finds that a lesser amount of time is in the best interest of the public. All expenses for removal and/or modification of the permitted installation shall be borne by the permittee. 

b.    A Type C Permit will not be issued for the extended term unless the City determines that there is no reasonable likelihood that the City will need to utilize the area for which the permit is granted within the permit term, and that the proposed use is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and that the use is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, and that the proposed use is not aesthetically incompatible with the City’s streetscape standards.

c.    In the case of a proposed use that is necessary to protect a governmental installation from possible terrorist attack, the City may waive any of the requirements of this section. 

d.    The City shall impose such fees as are appropriate to cover the City’s cost associated with processing the application and that takes into account the value of the land used, the length of use, and lost revenue to the City, if applicable.

D.    Type D - Franchised Utility Routine Maintenance Permit.

1.    Type D Permits may be issued for franchised utilities as defined in this chapter to perform routine maintenance on existing overhead lines and for entry into existing underground facilities. The permit will be valid for this work within the City boundaries. Type D Permits may be issued for up to one (1) year.

2.    Type D Permits will not involve physical disturbance of the right-of-way.

3.    Type D Permits may be revoked if the permittee does not adequately and consistently comply with the permit conditions or requirements of this chapter. In the event that the Type D Permit is revoked, the permittee must obtain a Type A Permit for each work site.

E.    Assignment of Permit. Permits cannot be assigned or transferred, subleased or used for any purpose not specified in the permit without prior written permission of the City. Any attempt to assign or transfer an interest in a permit without such prior written permission shall be cause for immediate termination. (Ord. 4857 §1, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.090 APPLICATIONS AND PROCESSING OF PERMITS.

A.    To obtain a right-of-way use permit the applicant shall file an application with the Department.

B.    Every application shall include the following information appropriate to the proposed use:

1.    A scale drawing showing the location of the proposed right-of-way use, the location of the existing and proposed improvements, surface features such as curbs and gutters, underground features such as the location of utilities, and the limits of the work area;

2.    A description of the use;

3.    The planned duration of the use;

4.    Applicant contact information;

5.    All other information which may be required as specified in policies adopted hereunder;

6.    Construction traffic control plan;

7.    An estimate of construction costs; and

8.    Payment of the required fees.

C.    The Director shall examine each application submitted for review and approval to determine if adequate information is provided and if it complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter and procedures adopted hereunder. Other departments that have authority over the proposed use activity will review and recommend approval or disapproval of the application. If the Director finds that the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter, he may approve the permit, and may impose such conditions thereon as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety, to mitigate any impacts resulting from the use and to coordinate activities or address potential conflicts with future improvements in the area.

D.    All applications for permits must be submitted ten (10) working days or more prior to the start of work or as required to obtain other City permits.

E.    Upon submittal of a completed application the applicant shall provide the application fee per the fee schedule adopted by the City. Permittees who have an approved monthly billing status shall be billed accordingly. (Ord. 5023 §2, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.100 RENEWAL OF PERMITS.

Each Type A and Type B Permit shall be of the duration specified on the permit and may be renewed without payment of an additional fee for up to the length of the original permit, at the discretion of the Director. If continued use of the right-of-way is desired by the permittee after expiration of a renewed permit, he/she must apply for a new permit. Type C and D Permits can not be renewed and the permittee must apply for and receive a new permit prior to expiration or remove the permitted improvements. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.110 PERMIT EXCEPTION.

A.    A right-of-way use permit shall not be required of franchised utilities when responding to emergencies that require disturbance of the right-of-way typical of a Type B Permit; provided, that the Department shall be notified by the responding utility or contractor verbally or in writing, as soon as practicable following onset of an emergency. Nothing herein shall relieve a responding utility or contractor from the requirement to apply for a right-of-way use permit as provided in this chapter within forty-eight (48) hours after beginning emergency work in the right-of-way.

B.    Permits shall not be required for routine maintenance and construction work performed by the City.

C.    Permits are not required for City Public Works and Utility Department construction projects.

D.    Permits are not required for the ordinary construction and maintenance of landscaping or irrigation systems in the planter strip of the right-of-way. Blockage of the right-of-way associated with ordinary maintenance of landscaping requires the appropriate permit. (Ord. 5023 §3, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.120 PERMIT FEES AND CHARGES.

A.    The fee for each permit shall be set forth in a fee schedule to be adopted by the City Council. Fees and charges adopted pursuant to this section may be increased or decreased by the Council on the Mayor’s recommendation in accordance with changes in the costs incurred by the City.

B.    Fees and Charges.

1.    Type A, Short-Term Use Permit. Fees for Type A Permits shall be established for the following categories:

a.    Regular. A fee shall be charged for each regular Type A Permit accepted for processing. This fee shall cover the administrative cost of the permit.

2.    Type B, Disturbance of Right-of-Way Permit. Fees for Type B Permits shall be established for the following categories:

a.    Sidewalk Repairs. Repair of existing sidewalks, not associated with other development activity and residential owner performed improper stormwater inflow elimination work in the sidewalk and curb area.

b.    Driveway Approach, Transverse Street Patches and Spot Patches. A driveway approach, transverse street patch or spot patches or other localized work activities not exceeding more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of disturbed area.

c.    Longitudinal Street Patches and New Curb and Sidewalk Installation. Longitudinal street patch or construction of new curb gutter and sidewalk on one side of a street, street lighting, or other work activities which generally progress longitudinally down a street.

d.    New Street Construction. Construction of a new street, extension of an existing street, construction of a private street, frontage improvements on an existing street and construction of a new pavement surface.

e.    Water and Sewer Mains and Laterals. Water and sewer mains and laterals permitted in accordance with BMC Title 15.

The Director will assign Type B Permit work to the most appropriate category or will establish a fixed fee or charge for City costs at an hourly rate for special work not covered in these categories.

3.    Type C, Long-Term Use Permit. Fees for Type C Long-Term Use Permits shall include the following categories:

a.    Application and Processing. A non-refundable application and processing fee will be charged for each Type C Permit application accepted for processing.

b.    Use Fee. A use fee will be established which incorporates the value of the land used and the length of the use.

c.    The Director may modify or waive fees for Type C Permits for government agencies or improvements which provide a benefit to the City.

4.    Type D, Franchised Utility Routine Maintenance Permit.

a.    Regular. A fee shall be charged for each regular Type D Permit accepted for processing. This fee shall cover the administrative cost of the permit.

5.    Plan Reviews. A fee will be established for reviewing plans for the construction of improvements of the right-of-way including new curbs and gutters, sidewalks, new streets, street lighting and other activities designated by the Director. The Plan Review fee allows for two (2) reviews.

6.    Additional Work. A fee will be established for activities beyond normal and customary services. These may include, but not be limited to: repeated plan reviews and site inspections, special work, response to citizen complaints, inspection of reworked areas, calls for inspection when the site is not ready and construction site emergencies.

C.    Waiver of Fees for City-Initiated Projects. Utilities in the right-of-way under the authority of a franchise agreement, State Tariff or other similar City authorization which must apply for permits because of City-initiated construction projects, may be granted a waiver of normal permit fees by the Director. This provision only applies to work that would not otherwise have been done by the utility.

D.    Exemption from Fees for City Projects. City projects are exempt from fees for right-of-way use permits. (Ord. 4734, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4684, Amended, 12/28/1999; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.130 SPECIFICATIONS.

All work to be performed under any permit issued under this chapter shall conform to all other City codes, the current development and construction standards of the Department and all other standards used by the City in the administration of this chapter. Such standards include, but are not limited to, the current version of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as amended or superseded, published by the Federal Highway Administration and the Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction as amended or superseded, published by the Washington State Department of Transportation and the American Public Works Association. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.140 NOTICE OF INTENT TO START WORK.

Permittee shall provide a minimum of one (1) working day notice of the intent to start work in the right-of-way. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.150 INSPECTIONS.

As a condition of issuance of any permit or authorization that requires approval of the Department, each applicant shall consent to inspections by the Department or any other appropriate City representative. Permittee shall provide a minimum of one (1) working day notice prior to a requested or required inspection. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.160 COMPLETION OF WORK.

At completion of the work, the permittee shall:

A.    Provide notice that the work is complete and request a final inspection.

B.    Provide record drawings of the improvements made in the right-of-way when required. Record drawings of improvements to be maintained by the City shall meet the format requirements of the City. All record drawings shall show at a minimum the actual location, depth and profile of the improvements in the right-of-way. Record drawings acceptable to the Department must be provided prior to release of the Performance Deposit. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.170 SHARED USE OF EXCAVATIONS.

If at any time, or from time to time, a utility company submits a permit request to excavate for installation of its facilities, the City may request in writing that such utility company provide an opportunity to install City facilities within the excavation; provided, that:

A.    Such joint use shall not unreasonably delay the work of the utility company; and

B.    Such joint use shall be arranged and accomplished on terms and conditions satisfactory to both parties and in accordance with the applicable codes, rules and regulations.

C.    To the extent reasonably possible, the utility company shall, at the direction of the City, cooperate with the City and provide other private utility companies with the opportunity to utilize joint or shared excavations in order to minimize disruption and damage to the right-of-way as well as to minimize traffic-related impacts. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.180 UNDERGROUND UTILITY LOCATION REQUIRED.

All permittees shall, before commencing any construction in City right-of-way, comply with all requirements of Chapter 19.122 RCW, the one (1) number locator service. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.190 WARNING AND SAFETY DEVICES.

A.    The permittee is responsible for the safety of the work area and shall provide and maintain warning lights, safety devices, signs and barricades on all rights-of-way when at any time there might be an obstruction or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic in accordance with the Specifications. Warning and safety devices may be removed when the work for which the right-of-way use permit has been granted is complete and the right-of-way restored to the conditions directed by the Department.

B.    The applicant shall submit a traffic plan showing the proposed shoulder closures, lane closures, detour routing, parking removal and location and type of warning lights, safety devices, signs and barricades intended to protect vehicular or pedestrian traffic at the site for which the right-of-way use permit is requested. No work in the right-of-way will be allowed until the traffic plan is approved.

C.    The Director may require that the permittee provide a person certified as a Washington State Traffic Control Flagger be on site during construction activities to monitor the setup and maintenance of the warning and safety devices.

D.    On right-of-way use permits that require a flagger for the purpose of traffic control during the construction, the flagger will be either a properly attired and certified Washington State Traffic Control Flagger, or an off-duty law enforcement officer.

E.    All decisions of the City inspector shall be final in all matters pertaining to the number, type, location, installation, and maintenance of warning and safety devices in the public right-of-way during any actual work or activity for which a duly authorized right-of-way use permit has been issued. Lack of notice or comment by the City on the warning and safety devices does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for the safety of the work area. (Ord. 5023 §4, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.200 TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTION NOTIFICATION.

A.    Where the Director determines that parking is a hazard to through traffic, or to the construction work or other right-of-way activity, parking may be restricted either entirely or during the time when it creates a hazard.

B.    Parking restriction signs shall be placed at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance of parking removal, with the start date of the "no parking" clearly shown. The area to be restricted shall be clearly marked with Type I barricades carrying signs that give the specific period (dates and times) that the area is to be free of vehicles. Signs shall be large enough to be easily read from a distance of fifty (50) feet and shall advise where impounded vehicles will be stored or indicate a twenty-four (24) hour telephone number for obtaining that information.

C.    The permittee shall be responsible for placement and maintenance of the signs. Placement of the signs shall be as approved by the Director. The permittee shall notify the Director by telephone or otherwise when the signs are placed. No towing of vehicles shall occur unless the signs are placed at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the beginning of the restricted parking.

D.    All signs must be approved by the Director prior to placement, and must conform generally to the following wording:

WARNING! TOW AWAY ZONE

NO PARKING

FROM: DATE & TIME

TO: DATE & TIME

FOR CONSTRUCTION WORK

ALL VEHICLES REMAINING WILL BE TOWED

(IMPOUND INFORMATION)

E.    In areas where parking spaces must be used in which fees are collected by the City for parking, the applicant shall pay the appropriate fees for uses of the parking spaces. No permit shall be issued until the applicant shows proof of payment for the parking spaces. (Ord. 5023 §5, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.210 MATERIALS TESTING.

Material tests may be ordered by the Director to assure conformity with the Specifications. Material tests may include, but are not limited to: gradation analysis, compaction testing, concrete strength, asphalt content analysis and pipe strength. When ordered by the Director, the permittee shall have the material test performed by a certified laboratory and the results provided to the Director. Location and timing of material testing shall be coordinated with the Director. (Ord. 5023 §6, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.220 PERFORMANCE AND WARRANTY DEPOSITS.

A.    Performance Deposit. A performance deposit shall be required to ensure conformance with the plans, specifications, standards, permit requirements, development guidelines and other requirements. The minimum amount of the performance deposit shall be one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated value of the work and the estimated cost to restore existing improvements as determined by the Director. Performance deposits shall not be released until a warranty deposit is received.

B.    Warranty Deposit. A warranty deposit shall be required to warrant the workmanship and material of constructed improvements in the right-of-way for a period of two (2) years. The minimum amount of the warranty deposit shall be twenty (20) percent of the value of the actual construction costs.

C.    Deposit Instruments. The deposit instrument for the performance or warranty deposit shall be cash, a non-revocable letter of credit, an assignment of funds, bond or other readily accessible source of funds approved by the City Risk Manager. The deposit instruments shall be on a form acceptable to the City Risk Manager. Any issuer of a deposit instrument shall pay invoices presented by the City pursuant to this chapter within forty-five (45) days. A bond will be accepted only for amounts over one thousand dollars ($1,000) or when State law requires a bond.

Interest on deposited funds will accrue to the benefit of the depositor, except that any interest earned on a cash deposit will be retained by the City for account administration.

D.    Notice of Incomplete or Defective Work. If the permitted work is determined to be incomplete or defective, damage of existing improvements is observed, a defect is observed during the warranty period or other activities which do not comply with the permit and require corrective action by the permittee as determined by the Director, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing prior to applying proceeds of the deposit to correct the work. The notice must state:

1.    The work that must be done or the improvement that must be made to comply with the requirements of the permit or deposit; and

2.    The amount of time that the applicant has to commence and complete the required work or improvements; and

3.    That, if the work or improvements are not commenced and completed within the time specified, the City will use the proceeds of the deposit to have the required work or improvements completed.

E.    Default on Deposit.

1.    If the work or improvements covered by the deposit are not completed within the time specified in the notice given under this chapter, the City shall obtain the proceeds of the deposit and do the work or make the improvements covered by the deposit. The City may either have employees of the City do the work or make the improvements or have a contractor do the work or make the improvements.

2.    If at any time the Director determines that actions or inaction associated with any permit work has created an emergency situation endangering the public health, safety, or welfare, creating a potential liability for the City, or endangering City streets, utilities, or property; and if the nature or timing of such an emergency precludes the notification of applicants as provided in this chapter while still minimizing or avoiding the effects of the emergency, the City may use the deposit to cover costs incurred by the City to correct the emergency situation. The City may either have employees of the City do the work or make the improvements, or have a contractor do the work or make the improvements. If the City uses the deposit as provided by this section, the applicant shall be notified in writing within four (4) working days of the commencement of emergency work. The notice must state the work that was completed and the nature or timing of the emergency that necessitated the use of the deposit without prior notification.

3.    The permittee is responsible for all costs incurred by the City in doing the work and making the improvements covered by the deposit. The City shall release or refund any proceeds of a deposit remaining after subtracting all costs for doing the work covered by the deposit. The permittee shall reimburse the City for any amount expended by the City that exceeds the deposit.

4.    In each case where the City uses any of the proceeds of the deposit, it shall, within thirty (30) days, provide the owner of the permit an itemized statement of all proceeds and funds used. (Ord. 5023 §7, 2007: Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.230 INSURANCE.

A.    General Provision. Before any permit is granted to any person, firm or corporation, for the work within or use of the right-of-way, such person, firm or corporation shall secure and deliver to the City and file with the Director a copy of comprehensive general liability insurance in the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for bodily damage and property. The City shall be listed as an additional insured on the policy. Alternate methods of meeting these insurance requirements must be approved by the City Risk Manager.

B.    Limited Exception. A homeowner or tenant who repairs, constructs, or uses the right-of-way fronting his/her residence and who, in the case of repair or construction, performs all the labor him/herself shall not be required to obtain insurance as set forth in subsection (A) of this section. Prior to the issuance of such a permit, the homeowner or tenant shall be required to provide proof of homeowner’s or renter’s insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for bodily injury and property damage unless, in the Director’s discretion, this requirement is waived after consideration of the nature of the proposed use or work and the need to reasonably protect the City’s interest as well as the health, safety, and welfare of the public. (Ord. 4818, Amended, 11/15/2002; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.240 HOLD HARMLESS.

As a condition to the issuance of any permit under this chapter, the permittee shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees and agents, for any and all suits, claims or liabilities caused by or arising out of any work or use authorized by any such permit. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.250 CORRECTION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF UNSAFE, NONCONFORMING, OR UNAUTHORIZED CONDITIONS.

A.    Whenever the Director determines that any condition on any right-of-way is in violation of, or any right-of-way is being used contrary to, any provision of this chapter or policies adopted hereunder or other applicable codes or standards, or without a right-of-way use permit, the Director may order the correction or discontinuance of such condition or any activity causing such condition.

B.    The Director is authorized to use any or all of the following methods in ordering correction or discontinuance of any such conditions or activities as the Director determines appropriate:

1.    Serving of oral directives to the permittee or other responsible person requesting immediate correction or discontinuance of the specified condition;

2.    Service of a written notice of violation, ordering correction or discontinuance of a specific condition or activity within a reasonable period as the Director may determine;

3.    Issuance of an order to immediately stop work until authorization is received from the City to proceed with such work;

4.    Revocation or suspension of previously granted permits pursuant to this chapter;

5.    Seek enforcement pursuant to BMC 11.02.320. (Ord. 4874 §1, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.260 NUISANCE IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.

A.    Debris and Spilled Loads.

1.    The owner or operator of any vehicle that has spilled, dropped, dumped or in any manner whatsoever deposited any matter ("debris") upon the right-of-way shall cause the right-of-way to be cleaned using suitable methods to the satisfaction of the Director. Upon failure to do so the Director may cause to have cleaned the right-of-way and the costs thereof shall be charged to the person or persons so responsible. The Department has the authority to designate haul routes and time of day for operations involving hauling over public right-of-way.

2.    Earth-hauling contractors, builders, or anyone else utilizing vehicles upon rights-of-way shall provide persons or equipment to keep the right-of-way clean at all times to the satisfaction of the Department. Upon failure to do so, the Department may issue an immediate stop work order, revoke City permits, and the responsible person or persons may be directed to immediately clean the right-of-way to the satisfaction of the Department. Upon failure to do so the Department may cause to have cleaned the right-of-way and charge the costs thereof to the person or persons so responsible. 

B.    Unauthorized Property.

1.    Any object, equipment, structure, or personal property ("property") which occupies any right-of-way without the legal authorization required by this chapter is declared a nuisance. The Department may attach a notice to any such property stating that if it is not removed from the right-of-way within twenty-four (24) hours of the date and time stated on the notice, the property may be taken into custody and stored at the owner’s expense. The notice shall provide an address and phone number where additional information may be obtained. If the property is a hazard to public safety, it may be removed summarily by the City. Notice of such removal shall be thereafter given to the owner, if known.

2.    All expenses incurred by the City in abating the nuisance condition or any portion thereof, or to repair any damage to the right-of-way, shall constitute a civil debt owing to the City jointly and severally by such persons who have been given notice or who own the property or placed it in the right-of-way, which debt shall be collectable in the same manner as any other civil debt. 

C.    Enforcement. If the nuisance debris or property has not been removed or remedied as directed above or in lieu of the above, the Director may seek enforcement pursuant to BMC 11.02.320. (Ord. 5023 §8, 2007: Ord. 4874 §2, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.270 NUISANCE UTILITY FACILITIES.

A.    Purpose. To establish a procedure for the identification and elimination or remediation of nuisance utility poles and other utility facilities located within or upon the right-of-way.

B.    Utility Facilities Defined. "Utility facilities" means poles (with or without crossarms), wires, lines, conduits, cables, communication and signal lines, braces, guys, anchors, vaults and all necessary or convenient facilities and appurtenances thereto within the right-of-way, whether the same be located over or under ground and whether installed and/or maintained by permit pursuant to this chapter or by franchise or by no such authority.

C.    Nuisance Utility Facility Defined. "Nuisance utility facility" as used in this section, includes a utility facility that limits ADA accessibility, creates sight distance problems, has disconnected wires or cable, is deteriorating, is creating a hazardous condition, and/or is not used or is abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days or longer unless such nonuse or abandoned status is approved by the Director at his or her sole discretion.

D.    Determination of Appropriate Remedy. Upon a determination by the Director that a nuisance utility facility exists, the Director shall notify the permittee, franchisee, owner or other person responsible for the nuisance utility facility and direct said entity or person to remove or remedy the nuisance utility facility upon terms and conditions as directed by the Director.

E.    Enforcement. If the nuisance utility facility has not been removed or remedied as directed above or in lieu of the above, the Director may seek enforcement pursuant to BMC 11.02.320. (Ord. 4874 §3, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.280 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.

A.    The Director may revoke any permit issued under this chapter whenever in the Director’s sole determination:

1.    The work or activity does not proceed in accordance with the plans as approved, or conditions of approval, or is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or procedures, or other City ordinances, state law or federal law;

2.    The City has been denied access to investigate and perform inspection;

3.    The permittee has made a misrepresentation of a material fact in applying for a permit;

4.    The progress or condition of the approved work or activity indicates that it is or will be inadequate to protect the public and adjoining property, the street or utilities in the street, or any excavation or fill endangers or will endanger the public, the adjoining property, street or utilities in the street;

5.    The right-of-way is being used in violation of a permit issued under this chapter or is being used in violation of any provision of this chapter.

B.    Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, all use of the right-of-way shall cease, except as authorized or directed by the Director.

C.    Notice of Revocation. Notice of revocation shall be by letter.

D.    Appeal of Revocation. A revocation may be appealed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 4874 §4, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.290 STOP WORK ORDERS.

Work in the right-of-way may be suspended by the issuance of an oral or written stop work order by the City inspector. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.300 ADOPTION OF POLICIES.

The Director may prepare and adopt policies and procedures for the purpose of implementing this chapter. Such policies do not require approval by the City Council. (Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.310 APPEALS.

A.    Any permittee or applicant for a permit whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked pursuant to this chapter may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date that the denial or revocation notice was mailed to the permittee or applicant, appeal such denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact, and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the denial or revocation and order issuance or reinstatement of the permit, and may impose any terms thereupon.

B.    The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The permittee or applicant and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the Superior Court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. (Ord. 4874 §5, 2003; Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


11.02.320 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

A.    In lieu of or in conjunction with any remedy provided for in this chapter, any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement and/or enforcement may be required as provided therein.

B.    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 4874 §6, 2003; Ord. 4650, Repealed & Replaced, 06/12/1999)


Chapter 11.03 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES AND COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS

Sections:

11.03.010    APPLICATION FOR A MASTER PERMIT.

11.03.020    COMPENSATION.


11.03.010 APPLICATION FOR A MASTER PERMIT.

A.    Contents of application for initial or renewal Master Permit. In order to obtain an initial or renewal Master Permit, an Operator of a communications system must apply for a master Permit. The application must contain the following information, and such information as the City may from time to time require.

1.    Identity of the applicant and corporate structure.

2.    A proposal for construction of a communications facility that includes at least the following:

(a)    a description of the services that are to be provided using the facility.

(b)    the location of proposed facility and facility design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the operation of the same; provided, however, that, if some of the descriptive data is not available at the time of application, the Master Permit may be issued subject to conditions that the data be filed and approved by the City before construction begins and that the Master Permit will be deemed to be forfeited if the data is not supplied and approved; provided further, in the event that Sections 11.03.010.A.2.(b)-(c) require information that is a business or trade secret and/or proprietary information and the Operator wishes to protect the information against disclosure, then Operator shall provide said information to City in a separate envelope marked "Proprietary Information: DO NOT DISCLOSE". The City will exercise good faith efforts to protect the confidentiality of the business or trade secrets or proprietary information that is designated as such; provided further, that (1) in the event a public disclosure request is made for information marked as proprietary, and if the City Attorney determines that said information may be subject to being disclosed; or (2) the City determines that the information should be disclosed in connection with its enforcement of any provision of this Title, or in the exercise of its police or regulatory powers; then the City shall notify the Operator of the Operator’s opportunity to seek a protective order from a court with appropriate jurisdiction. In the event that a protective order is not obtained within thirty (30) days or, if shorter, the time limitation set forth in State law, then City may disclose said information. The Operator is obligated to reimburse and indemnify City for all costs, damages and attorney fees that may be awarded or assessed by the court for any actions the City took at the request of Operator.

(c)    a map of the general route the facility will follow; a designation of the portions of the system that will be placed above ground and the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the Operator proposes to use in installing the system above ground and underground; a schedule for construction of the facility describing when and where construction will begin, how it will proceed, and when it will be completed; and the expected effect on right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the Public Rights-of-Way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; provided, however, that any proprietary information required under this subparagraph as well as the preceding subparagraph shall be subject to the non-disclosure procedure prescribed in the proviso of the preceding subparagraph.

(d)    A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities.

(e)    Identification of the area of the City to be served by the proposed system, including a description of the proposed area’s boundaries under the Master Permit.

(f)    An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law.

B.    Applications for transfer. An application for a transfer of a Master Permit must contain the same information required by Section 11.03.010.A, except that, if the transferor submitted an application under Section 11.03.010.A, to the extent information provided by the transferor under Section 11.03.010.A.2 remains accurate, the transferee may simply cross-reference the earlier application.

C.    City review. The City may request such additional information as it finds necessary, and require such modifications to the system proposed as may be necessary in the exercise of the City’s authority over the use of its public rights-of-way for communications systems. Once the information required by the City has been provided, the application shall be subject to review by the City and any approval shall be subject to the City’s determination that:

1.    the applicant will accept the modifications required by the City to its proposed system. This section does not authorize the City to exercise authority it does not otherwise have under applicable law.

2.    the applicant will accept a Master Permit satisfactory to the City and comply with any conditions precedent to its effectiveness.

3.    in the case of a transfer, any approval will also be subject to a determination that:

(a)    there will be no adverse effect on the public interest, or the City’s interest in the Master Permit;

(b)    transferee will agree to be bound by all the conditions of the Master Permit and to assume all the obligations of its predecessor; and

(c)    any outstanding compliance issues will be resolved or preserved to the satisfaction of the City.

D.    An applicant shall not be issued a Master Permit if it files or has previously filed materially inaccurate or misleading information in a Master Permit application or intentionally withheld information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.03.020 COMPENSATION.

A.    Rights-of-way fee. Subject only to the exceptions set out in Section 11.01.040.C of this Title, every Operator of a communications facility must compensate the City for its actual cost of administering this application and the rights-of-way. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


Chapter 11.04 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

11.04.010    RCW ADOPTED.

11.04.020    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

11.04.030    SPECIFIC CITATIONS.

11.04.040    PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES AND ASSESSMENT ROLLS.

11.04.050    DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.


11.04.010 RCW ADOPTED.

RCW 35.43 and 35.44 are hereby adopted insofar as the same may be applicable to the creation of local improvement districts, assessments, reassessments, and financing thereof in the city. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "local improvement district" also means "utility local improvement district". (Ord. 4834, Amended, 12/20/2002; Ord. 2477 §2, 1961)


11.04.020 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

Any person violating any provision of the RCW provisions adopted by Section 11.04.010 will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed three hundred dollars or imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2477 §3, 1961)


11.04.030 SPECIFIC CITATIONS.

In citing the specific provisions of the code referred to in Section 11.04.010 the same may be cited by reference to the RCW or by reference to any compilations published by the Bureau of Governmental Research at the University of Washington, or by reference to the Session Laws of the state of Washington. (Ord. 2477 §4, 1961)


11.04.040 PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES AND ASSESSMENT ROLLS.

The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, is hereby designated as the proper authority for making the preliminary estimates and assessment rolls relating to the formation of local improvement districts and utility local improvement districts and certifying the same to the City Council, together with all other papers and information pursuant to and as required by RCW 35.43.130. (Ord. 4825, Added, 11/22/02)


11.04.050 DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.

Whenever any local improvement district assessment shall have been made payable in installments and, if on the first day of January in any year, two or more installments are delinquent, or if the final installment has been delinquent for more than one year, then, as authorized pursuant to RCW 35.50.040, the entire assessment shall be due and payable and the collection thereof shall be enforced in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State of Washington. Proceedings brought to foreclose such delinquent assessments shall be commenced on or before December 1 of that year, but not before the City Treasurer has notified by certified mail, pursuant to RCW 35.50.030 as enacted and thereafter amended, the persons whose names appear on the assessment roll as owning the property charged with the assessments or installments which are delinquent at the address last known to the Treasurer, a notice 30 days before the commencement of the proceedings. This section shall apply to all local improvement districts formed pursuant to RCW 35.43 after the effective date of the ordinance creating this section. (Ord. 4834, Added, 12/20/2002)


Chapter 11.05 PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:

11.05.010    APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.

11.05.020    CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.


11.05.010 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.

A Person wishing to construct, install, place, operate, replace, reconstruct, or maintain a Private Communications System in a public right-or-way must obtain a License therefore. The License shall only authorize placement of the system in a specific portion of the Public Rights-of-Way for a limited and specific purpose in connection with the Person’s business but not encompassing in whole or in part the carriage of communications for hire in the Public Rights-of-Way, and for a limited period of time. Such application must be in the form provided for by regulation and must be accompanied by a filing fee, covering the cost of administration of this application. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.05.020 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.

Any License shall be subject to such conditions as the City may from time to time establish, shall be expressly subordinate to the use of the Public Rights-of-Way by operators of communications facilities, and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this Title. Subject to the foregoing, the provisions of Chapter 11.01, Section 11.01.050 shall apply to a Private Communications System as if it were a Communications Facility. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


Chapter 11.06 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

Sections:

11.06.010    CAPTIONS.

11.06.020    CALCULATION OF TIME.

11.06.030    SEVERABILITY.


11.06.010 CAPTIONS.

The captions to sections throughout this Title are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this Title. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this Title. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.06.020 CALCULATION OF TIME.

Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this Title or any Master Permit or License, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of duration time. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


11.06.030 SEVERABILITY.

If any term, condition, or provision of this Title shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or regulatory agency, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the City and shall thereafter be binding on the Grantee and the City. If, as determined by the City upon appropriate legal advice, or applicable court decision, any term, condition or provision of this Title imposes a requirement which is prohibited by applicable federal or state law, or prohibits an action which must be allowed under applicable federal or state law, then any such term, condition or provision shall be construed to not impose the requirement which is prohibited by valid federal or state laws or not to prohibit the action which must be allowed under valid federal or state law. (Ord. 4777, Added, 10/25/2001)


Chapter 11.08 SIDEWALK AND STREET FRONTAGE

Sections: 

11.08.010    PURPOSE.

11.08.015    DEFINITIONS.

11.08.020    RESPONSIBILITIES.

11.08.030    SIDEWALK AND STREET FRONTAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.

11.08.040    ENFORCEMENT - NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

11.08.050    PERMIT REQUIRED - APPLICATION - ASSESSMENT - LIEN.

11.08.060    DRIVEWAYS.

11.08.070    CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR - RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY - LIABILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY.

11.08.080    ASSESSMENT OF LIENS.

11.08.090    SIDEWALK ABATEMENT FUND CREATED.

11.08.095    REPAIRS PURSUANT TO AGREEMENT.

11.08.100    COSTS.

11.08.110    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


11.08.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter further defines the requirements and procedures to maintain sidewalks and other street frontage improvements as outlined in Chapters 35.68 and 35.69 RCW, which are adopted by reference as currently enacted and as hereafter amended. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.015 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions apply to this chapter:

(a)    "Sidewalk" means any and all pedestrian structures or forms of improvement for pedestrians included in the space between the street margin, as defined by a curb or the edge of the traveled road surface, and the line where the public right-of-way meets the abutting property, as set forth in RCW 35.69.010. The term "sidewalk" includes but is not limited to curbs, gutters, and portions of driveways that cross sidewalks.

(b)    "Driveway," where set forth separately from "sidewalk" in this chapter, means all portions of a driveway crossing City right-of-way. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017)


11.08.020 RESPONSIBILITIES.

Street frontage must be maintained in accordance with City standards. Permits may be required to undertake the work required in this chapter. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.030 SIDEWALK AND STREET FRONTAGE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.

(a)    It shall be the duty of every owner of property abutting on public right-of-way to keep sidewalks free of snow, ice, garbage cans, and all other obstructions. It shall be unlawful to construct, place, cause, create, maintain, or permit to remain upon any sidewalk any condition that constitutes a hazard to the normal use of said sidewalk by the public. Facilities which have a poor appearance but are otherwise physically sound shall not be considered hazardous.

Sidewalks in violation of current Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") accessibility guidelines, and/or sidewalks with one (1) or more missing sections including portions of any street missing sidewalk along the entire frontage, shall be corrected by the abutting property owner. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.040 ENFORCEMENT - NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

(a)    Upon finding that an owner is maintaining or allowing a condition prohibited in this chapter, the City Code Enforcement Officer or City Engineer may order the repair, reconstruction, replacement, cleaning, removal, or remedy of the condition or obstruction.

(b)    Enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC may be used in lieu of or in conjunction with the provisions of this chapter.

(c)    Notice of the violation and required corrective action shall be sent to the legal owner of the abutting property, pursuant to BMC 1.04.040 or RCW 35.68.030 or 35.69.030, as applicable, to repair or replace the sidewalk. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.050 PERMIT REQUIRED - APPLICATION - ASSESSMENT - LIEN.

(a)    Upon notification, the owner shall obtain a permit from the City to correct the sidewalk deficiency. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or reconstruct any sidewalk or driveway on public rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City. After sixty (60) calendar days, if the owner has not applied for a permit to correct the sidewalk deficiency, the City Council may, following a public hearing, assess a lien on the property for the expense of correcting the deficiency pursuant to BMC 11.08.080.

(b)    In the event the owner obtains a permit within the time prescribed above, but the corrections are not completed within two hundred forty (240) calendar days of receiving the permit, the City Council may, following a public hearing, assess a lien on the property for the expense of correcting the deficiency. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.060 DRIVEWAYS.

(a)    Upon receipt of an application and payment of all fees, the City may issue a permit to construct a driveway meeting City standards. The City Engineer may revoke any driveway permit or require a modification of any driveway if:

(1)    The area occupied by the driveway is needed for the public convenience;

(2)    Continued operation of the driveway interferes with the safe and orderly flow of pedestrians, bicycles or vehicular traffic;

(3)    The abutting owner has failed to comply with all specifications and conditions of the permit;

(4)    The driveway does not access legal parking and maneuvering space on abutting property; or

(5)    The driveway does not meet current ADA accessibility guidelines.

(b)    Within sixty (60) calendar days of written notice from the City Engineer to close or modify a driveway, the abutting property owner shall obtain any required permits and make the corrections. It the abutting owner fails to make the required corrections within sixty (60) calendar days, the City may perform the required work at the expense of the abutting owner and assess the costs as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.070 CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR - RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY - LIABILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY.

(a)    Whenever a portion of any street in any city is not improved by the construction of a sidewalk thereon, or the sidewalk thereon is hazardous for purposes of public travel and the City Council by resolution, pursuant to Chapter 35.68 or 35.69 RCW as applicable, finds that the improvement of such portion of such street by the construction, reconstruction or repair of a sidewalk thereon is necessary for the public safety and convenience, the duty, burden, and expense of such work shall devolve upon the property directly abutting upon such portion except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section pursuant to RCW 35.69.020.

(b)    An abutting property shall not be charged with any costs under this chapter in excess of fifty (50) percent of the valuation of such abutting property, exclusive of improvements thereon, according to the valuation last placed upon it for purposes of general taxation.

(c)    An abutting property shall not be charged with any costs under this chapter if the construction, reconstruction or repair is required to correct deterioration of or damage to the sidewalk that is the direct result of actions by the City or its agents or to correct deterioration of or damage to the sidewalk that is the direct result of the failure of the City to enforce its ordinances. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.080 ASSESSMENT OF LIENS.

The City Council may, following a public hearing, assess a lien on the property for the cost and expense of construction, reconstruction, and/or correcting the deficiency as authorized and pursuant to Chapter 35.68 or 35.69 RCW as applicable. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.090 SIDEWALK ABATEMENT FUND CREATED.

The sidewalk abatement fund is hereby created. The sidewalk abatement fund shall receive revenue from proceeds of lien settlements as outlined in BMC 11.08.080, and other revenue. All funds deposited into the sidewalk abatement fund shall be used solely for correcting deficiencies in sidewalks. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.095 REPAIRS PURSUANT TO AGREEMENT.

(1)    The Director of Public Works and Utilities is authorized to enter into agreements with owners of abutting property for the repair of any sidewalk determined to be defective or hazardous. The agreement shall be written, shall include a cost estimate, and shall define the extent of costs, if any, to be contributed by the City.

(2)    The City may participate in sidewalk repair, if there are available funds in the sidewalk abatement fund, only where there is no indication of negligence or misuse by the property owner, past or present, causing the defect. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017)


11.08.100 COSTS.

Whenever any construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk is to be done, the cost of the same may be paid as follows:

(1)    The abutting owner may construct the correction or improvement using a private contractor after obtaining a City permit. The cost will either be wholly at the owner’s expense, or with contribution from the City if an agreement pursuant to BMC 11.08.095 is in place;

(2)    The abutting owner may request the City construct the correction or improvement and reimburse the City directly; or

(3)    The City may construct the improvement and assess the costs thereof against the abutting property owner. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


11.08.110 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement and/or enforcement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1.12 BMC. Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 5331 §1 (part), 2017: Ord. 5276 §3 (part), 2015)


Chapter 11.10 COMPLETE STREETS PROGRAM

Sections:

11.10.010    VISION.

11.10.020    COMPLETE STREETS - DEFINITIONS.

11.10.030    COMPLETE STREETS POLICY STATEMENT.

11.10.040    SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.

11.10.050    EXCEPTIONS.

11.10.060    INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIPS.

11.10.070    BEST PRACTICE DESIGN CRITERIA.

11.10.080    COMMUNITY CONTEXT.

11.10.090    PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES.

11.10.100    IMPLEMENTATION.


11.10.010 VISION.

The City of Bremerton’s vision for complete streets is of a community in which all residents and visitors, regardless of their age, ability, or financial resources, can have access to an affordable, safe, and accessible transportation system that meets or exceeds their travel needs. The City shall seek to create a well-connected, well-balanced, local and regional transportation system for all modes of travel including, but not limited to, walking, biking, driving, riding public transit, delivering goods and services, and emergency response transportation. The City recognizes that safe, comfortable, convenient travel for users of all ages and abilities encourages the use of public rights-of-way and can improve the environment, encourage physical activity and promote a vibrant, healthy, equitable, and livable community. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.020 COMPLETE STREETS - DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "All users" means transportation facility users of all ages and abilities, including, but not limited to, automobile motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, transit vehicles and riders, freight providers, people with disabilities, emergency responders, commercial vehicles, delivery/service personnel, and adjacent land users.

(b)    "Complete streets" means streets that are designed and operated to enable safe access for all users of all ages and abilities.

(c)    "High need area/community of need" means:

(1)    Any census tract in which the median household income is less than eighty (80) percent of the statewide average median based on the most current census tract-level data from the U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey; or 

(2)    An area that has a high number of pedestrian and/or bicycle collisions; or

(3)    Areas with the highest risk factors for and cases of chronic disease, such as but not limited to high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, stroke and obesity. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.030 COMPLETE STREETS POLICY STATEMENT.

(a)    The City of Bremerton will plan for, design, construct, operate and maintain a transportation system that is safe, convenient, and integrated into a network for all users in a balanced, responsible, and equitable manner consistent with and supportive of the surrounding community.

(b)    Complete streets are intended to benefit users equitably, particularly vulnerable users and underinvested and underserved communities. Transportation projects will provide safe, convenient, reliable, affordable, accessible, and timely transportation choices regardless of race, ethnicity, religion, income, gender identity, immigration status, age, ability, languages spoken, or level of access to a personal vehicle.

(c)    Transportation facilities that support the concept of complete streets include, but are not limited to, pavement markings and signs; street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalk and pedestrian safety improvements; Americans with Disabilities Act and Title VI compliance; on-street parking; transit accommodations; bicycle accommodations including appropriate signage and markings; and appropriate streetscapes, furniture and art that appeal to and promote pedestrian use. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.040 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.

(a)    The complete streets program shall apply to all phases of City transportation capital projects. Those involved in the planning and design of new transportation projects, reconstruction projects, and retrofit projects within the public right-of-way shall give consideration to all users and modes of travel from the start of planning and design work though construction. Transportation improvements shall be viewed as opportunities to create safer, more accessible streets for all users.

(b)    Those involved in performing construction, repair, maintenance, and routine operations projects shall accommodate, as practical, the needs of all modes of transportation and all users during performance of the work.

(c)    To the extent feasible, private development projects that require frontage improvements or installation of new and/or retrofitted road construction should be designed and constructed to the City’s complete streets requirements. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.050 EXCEPTIONS.

(a)    The following activities and projects are exempted from the complete streets program as follows:

(1)    Ordinary and routine maintenance activities such as mowing, snowplowing, sweeping, spot repair, joint or crack sealing, pavement patching/potholing, shoulder repair, pavement marking refreshing, and restoration of drainage systems; this exception shall not be applied beyond the scope of that activity;

(2)    Emergency utility repair requiring roadway repair or reconstruction;

(b)    The Director of Public Works may allow an exception from the complete streets program for transportation projects as follows:

(1)    If application of this policy would require the accommodation of street uses prohibited by law;

(2)    Requires more space than is physically available;

(3)    Significantly increases project costs and equivalent alternatives exist within close proximity;

(4)    Has adverse impacts on environment resources such as streams, floodplains, wetlands, or on historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of currently existing infrastructure;

(5)    The cost of accommodation is disproportionate to the current need or probable future use;

(6)    Where complete streets elements are not practical, are contrary to public safety, or are prohibited;

(7)    Where other available means or factors indicate an absence of current or future need;

(c)    The Director of Public Works will notify the Public Works Committee of project exceptions to the complete streets program set forth in subsection (b) of this section prior to exception being granted to provide the Committee opportunity to give advice. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.060 INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION AND PARTNERSHIPS.

(a)    The City will cooperate and collaborate with other transportation agencies to encourage those agencies to incorporate the principles and practices of complete streets within those agencies’ activities in the City, and to facilitate seamless transportation connections between jurisdictions.

(b)    It is the goal of the City to foster partnerships with Washington State transportation funding agencies, including the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT), the Federal Highway Administration, tribes, Kitsap County, Kitsap Transit, Bremerton School District, Olympic College, school and college districts, Kitsap Public Health District, residents, businesses, interest groups, neighborhoods and other stakeholders, to implement the complete streets program. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.070 BEST PRACTICE DESIGN CRITERIA.

The City’s design and construction engineering standards and deviations will be used to implement complete streets best practices as identified in BMC 11.12.080 or as amended hereinafter. Additional design resources to be used in developing complete streets standards shall include, but are not limited to, the latest editions of Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO) publications. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.080 COMMUNITY CONTEXT.

(a)    The complete streets program implementation shall take into account the City’s existing planning documents, including the Comprehensive Plan, Nonmotorized Transportation Plan, and subarea plans, in order to identify existing and future community context elements and land use. The surrounding land use and context shall be used to define complete streets projects. Special attention shall be paid to planned buildings, parks and trails, as well as communities’ current and expected transportation needs.

(b)    Complete streets should provide walkability and other nonmotorized transportation routes within and between centers, neighborhoods, and key locations.

(c)    Complete streets should take into account the goal of enhancing the context and character of the surrounding built and natural environments adjacent to a project.

(d)    The City shall make efforts to address unintended consequences, such as involuntary displacement due to transportation projects. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.090 PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES.

(a)    The complete streets program will track the performance measures for the following objectives:

(1)    Health.

(i)    Improve access to park and recreation facilities;

(ii)    Enhance infrastructure supporting bicycling;

(iii)    Enhance infrastructure supporting walking;

(iv)    Improve access to public transportation;

(2)    Access. Enhance access to transportation facilities for those with disabilities.

(3)    Safety. Improve the safety of transportation facilities for bikers and pedestrians;

(b)    The Director of Public Works and/or designee shall report to the Public Works Committee on a biennial basis on the performance measures listed above and the extent to which the objectives have been met. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


11.10.100 IMPLEMENTATION.

The Public Works and Utilities Department is responsible for implementing the complete streets program with cooperation from other City departments and oversight from the Public Works Committee. The Director of Public Works has the authority to create and modify policy to implement the complete streets program in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 5354 §2 (part), 2018)


Chapter 11.12 TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:

11.12.010    TITLE.

11.12.020    PURPOSE.

11.12.030    AUTHORITY.

11.12.040    TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

11.12.050    DEFINITIONS.

11.12.060    TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS REPORTS.

11.12.070    TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION.

11.12.080    DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND DEVIATIONS.

11.12.090    DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.

11.12.100    EASEMENTS.

11.12.110    STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS.

11.12.120    LANDSCAPING IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY, EASEMENTS AND ACCESS TRACTS.

11.12.130    PRIVATE STREETS.

11.12.140    ACCEPTANCE OF PRIVATE STREETS AS DEDICATED PUBLIC STREETS.

11.12.150    DRIVEWAYS.

11.12.160    PRIVATE INTERSECTION OPENING.

11.12.170    STREET ENDS.

11.12.180    PARKING CIRCULATION.

11.12.190    TRAFFIC SIGNALS.

11.12.200    STREET LIGHTING.

11.12.210    TRAFFIC CONTROL.

11.12.220    UTILITY COMPANIES.

11.12.230    STREET INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS.

11.12.240    SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PEDESTRIAN SAFETY.

11.12.250    PAVEMENT RESTORATION FOR TRENCHING IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.

11.12.260    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


11.12.010 TITLE.

This section shall be known as the "Transportation Development Code." (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.020 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the transportation element of the City comprehensive plan, and to provide an orderly process for the adoption, implementation, interpretation and modification of City transportation system development standards. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.030 AUTHORITY.

The Department of Public Works and Utilities by and through its Director is charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall have the authority to:

(a)    Develop and adopt procedures as needed to implement this Code and to carry out the responsibilities of the Department.

(b)    Request the assistance of other City departments to administer and enforce this Code.

(c)    Assign the responsibility for interpretation and application of specified procedures to divisions within the Department of Public Works and Utilities.

(d)    Require or allow a performance or maintenance assurance surety when authorized by a provision of this chapter

(e)    Act as final authority for appeals and requests for variance from requirements of this chapter.

(f)    Amend, interpret, and allow deviations from the City of Bremerton design and construction standards (engineering standards) when the Director finds that said reasons are in the best interest of the community. The Director is further authorized to establish minimum requirements for the design and construction of transportation facilities, utilities, and other public infrastructure, and requirements for protecting existing facilities during construction. The engineering standards shall be consistent with this Code and adopted City policies. Modifications to or deviations from adopted engineering standards must be supported, in writing, and demonstrate that the public interest is protected, and the modification is based upon sound engineering and/or public safety principles and adequately addresses all relevant functional, safety, maintenance, and aesthetic concerns. If a deviation is requested by an applicant, the Director shall require all necessary information to be provided by the applicant, and the applicant shall pay all City costs, including staff time and consultant fees, associated with reviewing and approving the deviation request.

(g)    Apply for grants to conduct transportation improvements.

(h)    Delegate, in writing, the Director’s authority to perform any of the tasks required of him/her under this chapter to other personnel with the Department, as is needed for the effective and efficient administration of the Department and the duties required under this chapter. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.040 TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

This chapter shall apply to all development within the City. No permit shall be issued for any development in the City unless mitigation conditions, or improvements required by this chapter are made conditions of the permit. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.050 DEFINITIONS.

The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

(a)    "Activity centers" means locations such as schools, parks, retail areas and shopping centers, places of employment, or public service agencies that attract people.

(b)    "Bicycle facilities" is a general term referring to improvements that accommodate or encourage bicycling, including, but not limited to, parking facilities, bike racks, and improvements to bicycle routes.

(c)    "Bicycle route" means any route designated for bicycle travel in the comprehensive plan, whether exclusive for bicyclists or to be shared with other transportation modes.

(d)    "Cul-de-sac" means a street closed at one (1) end by widened pavement of sufficient size for vehicles to turn around.

(e)    "Curb (wheelchair) ramp" means a ramp cut into a roadway curb and sidewalk to allow access for physically challenged pedestrians to and from sidewalks and streets.

(f)    "Dedication" shall mean the transfer of land or interest in land by the owner of such land to the City for public uses, reserving no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the uses to which the property has been dedicated.

(g)    "Developer" or "applicant" means the property owner and his/her authorized agents or contractors responsible for a project. 

(h)    "Development" shall mean any modification to any existing structure, modifications of the existing natural landscape above and below ground or water, new construction or modification of a site previously modified by human activity. 

(i)    "Director" means the Director of the Department of Public Works and Utilities of the City of Bremerton or his/her designated or authorized representative.

(j)    "Easement" means a privilege to use the land of another, or to restrict the use of the land of another, for a designated purpose. "Easement," as used herein, unless the context clearly designates otherwise, shall be an easement appurtenant, and shall be in a form approved by the City, and recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor as an encumbrance on the subservient estate.

(k)    "Gross square feet" means the total number of square feet within the finished wall surface of the outer building walls of a structure, including enclosed parking, but excluding vent shafts, outdoor courts and parking.

(l)    "High occupancy vehicle (HOV)" means an automobile, vanpool, bus or other motor vehicle with two (2) or more occupants.

(m)    "Mixed use development" means the development of a contiguous tract of land, a building or a structure with two (2) or more different uses as identified in the Land Use Code.

(n)    "Mode split" means the percentage of overall trips made by different means of transportation.

(o)    "Peak period" means the two (2) hour a.m. or p.m. period during which the greatest volume of traffic uses the road system impacted by the project traffic.

(p)    "Project" means development or redevelopment for which a City permit is required.

(q)    "Redevelopment" means either renovation of a structure where the cost or value (whichever is greater) of renovation is greater than or equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the Kitsap County assessed value of that structure, or modification of the land, where the cost or value (whichever is greater) of the modification is greater than or equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the Kitsap County assessed value of the land.

(r)    "Right-of-way (public)" means all real property dedicated to public use for street purposes, utilities, walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, parking, or buffer strips, whether improved or unimproved, including the sub-surface rights and easements related thereto.

(s)    "Single occupancy vehicle (SOV)" means a motor vehicle transporting the driver only.

(t)    "Street frontage" means any part of private or public property that borders a public right-of-way dedicated for use by motorized vehicles. 

(u)    "Street tree" means a tree planted for landscaping purposes within the public right-of-way.

(v)    Street vegetation" means vegetative plantings, including trees, used for landscaping purposes within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.060 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS REPORTS.

Traffic impact analysis reports are required for proposed development projects when the City Engineer has reason to believe that the impact on the City’s existing or planned future transportation facilities will be significant. "Significant," for this purpose, means generating, on any portion of the City’s transportation system, in excess of two percent (2%) more traffic above the existing base line at either the peak period or for the average day where the base line shall be determined by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may require the traffic study to include any elements determined necessary in order to evaluate the nature and extent of appropriate mitigation measures. The report shall contain quantification of existing traffic, including existing LOS circulation, and parking plus that for the site after the proposed project is constructed. The analysis shall consider traffic impacts during the peak period. If the development generates significant traffic volumes outside the peak period of the adjacent road system, the City Engineer will determine the appropriate time interval of the analysis. The report shall also propose means to mitigate the impacts of the project in accordance with BMC 11.12.070. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a Washington Registered Professional Engineer who is qualified in traffic engineering. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.070 TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION.

(a)    The City Engineer shall impose conditions necessary to mitigate all impacts of traffic, circulation and parking resulting from a project. For segments, intersections or other portions of the street system for which a level of service (LOS) standard has been adopted within the current comprehensive plan of the city, mitigation measures shall be sufficient, in the estimation of the City Engineer, to assure that such segments, intersections or other portions of the street system continue to meet or exceed the adopted LOS standards after full project occupancy and operation. For segments, intersections or other portions of the street system for where the present LOS is below the standard that has been adopted in the current comprehensive plan, the mitigation measure shall be sufficient in the estimation of the City Engineer to maintain or exceed the present LOS. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, channelization; intersection modifications; signal installation, modification, or replacement; installation of acceleration/deceleration lanes; turn lanes and medians.

(b)    Required traffic mitigations related to LOS standard shall not require that an applicant mitigate portions of traffic not attributable to the project.

(c)    The City Engineer may require the applicant to participate in the funding of mitigation measures required as a result of traffic impacts associated with development on the property in lieu of construction of the improvements if the City Engineer determines that the delay in construction will not adversely impact the City Transportation System, and the best interests of the public would be better served by the delay. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.080 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND DEVIATIONS.

(a)    All projects shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the current City of Bremerton Design and Construction Standards (also referred to as the engineering standards) as on file with the Department of Public Works and Utilities. The engineering standards shall also apply wherever any public work is performed within the City of Bremerton. City capital improvement projects, maintenance projects, utility projects and other projects performed by or on behalf of City employees shall meet all standards outlined in this document, except for otherwise approved deviations. These standards are not intended to apply to "resurfacing, restoration, and rehabilitation projects" as those terms are defined in the most current Local Agency Guidelines, Washington Department of Transportation (WSDOT). Except where the engineering standards or the provisions of this chapter provide otherwise, all design, construction, and materials shall conform to the most current of the following publications:

(1)    WSDOT/APWA Standard Specifications for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction, hereinafter referred to as the "WSDOT/APWA Standard Specifications";

(2)    WSDOT/APWA Standard Plans for Road, Bridge, and Municipal Construction, hereinafter referred to as the "WSDOT/APWA Standard Plans";

(3)    A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, AASHTO; "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," FHWA; and

(4)    WSDOT Local Agency General Special Provisions (GSPs) for Permeable Pavement.

(b)    An applicant may request a deviation from an engineering standard. Requests for deviation shall be made by the applicant in writing and shall include the specific standard from which deviation is requested, an engineering report, calculations, or other technical documentation that provides a basis for the deviation. The deviation may only be granted if the applicant demonstrates with clear and convincing evidence that:

(1)    The deviation is required due to geotechnical, topographical, or other physical constraints that are beyond the control of the applicant.

(2)    The unavailability of specified materials and the substitute materials will equal or exceed the performance criteria of the specified materials.

(3)    The public safety and welfare will not be adversely impacted by the deviation.

(4)    The deviation with not detract from the intent and purpose of this chapter or the engineering standards.

(5)    The other requirements of BMC 11.12.030(f) are met. (Ord. 5308 §2, 2016: Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.090 DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.

The City may require the dedication of right-of-way in order to incorporate transportation improvements that are reasonably necessary to mitigate the direct impacts of the development. The property owner may be required to dedicate right-of-way to accommodate:

(a)    Motorized and nonmotorized transportation, landscaping, LID BMPs, utility, street lighting, traffic control devices, and buffer requirements; and

(b)    Street frontage improvements where the existing right-of-way is not adequate to meet current right-of-way width requirements; and

(c)    The extension of existing or future public street improvements; and

(d)    Other transportation facilities deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works and Utilities in order to mitigate the impacts identified in the development. (Ord. 5308 §3, 2016: Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.100 EASEMENTS.

(a)    The City may require the dedication of such easements as are necessary to provide all necessary public services, utility services, and motorized and nonmotorized circulation corridors in and through the development, consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and other adopted City plans. Easements may include, but are not limited to uses for private streets, sidewalks, street lighting, traffic control devices, temporary construction, and pathways. Design features of a street may necessitate the granting of slope, wall, and drainage easements.

(b)    Nonmotorized easements may be required where necessary to facilitate pedestrian circulation between neighborhoods, schools, shopping centers and other activity centers even if the facility is not specifically shown on the City’s comprehensive plan.

(c)    Nonmotorized easements shall be wide enough to include the trail width and a minimum clear distance of two (2) feet on each side of the trail. Easement width may vary according to site-specific design issues such as topography, buffering, and landscaping.

(d)    Nonmotorized easements shall be designated "City of Bremerton Nonmotorized Public Easement" and easement documents shall specify maintenance responsibilities. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.110 STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS.

(a)    The installation of street frontage improvements in accordance with the engineering standards is required prior to issuance of development and building permits for all new development and redevelopment for all land use types, unless one (1) or more of the following exceptions are met:

(1)    The property is undergoing redevelopment, is zoned as single-family residential, has one (1) single-family residence, and has less than two hundred (200) feet of total frontage;

(2)    Adjacent street frontage improvements are unlikely to be installed in the foreseeable future as determined by the Director; or

(3)    The installation of the required improvement would cause significant adverse environmental impacts.

(b)    Complete street frontage improvements shall be installed along the entire street frontage of the property at the sole cost of the applicant as directed by the Director. Street frontage improvements may include curb, gutter, sidewalk, storm drainage, street lighting, traffic signal equipment, utility installation or relocation, landscaping strip, LID BMPs, trail, street trees and landscaping, irrigation, street widening, turn pockets, and channelization or other improvements deemed necessary by the Director to mitigate the impacts of the development. Specific improvements will vary on a site-by-site basis and shall be determined by the Director. Beyond the property frontage, the applicant shall provide ramps from the new sidewalk or walkway to the existing shoulder, and pavement and channelization tapering back to the existing pavement and channelization as needed for safety and in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

(c)    When, due to site topography, City plans for improvement projects, or other similar reasons, the City Engineer determines that street frontage improvements cannot or should not be constructed at the time of building construction, the Director may, in his/her discretion, allow the applicant to pay to the City an amount equal to the property owner’s cost of installing the required improvements. Payment shall be made prior to issuance of a building permit. The property owner shall provide documentation satisfactory to the City of materials costs, quantities, and labor costs; or, in the Director’s discretion, record an agreement binding to the property, which provides for these improvements to be installed and paid for by the property owner by a date acceptable to the City; and record an agreement binding to the property to not protest a local improvement district to improve the street frontage. (Ord. 5308 §4, 2016: Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.120 LANDSCAPING IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY, EASEMENTS AND ACCESS TRACTS.

(a)    Preservation of existing street trees and landscaping may be required along City streets as a condition of permit approval.

(b)    For any development wherever it is necessary to remove or relocate street vegetation in connection with the widening of the street or highway, the paving of a sidewalk, or the installation of ingress or egress, the property owner shall replant such vegetation in size and kind or replace them according to engineering standards, as determined by the City Engineer, and BMC 13.10.080.

(c)    Any existing landscaping in the right-of-way not included in the development plans that is disturbed by construction activity on private property shall be replaced or restored to its original condition by the property owner.

(d)    Landscaping and other improvements within the right-of-way are subject to removal at the request of the City when the right-of-way is needed for public use.

(e)    Street Tree and Landscaping Installation Requirement.

(1)    Street landscape installation or improvement is required when applicable projects are to be undertaken along major arterials and other streets as identified in the Comprehensive Plan and in accordance with the engineering standards.

(2)    Ground cover shall be provided for site frontage right-of-way with a potential for erosion.

(f)    Species Selection. Selection of tree species shall comply with the engineering standards, Chapter 13.10 BMC, and the Comprehensive Plan.

(g)    Maintenance of plant materials shall be in accordance with Chapters 6.08 and 13.10 BMC. (Ord. 5154 §2, 2011: Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.130 PRIVATE STREETS.

Private streets will be allowed only when the comprehensive plan does not designate the area will be served by a public street, and the following criteria are met:

(a)    The street design and construction is in conformance with engineering standards; and

(b)    A covenant which provides for maintenance and repair of the private street by property owners has been approved by the City and recorded with Kitsap County; and

(c)    The covenant includes a condition that the private street will remain open at all times for emergency and public service vehicles; and

(d)    The private street would not hinder public street circulation; and

(e)    At least one (1) of the following conditions exists:

(1)    The street would ultimately serve four (4) or fewer lots; or

(2)    The street would ultimately serve more than four (4) lots, and the City Engineer and the Fire Chief determine that no other access is available. In addition, the proposed private street would be adequate for transportation and fire access needs, and the private street would be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood character; or the private street would be part of a Planned Unit Development; or the private street would serve commercial or industrial facilities where no circulation continuity is necessary as determined by the City. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.140 ACCEPTANCE OF PRIVATE STREETS AS DEDICATED PUBLIC STREETS.

Acceptance of private streets as dedicated public streets will be considered if the street meets all City street design and construction standards for public streets at the time the dedication is requested. Consideration of acceptance is also subject to the requirements of other City of Bremerton departments. Final acceptance is subject to City Council approval. The following criteria will be evaluated:

(a)    Acceptability of street and utility construction. Pavement condition shall be brought up to the standards of new construction and the observable condition index is ninety (90) or greater as determined by the City Engineer.

(b)    Condition of title.

(c)    Survey requirements for monumentation and conveyance.

(d)    The need for additional right-of-way and easements.

(e)    The benefit to the public of accepting the dedication.

(f)    Cost of accepting the street, including future maintenance costs. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.150 DRIVEWAYS.

(a)    Driveways and parking areas shall be designed such that vehicles attempting to enter the driveway or parking area will not impede vehicles in the travel lane of the public street.

(b)    Whenever possible, access for commercial and multifamily property shall be provided onto streets that do not abut single-family residential land uses.

(c)    Combined driveways for adjoining properties are encouraged. In conjunction with approval of a development, the City may require the applicant to provide an access and circulation easement to an abutting owner where joint access is reasonable to serve future development.

(d)    The installation of driveways onto arterials may be denied if alternate access is available. Owners applying for development permits on State routes and principal arterials shall demonstrate that they have made efforts to reduce the number of driveways along their frontage through formation of private shared easements or other means as a result of their projects.

(e)    The continued use of pre-existing driveways must meet all requirements of this section with the development of a site.

(f)    All abandoned driveways on the street frontage to be improved shall be removed and new curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be installed.

(g)    Driveway approach grade and configuration shall accommodate planned future street widening in accordance with the comprehensive plan to prevent the need for major driveway reconstruction.

(h)    No commercial driveway will be approved where backing onto the sidewalk or street will occur.

(i)    The City may restrict left turns to and from a driveway, either at the time of development or in the future, without compensating the property owner for any resulting impacts as a result of such restriction.

(j)    Unless there exists no other access to the property in question, the City will not permit any driveway to be located any closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other driveway, measured from nearest edge to nearest edge. If there exists no other access to the property in question, driveways shall be located as far apart as reasonably possible.

(k)    Unless there exists no other access to the property in question, the City will not permit any driveway to be located any closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the nearest cross street, measured from nearest edge to nearest edge. If there exists no other access to the property, the driveway shall be located as far away from the cross street as possible. Access onto State highways shall conform to Chapter 468-52 WAC.

(l)    The City shall not permit more than one (1) driveway or street opening on any property having a street frontage on principal arterials of two hundred (200) feet or less.

(m)    On streets other than principal arterials, the City shall not permit more than one (1) driveway or street opening on any property having a street frontage of one hundred (100) feet or less.

(n)    Driveways shall be located at least five (5) feet from the property line.

(o)    Driveways onto principal arterials, including State routes, shall include deceleration lane, and acceleration lanes.

(p)    Deviations from this section may be approved at the discretion of the Director if:

(1)    The modification is reasonable and necessary for development of the property; and

(2)    The modification will not create an unsafe condition for motorists or pedestrians. (Ord. 4856 §5, 2003)


11.12.160 PRIVATE INTERSECTION OPENING.

A private intersection opening may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer in lieu of a conventional driveway when the projected driveway traffic is greater than one thousand (1,000) vehicles per day.

(a)    A private intersection may include the following elements:

(1)    Traffic signalization;

(2)    Easements;

(3)    A minimum one hundred (100) foot storage area turn pocket plus taper between the face of curb and any turning or parking maneuvers within the development;

(4)    The opening is at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the near side face of curb of the nearest intersecting street;

(5)    The opening is at least one hundred (100) feet from any other driveway on the property frontage under the control of the property owner. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.170 STREET ENDS.

(a)    All dead-end public streets and private streets shall be designed as a cul-de-sac, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section.

(b)    A "hammerhead" turnaround may be used in lieu of a cul-de-sac if the street is less than two hundred (200) feet long and serves six (6) or fewer lots. Such an alternative design may be used if approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.180 PARKING CIRCULATION.

Parking lot and circulation needs shall be met on site. The public right-of-way shall not be used as part of one-way parking lot flow, or other site circulation. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.190 TRAFFIC SIGNALS.

(a)    When a proposed street or driveway design interferes with existing traffic signal facilities, traffic signal modification or relocation must be provided and paid for by the applicant.

(b)    To mitigate the traffic impacts of a development, modification of an existing signal or installation of a new signal may be required to be provided and paid for by the applicant as determined by the Director.

(c)    All traffic signal design modifications shall be prepared by a Washington Registered Professional Engineer experienced in traffic signal design and included in the traffic impact analysis report specified in BMC 11.12.060. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.200 STREET LIGHTING.

(a)    Street lighting is required along all public streets, including new public streets in subdivisions and short subdivisions in accordance with the engineering standards and BMC 11.12.110. The property owner is responsible for design and installation of new lighting and relocation of existing lighting along the street frontage of the development.

(b)    All street light installations, including wiring, conduit, and power connections, shall be located or relocated underground except in residential areas with existing above-ground utilities.

(c)    For new subdivisions, the City will accept maintenance and power cost responsibility for the public street light system when a subdivision is fifty percent (50%) or more occupied. Until then, the property owner shall remain responsible for the maintenance of and energy charges for the street lighting system. The property owner shall notify the City when fifty percent (50%) occupancy is obtained.

(d)    The City will not accept maintenance and power cost responsibility for a public street light system that does not conform to the City’s most current engineering standards.

(e)    Street illumination in accordance with engineering standards is required at the intersection of a private street and a public street. No street lighting is required along a private street. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.210 TRAFFIC CONTROL.

(a)    Temporary traffic control to ensure traffic and pedestrian safety during construction activities must be provided by the property owner at the owner’s expense. A plan meeting the approval of the City Engineer must be developed prior to starting construction activities.

(b)    The developer is responsible for supplying and installing all necessary permanent traffic control devices such as street name signs, stop signs, speed limit signs, and channelization, all in accordance with City Standards and the MUTCD.

(c)    Neighborhood traffic control devices such as speed humps, traffic circles, curb extensions, etc., are devices used to control vehicle speeds and cut-through traffic. Installation of these devices will be permitted only in accordance with engineering standards and warrants, and with approval by the City Engineer. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.220 UTILITY COMPANIES.

(a)    Subject to the rules, regulations and schedules of the WUTC for private utilities, utility companies with facilities in City right-of-way shall relocate their facilities at their own expense when the relocation is necessary to accommodate public street improvements. The improvement work must be required by the City in order for the relocation work to be the financial responsibility of the utility; otherwise, all costs shall be the responsibility of the property owner. In the event such utility company is subject to a franchise agreement or right-of-way use agreement with the City, such agreement shall control any relocation requirement. 

(b)    All new utility transmission, distribution or collection systems in new subdivisions and short subdivisions, including power, telephone, television, cable, Internet cable, and all other communications shall be installed underground unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement or right-of-way agreement.

(c)    Above-ground utility devices (e.g., poles and transformers) shall be located as shown in the engineering standards and shall not under any circumstances reduce the unobstructed width of the sidewalk to less than forty-two (42) inches.

(d)    Utility companies are subject to the Department of Public Works and Utilities policies regarding "Type B Right-of-Way Use," "Elimination of Nuisance Utility Poles," "Trenching in the Right-of-Way," and other policies as prepared and updated by the Director. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.230 STREET INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS.

No new development, redevelopment, and maintenance of existing conditions (e.g., parking, vegetation growth, or other obstructions) shall result in obstruction of sight distance to motor vehicle operators as determined by the Director. Specific criteria for identification of sight obstructions are set forth in the City’s Engineering Design and construction standards. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.240 SIGHT DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PEDESTRIAN SAFETY.

(a)    The minimum sight distance for pedestrian safety shall be determined as follows: the driver of an exiting vehicle shall be able to view a one (1) foot-high object in the center of a sidewalk or shoulder and located fifteen (15) feet away from either edge of the driveway throat when the driver’s eye is fifteen (15) feet behind the back of the sidewalk.

(b)    The minimum sight distance defined in subsection (a) of this section shall be maintained at all driveways, buildings, and garage entrances where structures, wing walls, etc., are located adjacent to or in close proximity to a pedestrian walkway.

(c)    Sight lines to traffic control devices such as signs, signals, etc., shall not be obscured by landscaping, street furniture, marquees, awnings, or other such obstructions. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.250 PAVEMENT RESTORATION FOR TRENCHING IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.

(a)    Construction in the right-of-way including trenching, excavation and pavement restoration shall be in accordance with the engineering standards.

(b)    Public street pavement shall not be degraded by trenching, excavation, and pavement restoration activities without due compensation to the City. Deviations to subsection (a) of this section may be approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities upon written request by the applicant and demonstration of a satisfactory alternative.

(c)    A five (5) year moratorium on pavement trenching is effective upon completion of new street construction and upon pavement overlay of an existing street. Deviations to this subsection may be approved by the Director under compelling circumstances and emergencies, such as utility failures, main breaks, etc. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


11.12.260 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement and/or enforcement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 4856 §5 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 11.15 ON STREET PAID PARKING

Sections:

11.15.010    ESTABLISHED.


11.15.010 ESTABLISHED.

That on-street paid parking is hereby established:

(1)    On Second Street, west of Washington Avenue

(2)    On Fourth Street, east of Park Avenue

(3)    On Burwell Street, between Pacific Avenue and Washington Avenue

(4)    On Second Street between Washington Avenue and the Boardwalk as referenced in Exhibit A, drawing of proposed on-street parking locations, and incorporated herein.

(5)    On Fifth Street, east of Park Avenue as referenced in Exhibit A1, drawing of proposed on-street parking location and incorporated herein. (Ord. 4736, Amended, 12/01/2000; Ord. 4712, Added, 06/23/2000)


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



Chapter 11.18 ADDRESSING

Sections:

11.18.010    PURPOSE.

11.18.015    POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.

11.18.020    ADDRESS GRID MAP.

11.18.030    DEFINITIONS.

11.18.040    DESIGNATION OF WAY OF TRAVEL.

11.18.050    COMPLIANCE WITH ADOPTED CODES.

11.18.060    NUMERICAL DESIGNATION OF BUILDINGS AND REAL PROPERTY.

11.18.070    DENOTING OF WAYS OF TRAVEL (STREET NAMING).

11.18.090    DISPLAY OF DESIGNATIONS.

11.18.100    ENFORCEMENT.


11.18.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter provides the procedures and guidelines for regulating addressing within the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.015 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.

(a)    The City Engineer, or his or her designee, is authorized and empowered to assign and/or change numerical address designations of buildings and real property.

(b)    New addresses shall be assigned in conjunction with an approved building permit and/or during the plat approval process.

(c)    Public street names shall be established during the plat approval process or by a resolution adopted by the City Council. Private street names shall be established and approved by the City Engineer in accordance with this chapter.

(d)    The City Engineer, or his or her designee, is authorized to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and develop policies and procedures necessary to ensure the proper implementation of these provisions.

(e)    The City Engineer, or his or her designee, is authorized and empowered to designate streets if determined to be in the interest of public safety. If there are multiple segments or branches of a street, it will be at the City Engineer’s discretion, in cooperation with Cencom, as to the number of street names assigned.

(f)    The processing fees for assignment of new addresses and petitions for street naming shall be in accordance with BMC 3.01.010 (Public Works and Utilities - Rate Table G).

(g)    The City Engineer, or his or her designee, is authorized and empowered to deviate from the addressing criteria established by this chapter for the designation of streets and the addressing of property as deemed necessary for public safety purposes. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.020 ADDRESS GRID MAP.

This chapter recognizes the Kitsap County Official Addressing Map and the mapping grid established by City Ordinance No. 837, dated June 1, 1928. The maps will be utilized as a guide for assigning addresses within the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.030 DEFINITIONS.

Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(a)    "Address" means the appropriate combination of address number (numerical designation), directional prefix or suffix, street name, and street type, e.g., 2300 E. 11th Street.

(b)    "Address grid system" means the theoretical network established by Kitsap County and as modified for the 1928 address grid map as established per the City of Bremerton Ordinance No. 837 which is a theoretical network of uniformly spaced horizontal and perpendicular lines used to establish regularly spaced intervals as the basis for assigning address numbers.

(c)    "Avenue" means a way of travel that runs generally north and south.

(d)    "Boulevard" means a way of travel where the lanes of travel are separated, for example, by a barrier, landscaped area, or similar divider.

(e)    "Circle" means a small, loop-type way of travel where exit and entry are the same.

(f)    "Commercial occupancies," for addressing purposes, means all other occupancy groups not defined as residential occupancies. (Typically constructed in accordance with the International Building Code, for example, commercial occupancies would include: retail stores, office buildings, multifamily residential buildings, hotels, hospitals, schools, warehouses, storage buildings, churches, etc.)

(g)    "Court" means a way of travel, which runs generally east and west and ends in a cul-de-sac.

(h)    "Cul-de-sac" means a way of travel that dead-ends with provisions for turning around large emergency and public utility vehicles.

(i)    "Department" means the City of Bremerton Engineering Division within the Public Works and Utilities Department.

(j)    "Drive" means an irregular or diagonal way of travel.

(k)    "Group R occupancies," for addressing purposes, means all occupancies classified as Group R in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Bremerton as well as all "residential occupancies" as defined herein.

(l)    "Group U occupancies," for addressing purposes, means all occupancies classified as Group U in accordance with the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Bremerton, as well as residential accessory buildings such as outbuildings, detached private garages, sheds and carports constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code.

(m)    "Lane" means a way of travel which is usually on private property or road tract and which is generally maintained with private funds.

(n)    "Loop" means a way of travel that has two (2) exits or entrances originating from the same way of travel.

(o)    "Place" means a way of travel that runs generally north and south and that is generally parallel to, but shorter than, an avenue and ends in a cul-de-sac.

(p)    "Private street or road" means a street or road that is on private property and which is maintained with private funds.

(q)    "Residential occupancies," for addressing purposes, means detached one (1) and two (2) family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress, and typically constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code.

(r)    "Road" means a way of travel that has been designated as a road or which is an extension of an existing road.

(s)    "Street" means a way of travel that runs generally east and west.

(t)    "Way" means a way of travel that runs generally east and west which is generally parallel to, but shorter than, a street.

(u)    "Way of travel" means a roadway of any definition, including, but not limited to, avenues, boulevards, circles, courts, drives, loops, places, lanes, roads, streets, and ways, which is capable of carrying vehicular traffic.

(v)    "Street name sign" means a sign designating the name of a way of travel. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.040 DESIGNATION OF WAY OF TRAVEL.

(a)    Ways of travel running generally and predominantly east and west shall have a numerical designation or a designated name for the entire way of travel in which they are situated when initially named. These shall generally have a street type designated as "Street."

(b)    Ways of travel running generally and predominantly east and west but are not a continuation of an existing numbered street may be designated by a name for the entire way of travel.

(c)    Ways of travel running generally and predominantly north and south shall be designated by a name for the entire way of travel in which they are situated when initially named. These shall generally have a street type designated as "Avenue."

(d)    For annexed areas, the names shall remain the same except when deemed necessary to be changed by the City of Bremerton for clarification for public safety purposes.

(e)    Ways of travel shall be designated by a name in accordance with BMC 11.18.070. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.050 COMPLIANCE WITH ADOPTED CODES.

This chapter shall comply with Section 505 of the International Fire Code as amended by BMC 18.02.060. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.060 NUMERICAL DESIGNATION OF BUILDINGS AND REAL PROPERTY.

(a)    Buildings with an occupancy classification other than Group U shall be designated numerically. For measurement purposes in determining the numerical designation, the location of the main entrance to the property on which the building is situated or unimproved real property shall be used.

(b)    Buildings with an occupancy classification of Group U, or buildings accessory to those that are numerically designated, may be designated numerically at the discretion of the director provided appropriate justification can be established indicating the need for a separate numerical designation.

(c)    Buildings with multiple tenant spaces, suites or dwelling units shall receive one (1) numerical designation per building.

(d)    Community or public facilities without structures, such as parks and utilities, shall also receive numerical designations.

Exceptions:

(1)    Mini-storage complexes may have one (1) address for multiple buildings provided each building is designated with the numerical designation of the complex as well as the individual unit designation and the site plan showing all building and unit designations is submitted to and approved by the Engineering Division and Fire Department.

(2)    Residential duplexes and triplexes shall have separate numerical designations unless there are not enough numerical designations then each will have a unit number.

(3)    Residential units (such as townhouses) with zero lot lines and separate outside entrances under separate ownership shall have individual numerical designations.

(4)    Portable classrooms and temporary structures shall use the main building address unless separate addresses are required by the Fire Department.

(e)    Numerical designations shall be assigned based on the geographic direction of the way of travel, as determined by observing its overall length and noting its general or predominant direction as follows:

(1)    Even numerical designations shall be assigned to the north and east sides of ways of travel and odd numerical designations shall be assigned to the south and west sides of ways of travel.

(2)    The numbering for north and south running streets shall begin at 1st Street and the extension thereof. Numbers north of 1st Street shall begin with the one hundred (100) block and get larger as they go north. Numbers south of 1st Street shall begin with the one hundred (100) block and get larger as they go south. Note: see grid map adopted by City Ordinance No. 837, in 1928.

(3)    The numbering for the east and west running streets shall begin at the point at east side of the Port Washington Narrows and begin with the one hundred (100) block and get larger away from the Narrows as they proceed in each east or west direction. Note: see grid map adopted by City Ordinance No. 837, in 1928.

(4)    The numbering for areas annexed after 1977 shall remain the same provided they may be changed by the City of Bremerton for clarification for public safety purposes.

(f)    From the point of origin, when possible, even and odd numerical designations shall be assigned sequentially and opposite one another for the entire way of travel in which they are situated when initially named.

Exceptions:

(1)    Buildings and real property situated on a circle, court, or loop shall be numbered consecutively beginning at the point of origin and proceeding progressively around such circle, court or loop in a clockwise direction.

(2)    Where there is a clear dividing line at the closed end, one (1) side may be even and the other side odd numbers.

(g)    Buildings with multiple tenant spaces, suites or dwelling units shall have the suites/units further identified with suite, unit or apartment numbers. Assignment of suite or apartment numbers of commercial occupancies shall be from left to right facing the buildings or units. All suite, apartment or unit numbers shall use "100" numbers for units located on the first floor of buildings, "200" numbers for units located on the second floor, "300" numbers for units on the third floor, and continue likewise for successive floors. Suite, unit or apartment numbers on floor levels below the first floor (sub-grade levels) shall use the letter "S" preceding the suite/unit numbers. For example, on the floor level immediately below the first floor, "S100" numbers shall be used. The next floor level down shall use "S200" numbers and continue likewise for successive sub-grade or basement levels.

(1)    Multi-unit commercial occupancies, other than Group R, shall have suite/unit numbers in ten (10) number increments, whenever possible, to ensure adequate opportunity for future changes to be numbered in correct order.

(2)    Multi-unit commercial occupancies with Group R units shall have suite/unit numbers consecutively. For example, a multi-unit Group R building would have suite/units 100, 101, 102, 103 on the first floor, suite/units 200, 201, 202, 203 on the second floor, etc. A multi-unit Group R building with interior access corridors may use consecutive even and odd numbers on opposite sides of the corridor. Suite/unit numbers of different floors, whenever possible, shall be "stacked"; for example, unit 112 should be directly below unit 212, which would be directly below unit 312, etc.

(h)    Commercial tenant spaces, suites, or dwelling units that open directly to the face of the building shall each have a separate whole numerical designation whenever possible.

(i)    The Department is authorized to take all lawful action to change the address numbers of parcels or units that do not meet the criteria of this chapter. Address numbers will be changed primarily for public safety reasons to ensure that adequate emergency services can be directed to the address.

Address numbers may be changed for the following reasons:

(1)    When duplicate address numbers are present.

(2)    When an odd numbered address is located among even numbered addresses or when an even numbered address is located among odd numbered addresses.

(3)    In the event the address number is not consistent with the adjacent addresses (i.e., 911 Burwell is located between 901 and 905 Burwell).

(4)    In the event that the address does not match the proper block number as required by the street grid map (i.e., 1100 Burwell is located on the 1400 block of Burwell).

(j)    The Department is authorized to take all lawful action to make address changes to addresses that do not meet the criteria of this chapter provided all of the following procedures are followed:

(1)    A notice of intent to change the address number shall be sent via U.S. mail to the property owner and other interested parties. This may include the Post Office, Cencom, and the Fire Department.

(2)    All notified parties shall have thirty (30) days to respond to the Department in writing with any comments on the proposed action. These comments may be considered prior to making an administrative decision.

(3)    If it is determined that the address number should be changed, a notice of administrative decision to change the address number will be sent via U.S. mail to all persons impacted by the proposed action.

(4)    Appeal of the administrative decision may be made to the Administrative Hearing Examiner in writing within thirty (30) days following the issuance of the notice of decision in accordance with BMC 2.13.090.

(5)    When the process is complete, notice will be provided to each parcel owner notifying them of the new address number assignment. The parcel owners shall have the new address numbers posted within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.070 DENOTING OF WAYS OF TRAVEL (STREET NAMING).

(a)    Ways of travel may be named when they serve a minimum of three (3) or more parcels, or three (3) or more buildings with an occupancy group other than Group U. Requests for street names shall be petitioned to, and approved by, the Department. The street name is the principal identifying component of a full street name, which in most cases should uniquely distinguish a street from all others. In addition to emergency response, addresses are used to record the location of events and objects in databases throughout the County. It is important that street names be easy to input correctly. The following street name criteria reflect that need as well as the needs of emergency response:

(1)    No street name shall be used more than once. For example, two (2) streets may not be named Cedar even if they have different street types.

(2)    Street names shall not sound alike. For example, two (2) streets may not be named Stephen and Steven.

(3)    Names that tend to be mispronounced or misspelled shall not be used. For example, names like Javelina, Weimaraner, and Perseverance are either hard to spell or pronounce and would be subject to increased scrutiny during the name review process.

(4)    Street names should be limited to thirteen (13) characters or less.

(5)    Two (2) word names that sound like one (1) word names, or one (1) word names that sound like two (2) word names, shall not be used. For example, names like Clearlake, Clear Lake, and Baytree would not be acceptable.

(6)    Names that include directional words such as North, South, East, or West shall be avoided. For example, North East Beach would not be acceptable.

(7)    Names that include punctuation shall be used without the punctuation. For example, George’s Road would be approved as NW Georges Road.

(8)    No segment of any street shall have more than one (1) name. For example, Riddell Road on one (1) side of the street and Riddell Road NW on the other side of the street.

(9)    The Department shall promote street name continuity. For example, a private or unmaintained City or County street extending from the end of a dead-end City or County maintained street shall retain the same name as the City or County street.

(10)    Street names shall not include any of the road types listed in BMC 11.18.030, Definitions. For example, Mountain Loop Road would not be an acceptable name.

(b)    Street name changes may be initiated by the City of Bremerton when the street name fails to meet the criteria in subsection (a) of this section. The Department shall work in cooperation with Cencom and other Departments in making changes. Except as detailed in this section, existing street names shall not be required to meet the criteria of this chapter.

(c)    The Department is authorized to take all lawful action to change a street name that does not meet the criteria of this chapter provided all of the following procedures are followed:

(1)    A notice of intent to change the street name shall be sent via U.S. mail to all persons impacted by the proposed action. This may include the owners of properties which are currently addressed on that street, the Post Office, Cencom, and the Fire Department.

(2)    All notified parties shall have thirty (30) days to respond to the Department in writing with any comments on the proposed action. These comments shall be considered prior to making an administrative decision.

(3)    If it is determined that the street name should be changed, a notice of administrative decision to change the street name will be sent via U.S. mail to all persons impacted by the proposed action.

(4)    Appeal of the administrative decision may be made to the Administrative Hearing Examiner in writing within thirty (30) days following the issuance of the notice of decision in accordance with BMC 2.13.090.

(5)    When the street naming process is complete, notice shall be provided to each parcel owner notifying them of the new street name. The parcel owners on private or unmaintained streets shall post new road signs within thirty (30) days.

(d)    All new or replaced road name signs shall be constructed and placed pursuant to the City of Bremerton public works sign standards. Costs and maintenance of any road signs for a private or unmaintained street shall be the sole responsibility of the parcel owners on said street. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.090 DISPLAY OF DESIGNATIONS.

(a)    The owner, occupant, tenant, lessee or any other person or entity having an interest in any addressed building shall conspicuously display the numerical designation assigned to such building. The numerical designation shall be easily legible with numerals displayed upon a contrasting background, for example, black on white, or white on blue, etc. Whenever possible, numerical designations should not be placed on window glazing.

(1)    New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half (0.5) inch. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.

(2)    Housing developments which contain one hundred (100) or more dwelling units which alley ways are or may be used for access to dwelling units shall have four (4) inch high minimum house numbers including street designation included. The street designation may be a smaller size, but no less than two (2) inches in size.

(3)    Address numbers for commercial buildings shall be twelve (12) inches high and contrast with the background. Individual unit/suite or space numbers or letters shall be six (6) inches high, contrasting with the background, and visible from the approach side or angle.

(b)    Premises Identification. Approved numbers or address shall be posted for all new and existing buildings in such a position, facing the way of travel, as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property. If the numerical designation of the building is not clearly visible from a named way of travel, the numerical designation shall also be displayed near the main entrance to the property and the driveway entrance upon which the building is situated. During the construction of buildings, the numerical designation shall be posted at the premises prior to requesting any Department inspections. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


11.18.100 ENFORCEMENT.

The City Engineer or City Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce this chapter, in accordance with Chapter 1.04 BMC. (Ord. 5171 §1 (part), 2011)


Chapter 11.20 VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:

11.20.010    PURPOSE.

11.20.020    TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

11.20.030    CONSTRUCTION - INTENT.

11.20.040    DEFINITIONS.

11.20.050    ESTABLISHING SUFFICIENCY OF SIGNATURES ON PETITIONS.

11.20.060    OWNERS RESPONSIBILITY TO NOTIFY OTHER PROPERTY INTERESTS.

11.20.070    PETITION FOR VACATION BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.

11.20.080    CITY INITIATED VACATION.

11.20.090    LIMITATIONS ON VACATIONS WHICH ABUT BODIES OF WATER.

11.20.100    FIXING TIME FOR HEARING.

11.20.110    NOTICE OF HEARING.

11.20.120    HEARING.

11.20.130    RECORDING OF VACATION ORDINANCE.

11.20.140    COMPENSATION.

11.20.150    FEES.


11.20.010 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the requirements for the vacation of public rights-of-way in accordance with Chapter 35.79 RCW. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.020 TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.

This chapter and the procedures adopted hereunder shall be in effect throughout the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.030 CONSTRUCTION - INTENT.

A.    This chapter is enacted to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes.

B.    It is expressly the purpose of this chapter and any procedures adopted hereunder to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder.

C.    It is the specific intent of this chapter and any policies adopted hereunder to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this chapter upon the applicant, and no provision is intended to impose any duty upon the City of Bremerton, or any of its officers, employees or agents. Nothing contained in this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder is intended to be or shall be construed to create or form the basis for liability on the part of the City of Bremerton, or its officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions hereof, or by reason or in consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or any procedures adopted hereunder by the City of Bremerton, its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.040 DEFINITIONS.

"City" means the City of Bremerton, Washington.

"Department" means the Public Works and Utilities Department or other Department designated by the Mayor.

"Director" means the Director of Public Works and Utilities or his/her designated representative.

"Engineering Division" means the Engineering Division of the Department.

"Front footage" means the amount of property that abuts a right-of-way to be vacated as measured in lineal footage.

"Front footage basis" means the ratio of the front footage of one or more properties on a right-of-way to be vacated to the total front footage of the right-of-way to be vacated.

"Owner" means one who has an interest in real estate or private property as listed in the records of the County Treasurer.

"Property" means real estate including any lot, tract or parcel or other subdivision of land.

"Right-of-way" means all public streets and property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for street and alley purposes, together with public property granted or reserved for, or dedicated to, public use for walkways, sidewalks, bikeways, parking, and horse trails, whether improved or unimproved, including the air rights, sub-surface rights and easements related thereto. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.050 ESTABLISHING SUFFICIENCY OF SIGNATURES ON PETITIONS.

A.    Sufficiency of Signature. For the purpose of determining the sufficiency of signature(s) of owner(s) on the petition, or consent to vacate the following rules shall govern:

1.    The signature of every owner of a property as determined by the records of the County Treasurer are necessary to bind that property.

2.    In the case of ownership by a corporation, the signature of any officer authorized by the bylaws or resolution of the board of directors shall be sufficient when evidenced by an excerpt of the said bylaws or said resolution, certified by the secretary of said corporation, granting such authority.

3.    In the case of property owned by the estate of a decedent or incompetent, the signature of the duly qualified administrator or executor or guardian shall be equivalent to the signature of the owner of the property.

B.    The City will rely upon the records of the County Treasurer to determine the owner(s) of a property. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.060 OWNERS RESPONSIBILITY TO NOTIFY OTHER PROPERTY INTERESTS.

It is the responsibility of the owner listed in the County Treasurer’s Records to notify other persons or entities who have interest in the property who are not listed with the County Treasurer’s Office of the proposed vacation. This may include, but not be limited to a mortgagor or contract vendor for purchase of the property. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.070 PETITION FOR VACATION BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.

A.    General. The owners of an interest in any property abutting upon any street or alley who may desire to vacate the street or alley, or any part thereof, may petition the City Council to make vacation. The petition application shall be filed with the Engineering Division. If the petition is signed by the owners of more than two-thirds of the property on a front footage basis abutting upon the part of such street or alley sought to be vacated, the council, shall by resolution, fix a time when the petition will be heard.

B.    Petition application. To initiate a vacation by petition, the applicant must provide the following:

1.    The petition signed by owners of more than two-thirds of the property, on a front footage basis, abutting upon the part of such street or alley sought to be vacated.

2.    A legal description of the area sought to be vacated.

3.    A scale drawing of the part of the street or alley sought to be vacated. The drawing shall show the right-of-way lines, location of any existing surface features such as curbs and gutters, catch basins or power lines, and the locations of existing underground features such as water lines or gas lines.

4.    A letter from each utility company that describes any existing or future facilities in the area sought to be vacated and whether any easements are required to be provided prior to a vacation.

5.    Payment of the application fee.

6.    Any other information that may be required by the Director or as specified by this chapter or the policies adopted hereunder, including but not limited to a title report, a survey of the area sought to be vacated by a surveyor registered in Washington, or other information to clarify issues that may arise because of the proposed vacation.

C.    Application reviewed. Upon receipt of the application to vacate a portion of the right-of-way, the City will review the accuracy and completeness of the application. The review will include, but not be limited to evaluating: the petition signatures, the legal description, the drawing and the utility letters. If the application is incomplete, the City shall notify the applicant of the errors or omissions and request the information necessary to complete the application. The information must be provided within sixty (60) days, unless otherwise extended by the City, or the application shall be considered terminated.

D.    Staff report. When the application review is complete the City will prepare a draft staff report on the proposed right-of-way vacation that provides information and a recommendation on issues that the council must make a determination on in the hearing, the amount of compensation to be paid to the City, and any easements that must be retained.

E.    Applicant notification for hearing. The City will notify the applicant that the application is considered complete and provide a copy of the draft staff report. Should the applicant elect to proceed, the compensation for the area sought to be vacated shall be paid to the City prior to establishing a hearing date. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.080 CITY INITIATED VACATION.

A.    The City Council may initiate a vacation by adopting a resolution. The same resolution may fix the vacation hearing time.

B.    Objections. Where the vacation proceeding is initiated by resolution of the council without a petition of the abutting property owners, if 50 percent of the abutting property owners file written objection to the proposed vacation with the City Clerk prior to the time of the hearing, the City Council shall be prohibited from proceeding with the vacation.

C.    Fees waived. In the event that the City Council initiates a right-of-way vacation, fees shall not be required unless the council directs otherwise.

D.    Compensation waived. In the event that the City Council initiates a right-of-way vacation, compensation shall not be required unless the City Council directs otherwise. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.090 LIMITATIONS ON VACATIONS WHICH ABUT BODIES OF WATER.

The City shall not vacate a street or alley, or any portion of a street or alley which abuts a body of salt or fresh water without first complying with the requirements for the vacation of such as set forth in RCW 35.79.035 as presently enacted or subsequently amended. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.100 FIXING TIME FOR HEARING.

Upon meeting all requirements of the application for a petition to vacate or passage of a resolution for City-initiated vacation by the City Council, the City Council shall by resolution fix a time when the hearing on the proposed vacation will be heard. The hearing shall not be more than sixty (60) days or less than twenty (20) days after the date of passage of such resolution. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.110 NOTICE OF HEARING.

Upon passage of the resolution fixing the time for a public hearing, the City Clerk shall cause a written notice of the pendency of the petition to be posted, at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the date set for hearing, in three public places in the City and a like notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on that portion of the street or alley sought to be vacated. Copies of such notice shall be mailed, at least 15 calendar days prior to the date of hearing, to each owner of property abutting the right-of-way proposed to be vacated, including the petitioners at a local address if a resident of the city, otherwise to the last address showing on the records of the County Auditor. Said notice shall contain a statement in that the City Council has set a hearing on a proposal to vacate the portion described in the notice together with a statement of the time and place fixed for the hearing of the petition and inviting interested persons to appear and be heard for or against the granting thereof or to submit written comment prior to that date. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.120 HEARING.

A.    Hearing. At the time appointed for the hearing of the vacation petition or resolution, or at such time as the same may be adjourned to by the City Council, the matter shall be considered and persons desiring to speak for or against the vacation thereof shall be heard. Following such hearing, the City Council shall determine:

1.    Whether the street, alley or portion thereof is no longer required for public use; and vacation of the described portion will better serve the public good; and

2.    Whether the vacation is consistent with the City Comprehensive Plan; and

3.    Whether the continued use of the proposed vacation as a public way is not of such public benefit as not to justify the cost of maintenance; and

4.    Whether the substitution of a new and different thoroughfare would be more useful to the public; and

5.    Whether conditions may so change in the future as to provide a greater public use or need than presently exists; and

6.    Whether objections to the proposed vacation are made by owners of private property (exclusive or petitioners) abutting the same.

B.    Public comments on vacations. The City Council shall consider public comments for or against the vacation in their deliberations on the vacation.

C.    Granting vacations. At the conclusion of the hearing and based upon the information in the staff report and the public comment, the City Council shall take one of the following actions:

1.    Vacate the street or alley or any portion thereof as described in the original vacation resolution.

2.    Deny the request for the vacation.

3.    Adjust the area described in the original vacation resolution, provided it is within the originally proposed area to be vacated.

D.    In addition to the actions listed in C above, the City Council may:

1.    Impose other conditions on limitations as it deems necessary to preserve any desired public use.

2.    Retain an easement or the right to exercise and grant easements on the vacated land for the construction, repair and maintenance of public utilities and services. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.130 RECORDING OF VACATION ORDINANCE.

The City Clerk shall cause the recording of a vacation ordinance granted by City Council after all conditions set by the City Council have been satisfactorily met. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.140 COMPENSATION.

A.    Classifications of rights-of-way for purpose of compensation. For purposes of this chapter, all rights-of-way within the City primarily used or reserved for use as public ways, including streets and alleys, are declared to be within one of the following classes:

1.    Class I - Rights-of-way in which the City holds fee simple title;

2.    Class II - Rights-of-way in which the interest of the City is limited to a public easement or right of use for particular purposes which has substantial public improvements in any portion of the right-of-way;

3.    Class III - Rights-of-way in which the interest of the City is limited to a public easement or right of use for particular purposes which are generally improved and for which no public funds have been expended in the acquisition or providing improvements.

B.    Amount of compensation. The amount of compensation required to be paid to the City, as a condition precedent to the vacation of a public way shall be determined according to the following criteria:

1.    Class I rights-of-way shall be considered a sale of a capital asset and shall be compensated for at 100 percent of its appraised value.

2.    Class II rights-of-way shall be compensated for in the amount not to exceed 50 percent of the appraised value of said property.

3.    Class III rights-of-way shall not require compensation in excess of fees associated with vacation.

C.    Determination of value for compensation. The compensation for the vacated property shall be determined by one of the following methods at the discretion of the applicant;

1.    The average property value in the County Assessor’s records of the abutting properties weighted on a front footage basis.

2.    The applicant can provide an appraisal of the property. The appraiser must be a certified appraiser agreeable to the City. If an appraisal is performed it must be used for the determination of compensation.

D.    Property in lieu of payment. In lieu of payment for monetary compensation, the petitioners may grant or dedicate to the City for street or other purposes, real property useful for that purpose where the property to be acquired by such exchange has an appraisal value at least equal to the amount of cash compensation that would otherwise be required. The City shall not be obligated to accept such an exchange and the decision of the Director on the acceptability of the alternate property offered shall be final.

E.    Waiving compensation - other governmental agencies. Where vacation or transfer of a public way is applied for by or on behalf of another governmental agency or jurisdiction, the City Council may waive any compensation required by this chapter and may also waive filing fees, if the City Council deems such a waiver to be to the public’s interest and advantage. A transfer or vacation or property in which compensation has been waived under this section shall be accompanied by a covenant providing that the City shall be compensated for the fair market value of the interest conveyed or vacated at the time of any future sale or lease of the subject property by said other governmental agency.

F.    Compensation returned. If the City Council denies the petition for vacation, the compensation deposited with the City will be returned to the applicant, without interest. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


11.20.150 FEES.

A non-refundable fee for accepting and processing right-of-way vacation applications and any separate direct charges shall be set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. Fees and charges pursuant to this section may be increased or decreased by the City Council on the Mayor’s recommendations in accordance with the changes in costs incurred by the City. (Ord. 4664, Repealed & Replaced, 09/05/1999)


Chapter 11.25 ASSUMPTION OF TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT

Sections:

11.25.010    TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT ASSUMED.

11.25.020    GOVERNING BOARD.

11.25.030    AUTHORITY OF THE CITY.

11.25.040    TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS FUNDED.

11.25.050    NO EXISTING RIGHTS IMPAIRED.

11.25.060    RULES, REGULATIONS, PENDING BUSINESS, AND CONTRACTS.

11.25.070    REPORTS, BOOKS, AND RECORDS.

11.25.080    FUNDS, CREDITS, APPROPRIATIONS, FEDERAL GRANTS, OR OTHER ASSETS.

11.25.090    ASSUMPTION OF INDEBTEDNESS.

11.25.100    LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.


11.25.010 TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT DISTRICT ASSUMED. 

The City Council, by Ordinance No. 5076, as amended by Ordinance No. 5245, established a transportation benefit district with geographical boundaries comprised of the corporate limits of the City as they existed or as subsequently annexed, known as the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District (or "District"). RCW 36.74.010 authorizes any city in which a transportation benefit district has been established pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, with boundaries coterminous with the boundaries of the city, to assume the rights, powers, functions, and obligations of the transportation benefit district. As authorized pursuant to RCW 36.74.010, the City of Bremerton assumes all of the rights, powers, functions, and obligations of the Transportation Benefit District previously established in this chapter, and the City of Bremerton is hereby vested with each and every right, power, function, and obligation granted to or possessed by the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District under Chapter 36.73 RCW, Chapter 36.74 RCW, this chapter, and/or any other applicable law, as currently enacted and subsequently amended. By this assumption of the rights, powers, functions, and obligations of the District, the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District will cease to exist as a separate entity. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016: Ord. 5245 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5076 §3 (part), 2009)


11.25.020 GOVERNING BOARD.

As authorized pursuant to RCW 36.74.030(2), the governing body of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District established pursuant to RCW 36.73.020 is hereby abolished and the City of Bremerton City Council ("City Council") hereby assumes and is vested with all the rights, powers, functions and obligations previously vested, exercised and/or performed by the governing body of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016: Ord. 5245 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5076 §3 (part), 2009)


11.25.030 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY. 

The City shall have the authority to exercise the rights, powers, functions and obligations set forth in this chapter and Chapter 36.73 RCW, as currently enacted and subsequently amended, including, but not limited to:

(a)    Imposing a vehicle fee pursuant to RCW 36.73.065;

(b)    Implementing a material change policy previously adopted by the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District to address major plan changes that affect project delivery of the ability to finance the plan, pursuant to the requirements set forth in RCW 36.73.160(1); and

(c)    Funding transportation improvements as authorized pursuant to BMC 11.25.040. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016: Ord. 5245 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5076 §3 (part), 2009)


11.25.040 TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS FUNDED.

The revenues generated by the exercise of the powers granted in BMC 11.25.030 and/or Chapter 36.73 RCW may be used for any purpose allowed by law to make transportation improvements that are consistent with existing state, regional, and local transportation plans and necessitated by existing or reasonably foreseeable congestion levels pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW. The transportation improvements funded by the City shall be made in an effort to protect the City’s long term investments in its infrastructure, to reduce the risk of transportation facility failure, to improve safety, to continue optimal performance of the infrastructure over time, to avoid more expensive infrastructure replacements in the future and to improve modal connectivity within the City of Bremerton. Any expansion of these authorized purposes may be funded only after compliance with the provisions of RCW 36.73.050(b) or a vote of the people pursuant to RCW 36.73.065(c). (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016: Ord. 5245 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5076 §3 (part), 2009)


11.25.050 NO EXISTING RIGHTS IMPAIRED.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.040, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as impairing or altering any existing rights acquired by the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District under Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter, or any other provision of law applicable to transportation benefit districts. Nor does this assumption impair or alter any actions, activities, or proceedings validated thereunder; any civil or criminal proceedings instituted thereunder; any rule, regulation, or order promulgated thereunder; any administrative action taken thereunder; nor the validity of any act performed by the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District or division thereof or any officer thereof prior to the assumption of such rights, powers, functions, and obligations by the City as authorized by law. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016)


11.25.060 RULES, REGULATIONS, PENDING BUSINESS, AND CONTRACTS.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.050(1), all rules and regulations and all pending business before the board of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District shall be continued and acted upon by the City Council. In addition, pursuant to RCW 36.74.050(2), all existing contracts and obligations of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District remain in full force and effect, and will be performed by the City. The assumption does not affect the validity of any official act performed by any official or employee prior to the assumption authorized in the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016)


11.25.070 REPORTS, BOOKS, AND RECORDS.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(1), all reports, documents, surveys, books, records, files, papers, or other writings relating to the administration of the powers, duties, and functions available to the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District shall be made available to the City. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016)


11.25.080 FUNDS, CREDITS, APPROPRIATIONS, FEDERAL GRANTS, OR OTHER ASSETS.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(2), all funds, credits, or other assets held in connection with rights, powers, duties, and functions of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District assumed hereunder shall be assigned to the City. Further, pursuant to RCW 36.74.060(3), any appropriations or federal grant made to the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District (if any) for the purpose of carrying out the rights, powers, functions, and obligations authorized to be assumed by the City must, on the effective date of the assumption, be credited to the City for the purpose of carrying out such assumed rights, powers, functions, and obligations. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016)


11.25.090 ASSUMPTION OF INDEBTEDNESS.

Pursuant to RCW 36.74.070, the City assumes and agrees to provide for the payment of all of the indebtedness of the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District, including the payment and retirement of outstanding general obligation and revenue bonds (if any) issued by the Bremerton Transportation Benefit District. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016)


11.25.100 LIBERAL CONSTRUCTION.

As authorized pursuant to Chapter 36.73 RCW, this chapter shall be liberally construed to permit the accomplishment of its purposes. (Ord. 5297 §3 (part), 2016: Ord. 5245 § 1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5076 §3 (part), 2009. Formerly 11.25.060)


Title 12 (RESERVED)


Title 13 PARKS AND RECREATION

Chapters:

13.04    PARK CODE

13.08    RECREATIONAL VESSELS ON KITSAP LAKE

13.10    MUNICIPAL TREES

13.12    PARKS PROTECTION

13.15    PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION


Chapter 13.04 PARK CODE

Sections:

13.04.010    TITLE.

13.04.020    DEFINITIONS.

13.04.030    SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC.

13.04.040    DESTROYING PARK PROPERTY.

13.04.050    ANIMALS AT LARGE.

13.04.060    DISCHARGING FIREARMS OR EXPLOSIVES.

13.04.070    TREATMENT OF ANIMALS AND BIRDS.

13.04.080    SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.

13.04.100    RIDING MOTOR VEHICLES, NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND HORSES.

13.04.110    GAMES AND SPORTS.

13.04.120    POLLUTING WATERS.

13.04.130    FIRES.

13.04.140    LIQUOR.

13.04.150    HOURS.

13.04.160    NONCOMPLIANCE - EJECTION FROM PARK.

13.04.170    PROCEEDING AGAINST VIOLATORS.

13.04.180    PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.


13.04.010 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the park code of the city of Bremerton. (Ord. 2191 §101, 1956)


13.04.020 DEFINITIONS.

The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations will have the meaning given herein, unless inconsistent with the context. Words using the present tense include the future. Words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directive:

(1)    "Superintendent" is the person immediately in charge of all park areas and their activities, and to whom all park attendants of any area are responsible.

(2)    "Park" is a park, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.

(3)    "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (Ord. 2191 §102, 1956)


13.04.030 SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, ETC.

It is unlawful to use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard, bulletin board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising in any park; or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, railing, post or structure within any park; or without the written consent of the superintendent, to place or erect in any park, a structure of any kind; provided, that the superintendent may permit the erection of temporary directional signs or decorations on occasions of public celebration and picnics. (Ord. 2191 §103, 1956)


13.04.040 DESTROYING PARK PROPERTY.

It is unlawful to remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any structure, monument, statue, vase, fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, fern, plant, flower, lighting system, or sprinkling system or other property lawfully in any park. (Ord. 2191 §104, 1956)


13.04.050 ANIMALS AT LARGE.

It is unlawful to allow or permit any animal to run at large in any park, or enter any lake, pond, fountain or stream therein, except that unleashed dogs are allowed in designated dog park areas within the City of Bremerton park system. (Ord. 4952 §3, 2005: Ord. 2191 §105, 1956)


13.04.060 DISCHARGING FIREARMS OR EXPLOSIVES.

It is unlawful to shoot, fire or explode any firearm, fireworks, firecracker, torpedo or explosive of any kind or to shoot or fire any air gun, bows and arrows, BB gun or use any slingshot in any park, except the superintendent may authorize archery, and the firing of small bore arms and fireworks at designated times and places suitable for their use. (Ord. 5067 §1, 2008: Ord. 2191 §106, 1956)


13.04.070 TREATMENT OF ANIMALS AND BIRDS.

It is unlawful in any manner to tease, annoy, disturb, molest, catch, injure or kill or to throw any stone or missile of any kind at or strike with any stick or weapon any animal, bird or fowl. (Ord. 2191 §107, 1956)


13.04.080 SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.

No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, nor expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall any person station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing, except the licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority of the superintendent. (Ord. 2191 §108, 1956)


13.04.100 RIDING MOTOR VEHICLES, NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLES AND HORSES.

(a)    It is unlawful to ride or drive any bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, horse or pony over or through any park except within and upon the park drives, parkway, park boulevards and bicycle paths designated for such use, or at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour, except as otherwise authorized by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 

(b)    It is unlawful to park, ride or drive any motorcycle or motor vehicle upon, over or through any park except within and upon park drives, parkways, park boulevards, rights-of-way or parking lots located within a park and designated for such use, except as otherwise authorized by the Director of Parks and Recreation. (Ord. 4915 §3, 2004; Ord. 4267 §1, 1990; Ord. 2191 §110, 1956)


13.04.110 GAMES AND SPORTS.

It is unlawful to practice or play golf, baseball, cricket, lacrosse, polo, archery, hockey, tennis, badminton, or other games of like character or to hurl or propel any airborne or other missile except at places set apart for such purposes by the superintendent. (Ord. 2191 §111, 1956)


13.04.120 POLLUTING WATERS.

No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. No person in a park shall have brought in or shall dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where they are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. (Ord. 2191 §112, 1956)


13.04.130 FIRES.

It is unlawful to build any fires in any park except in areas designated by the superintendent. (Ord. 2191 §113, 1956)


13.04.140 LIQUOR.

It is unlawful to serve or consume, within any City park, any liquor as defined in RCW 66.04.010(25), as enacted and hereinafter amended, except the service and consumption of liquor are authorized in the following circumstances:

(a)    The service and consumption of liquor in designated City parks as authorized in subsections (b) though (g) of this section are:

(1)    Permitted by the Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board; and

(2) Such service and consumption of liquor is limited to beer and wine.

(b)    Within Pendergast Regional Park, Evergreen Rotary Park, Lions Park, Harborside Fountain Park and the Louis Mentor Boardwalk when:

(1)    The service of liquor is administered during an event or activity which is: (i) licensed by the City as a special event pursuant to Chapter 5.36 BMC, or (ii) authorized by the City Council upon terms and conditions as established by the City Council.

(c)    Within the boundaries of the Harborside Fountain Park and the Louis Mentor Boardwalk when:

(1)    Such service of liquor is administered by the operator of the Kitsap Conference Center at Bremerton Harborside, as permitted by the City’s Director of Parks and Recreation, or designee, subject to terms and conditions as established by the Director.

(d)    Within the mezzanine food service area of the Olympic Soccer and Sports Center ("Indoor Soccer Center") located within Pendergast Regional Park when:

(1)    Such service of liquor is administered by the operator of the Indoor Soccer Center.

(e)    Within the building of the Bremerton Ice Arena facility ("Ice Arena") located within Eastpark when:

(1)    Such service of liquor is administered by the operator of the Ice Arena;

(2)    Such service and consumption, when in the viewing stands area, is limited to private events, not public events; however, service and consumption of liquor are prohibited on the field of play; and

(3)    Required approval has been granted by the National Parks Service, on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to the deed conveying the property to the City.

(f)    Sampling of beer and wine and sales of beer and wine within the boundaries of a farmer’s market licensed or permitted area located within Evergreen Rotary Park when:

(1)    Authorized by the City Council upon terms and conditions as established by the City Council; and

(2)    Such services comply with the requirements of RCW 66.24.170, 66.24.175, 66.24.240, and 66.24.244 and other related statutory or regulatory requirements, as currently enacted or hereinafter amended; and

(3)    The sampling area is located within a forty-eight (48) inch high barrier or other designated booth or stall, the location and aesthetics of which are subject to approval by the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(g)    Within the boundaries of Otto Jarstad Park, which is City utility property maintained by the Department of Public Works and Utilities, when:

(1)    Permitted by the City’s Director of Public Works and Utilities, or designee, as a private, not a public event, subject to terms and conditions as established by the Director; or

(2)    The service of liquor is administered during an event or activity which is: (i) licensed by the City as a special event pursuant to Chapter 5.36 BMC, or (ii) authorized by the City Council upon terms and conditions as established by the City Council.

For purposes of this section, the authorized service and consumption of liquor include any related sale of liquor. "Private event" means events, such as weddings and birthday parties, authorized for use of specific space within a park by private groups pursuant to a permit or rental agreement. (Ord. 5370 §1, 2019: Ord. 5329 §1, 2017: Ord. 5274 §1, 2015: Ord. 5183 §1, 2012: Ord. 5166 §1, 2011: Ord. 5060 §1, 2008: Ord. 5005 §3, 2007: Ord. 2191 §114, 1956)


13.04.150 HOURS.

Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public information. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the superintendent at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the superintendent shall find reasonably necessary. (Ord. 2191 §115, 1956)


13.04.160 NONCOMPLIANCE - EJECTION FROM PARK.

It is unlawful to violate or fail to comply with any park rule or regulation duly posted by the superintendent, and the superintendent or any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from a park, any person acting in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2191 §116, 1956)


13.04.170 PROCEEDING AGAINST VIOLATORS.

Anyone concerned in the violation of this chapter, whether directly or indirectly committing the thing that constitutes the offense, or who aids or abets the same, and whether present or absent; and anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands, induces, or otherwise procures another to commit such offense, is and shall be a principal under the terms of this chapter and shall be proceeded against and prosecuted as such. (Ord. 2191 §117, 1956)


13.04.180 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.

Violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 BMC. (Ord. 4733, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4680, Amended, 12/17/1999; Ord. 2191 §118, 1956)


Chapter 13.08 RECREATIONAL VESSELS ON KITSAP LAKE

Sections:

13.08.010    DEFINITIONS.

13.08.020    MANNER OF OPERATION.

13.08.030    VIOLATIONS.

13.08.040    NOISE CONTROL/EXHAUST.

13.08.050    SIZE LIMITATION.

13.08.060    SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.

13.08.070    SCUBA DIVING.

13.08.080    DUTY TO OBEY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

13.08.090    REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS.

13.08.100    REGATTAS, RACES OR AQUATIC EVENTS - APPLICATIONS.


13.08.010 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section:

(a)    "Vessel" means any contrivance, other than aircraft, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation or recreation on water, including model craft, powered by an internal or external engine and personal watercraft. However, it does not include inner tubes, air mattresses, sailboards, and small rafts and floatation devices or toys customarily used by swimmers.

(b)    “Personal watercraft” means a watercraft of less than sixteen (16) feet that uses a motor powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power and that is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing, or kneeling on, or being towed behind the watercraft, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the watercraft.

(c)    "Sunrise/sunset" shall be defined as that prescribed for sunrise/sunset in Kitsap County by the Director of the Nautical Almanac at the United States Observatory at Washington, D.C.

(d)    "Aquatic event" or "regatta" means any organized water event of limited duration which is sanctioned by duly constituted authority and which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule and in which general public interest is manifested.

(e)    "Diver’s flag" means a flag that is nationally recognized as being a diver’s flag.

(f)    "Scuba diving" shall mean that an individual utilizes a self-contained underwater breathing apparatus while swimming underwater.

(g)    "Water ski" means all forms, manners, means or contrivances of person or persons being towed behind a vessel.

(h)    "Buoy" means a float, colored, moored in such a manner as to designate a definite channel or guide for navigation. Said "buoy" to be of sufficient size to be readily seen from a minimum distance of one hundred (100) yards from a moving vessel. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §l, 1988)


13.08.020 MANNER OF OPERATION.

(a)    It is unlawful to operate a vessel in a negligent manner or manipulate any vessel, water skis, surfboard, or similar device in a disorderly, grossly indifferent or negligent manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person.

(b)    It is unlawful to operate a vessel for the towing of water skiers without the presence of another responsible person other than the operator of the vessel. Skiers shall be towed in a safe manner in a counter-clockwise rotation.

(c)    No person shall operate a vessel at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions at the time and place of operation. In no case shall speeds exceed forty-five (45) miles per hour.

(d)    A no-wake zone shall be established along the perimeter of the lake and will be marked by buoys at a minimum two hundred (200) lineal feet from shore, unless reduced for safety considerations by the Parks Director. At the south end of the lake, buoys will be placed at a reasonable distance from vegetation at the discretion of the Parks Director.

(e)    It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel within the no-wake zone in any manner causing a wake; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to vessel operators pulling water skiers for takeoff and landing at an angle no less than forty-five (45) degrees from the shoreline where executed with due care. These speed restrictions will not apply to emergency vessels, enforcement vessels, regattas, races, or aquatic events approved through the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(f)    It is unlawful for any person to operate any vessel or manipulate any water skis, surfboard, or similar device while:

(1)    Having an eight-hundredths (0.08) percent or more by weight of alcohol content in their blood as shown by chemical analysis of their breath, blood, or other bodily substance made under RCW 79A.60.040, as now or hereafter amended; or

(2)    Being under the influence of or affected by intoxicating liquor or any drug; or

(3)    Being under the combined influence of or affected by intoxicating liquor and any drug.

A violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in BMC 1.12.020.

(g)    It is unlawful for the owner of any vessel or any person having such vessel in his or her charge or control, to authorize or knowingly permit the same to be operated by any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug.

(h)    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in charge of a vessel to knowingly authorize the same to be operated by any person who, by reason of a physical or mental disability would be incapable of safely operating such vessel.

(i)    Vessels operating between sunset and 8:00 a.m. shall not operate in any manner causing a wake; provided, however, this limitation shall not apply to emergency vessels or enforcement vessels.

These hours of operation shall be reviewed annually by the Parks and Recreation Board and recommended amendments, if any, referred to the City Council.

(j)    Vessels must raise a ski observer flag after a person being towed by the vessel falls. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988)


13.08.030 VIOLATIONS.

Except as otherwise provided, violations of this chapter are civil infractions pursuant to BMC 1.12.020. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008)


13.08.040 NOISE CONTROL/EXHAUST.

No vessel shall be operated upon Kitsap Lake unless it has an underwater exhaust system. These provisions shall not apply to vessels actually competing in an authorized race or regatta or authorized testing for that race or regatta. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.030)


13.08.050 SIZE LIMITATION.

The maximum allowable length for vessels upon Kitsap Lake shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Vessel measurement shall be from the tip of the bow to the stern of the vessel down the centerline but not including boomkins, swim ladders, outboard engines, outdrives, or other extremities. This provision shall not apply to vessels actually competing in an authorized race or regatta or authorized testing for that race or regatta. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008)


13.08.060 SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.

All vessels operated and used upon waters of the City of Bremerton shall, in all respects, conform to the requirements of Washington State law, including, but not limited to, Chapter 79A.060 RCW. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.040)


13.08.070 SCUBA DIVING.

Persons engaging in scuba diving shall mark the water areas where such operations are being conducted with "diver’s flags" of sufficient size so that they may be seen at a distance of not less than one hundred (100) yards under normal visibility conditions; provided, that where scuba diving operations are conducted between the hours of sunset and sunrise, artificially illuminated marker buoys shall be provided which are visible at a distance of not less than one hundred (100) yards under normal visibility conditions. Scuba diving shall not be conducted so as to unreasonably interfere with normal operation of vessels. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.050)


13.08.080 DUTY TO OBEY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.

(a)    Any person operating a vessel requested or signaled to stop by a law enforcement officer has a duty to stop. The signal given by law enforcement may be hand, voice, emergency light or siren.

(b)    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any duly authorized law enforcement officer.

(c)    Any person requested to identify himself to a law enforcement officer pursuant to an investigation of a violation of this chapter has a duty to identify himself, give his current address, and sign an acknowledgement of receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.060)


13.08.090 REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS.

Any person who operates a vessel and collides with the property of another, and causes damage of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, report such collision to the Bremerton Police Department. Any person who operates a vessel and collides with any other vessel thereby causing any personal injury to a person other than himself or herself, shall immediately report the incident to the Bremerton Police Department. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.070)


13.08.100 REGATTAS, RACES OR AQUATIC EVENTS - APPLICATIONS.

Applications for regattas, races, or aquatic events shall be submitted under the conditions set forth in this section.

(a)    Submission of Application. An individual or organization planning to hold a regatta, race, or aquatic event which, by its nature, circumstance, or location may introduce extra or unusual hazards to the safety or life on the waters of Kitsap Lake shall submit an application to the City Clerk.

(b)    Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall be submitted no less than ninety (90) days prior to the start of said event and, in any case, not later than the first day of the month of May of the year of the event; provided, however, the City Council may waive this time requirement for a written application received prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, so long as a formal City application is submitted by June 15th and at least two (2) weeks prior to the event. Each application shall be accompanied by a permit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to be paid to the City Clerk along with the application.

(c)    The application shall include the following details:

(1)    The name and address of the sponsoring organization;

(2)    The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of the event;

(3)    Nature and purpose of the event;

(4)    Information as to general interests;

(5)    Estimated number and types of vessels participating;

(6)    Estimated number of spectator vessels;

(7)    Estimated number of persons, participants and all others;

(8)    Minimum number of vessels boats and persons being furnished by the sponsoring organization to patrol the event;

(9)    A time schedule and description of events;

(10)    A section of a chart or scale drawing showing the boundaries of the event, various water courses or parking areas and areas to be utilized by participants, officials and spectators;

(11)    A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has obtained public liability and property damage insurance for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to person or persons, or to property, by reason of said event and to ensure that the requirements for markers, rescue equipment, or other safety conditions stated in the application finally approved as actually provided.

The insurance policy required pursuant to this section shall name the City as an additional insured and the City shall be notified by the insurer at least twenty (20) days prior to any cancellation of the insurance. The insurance policy shall also contain a standard form cross-liability endorsement. Such insurance shall contain a minimum coverage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per occurrence; provided, however, that in the event the applicant desires to have a hydroplane race, the minimum coverage shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence.

(d)    A one thousand dollar ($1,000) performance bond, or one thousand dollars ($1,000) cash deposit, shall be posted by the applicant to ensure that the aforementioned conditions of the application and permit are followed by the applicant. Following the conclusion of the event said one thousand dollar ($1,000) performance bond, or cash deposit, shall be refunded if all conditions have been performed to the satisfaction of the City.

(e)    Upon receiving an application to hold a regatta, race or aquatic event, the City Clerk’s office shall forward the application to the Police Department, Fire Department, Risk Manager, and the Parks Department.

(f)    The Fire Department will make the following determinations, in writing, and send said determinations to the Parks Department Superintendent.

(1)    Whether the proposed regatta, race or aquatic event may be held on Kitsap Lake safely or whether the interest of safety of life or property requires changes in the application before it can be approved;

(2)    The extent of paramedic services shall be determined by the Fire Chief;

(3)    Whether rescue boats are needed and, if so, the number of required rescue boats; provided, however, that at least two rescue boats positioned as determined by the Fire Chief shall be required for hydroplane races. The equipment, boats and manpower for these rescue boats shall comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, and shall be provided by the applicant; provided, that the applicant will allow Bremerton police and fire personnel to ride in the boats as directed by the Fire Chief. The rescue boats shall be equipped with fire protection equipment determined necessary by the Fire Chief.

(g)    The police department will make the following determinations and will send such determinations to the Parks Department in writing:

(1)    Whether the proposed regatta, race or aquatic event may be held on Kitsap Lake safely or whether the interest of safety of life or property requires changes in the application before it can be approved.

(2)    Whether closure of the lake or a portion thereof is warranted and steps needed to be taken by the applicant in the way of buoys or shore barriers to protect the public; provided, that the Parks Department will be responsible for posting the closure or partial closure of the lake at least thirty (30) days prior to the designated event and for notifying the F.A.A. of the lake’s closure.

(3)    The amount of law enforcement and manpower supplied by the applicant needed to enforce closure or partial closure of the lake, to include required traffic control in the immediate area of Kitsap Lake.

(h)    The Risk Manager shall determine whether the insurance provided by the applicant is adequate and will send such determination, in writing, to the Parks Department.

(i)    The Parks Department shall communicate the requirements imposed by the Fire, Police, Parks Department, and Risk Manager to the applicant and shall add these requirements to the application.

(j)    If the application meets the requirements of this chapter, the Parks Director, or his or her designee, is authorized to grant the application and issue a permit.

(k)    If the permit is granted subject to the conditions set forth in this section, the Fire, Police or Parks Department may revoke the permit in the name of the City if, at any time, the applicant, sponsor, or participant in such event violates any of the conditions contained in the application. (Ord. 5041 §1 (part), 2008: Ord. 4154 §1, 1988. Formerly 13.08.080)


Chapter 13.10 MUNICIPAL TREES

Sections:

13.10.010    PURPOSE.

13.10.020    DEFINITIONS.

13.10.030    RESPONSIBILITY FOR MUNICIPAL TREES.

13.10.040    DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS.

13.10.050    FASTENING MATERIALS TO TREES OR SHRUBS.

13.10.060    PUBLIC UTILITIES.

13.10.070    MASTER URBAN TREE PLAN.

13.10.080    PLANTING, PRUNING, REMOVAL, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.

13.10.090    NUISANCE ABATEMENT.

13.10.100    COST OF PLANTING, REMOVING, MAINTAINING AND PROTECTING TREES AND SHRUBS.


13.10.010 PURPOSE.

It is the policy of the City of Bremerton to regulate and control planting, removal, maintenance and protection of trees and shrubs on public areas of the City to eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions which may result in injury to persons using public areas of the City; to promote and enhance the beauty of the City; to prevent damage to any overhead or underground utilities, street, sidewalk or other public property; to protect trees and shrubs located in public areas from undesirable and unsafe planting, removal and maintenance practices; to guard all trees and shrubs on public areas against the spread of disease and pests; and to increase public awareness of tree benefits and proper planting and maintenance practices through education.

The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to: 1) all trees and shrubs presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area; and 2) all trees and shrubs planted in or upon any private premises which directly affect overhead and underground utilities, sidewalks, streets, public property, or cause unsafe viewing distances. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.020 DEFINITIONS.

(a)    "Critical root zone (CRZ)" shall be defined as the minimum area of root protection around the trunk of a tree. The CRZ is based on the area that results from measuring, at diameter breast height (DBH) or four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the ground, one and one-quarter (1-1/4) feet outwards from the trunk for every inch of trunk diameter. A minimum of six (6) feet diameter must be protected around small trees, regardless of diameter.

(b)    "Public area" shall include all public streets, roads, boulevards, sidewalks, planter strips, City-owned rights-of-way, parks, and the lands owned or leased by the City which are accessible to the public but not including municipal utility watershed or forest lands.

(c)    "Municipal trees and/or shrubs" shall include all woody vegetation presently or hereafter planted on any public areas.

(d)    "Maintenance" and "protection" shall include but not be limited to all operations of watering, pruning, spraying, bracing, inspection and other actions necessary to the health and aesthetics of the tree or shrub.

(e)    "Hazardous tree or shrub" shall be defined as any tree or shrub or part thereof growing on private or public property which: obstructs or impairs the free and full use of a public area, interferes with overhead or underground utilities, is afflicted with or weakened by a contagious or fatal disease, causes unsafe viewing distances, blocks or impedes usage of street or sidewalk, or presents an imminent and foreseeable danger to persons or property. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.030 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MUNICIPAL TREES.

(a)    Private property owners will be responsible for the maintenance and liability of municipal trees adjacent to their property that have been planted by the owner or prior owners, or for which responsibility has been assumed by the owner through a recorded agreement with the City. 

(b)    Private property owners may prune or remove municipal trees adjacent to their property after approval is received from the City Arborist. If approval is denied, the tree shall become the City’s responsibility and shall be inventoried as such by the Parks and Recreation Department.

(c)    Property owners and/or occupants are responsible for notifying Engineering in the case that a municipal tree or shrub adjacent to their property space is creating a hazard, so that remedial actions can be taken.

(d)    Private groups may arrange for the planting or maintenance of areas of municipal trees under the authorization of the Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.040 DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS.

Unless authorized by this chapter, no person shall in any public area of the City, break, injure, mutilate, kill, destroy, prune or remove any tree or shrub; permit any animal under his or her control to do so; permit any fire to injure any portion of any tree or shrub; permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or be emptied on or about any tree or shrub. Prior to building operations, municipal trees and shrubs shall have secured protection barriers surrounding, at minimum, the critical root zone of plants. No equipment stockpiling, traffic, or soil disturbing activities shall occur within the critical root zone of municipal trees and shrubs. Persons responsible for damage to trees on public areas shall be penalized pursuant to the BMC 13.04.180 regarding damage to park property, and BMC 13.04.040. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.050 FASTENING MATERIALS TO TREES OR SHRUBS.

No person shall fasten any sign, rope, wire, or other materials to, around, or through any municipal tree or shrub without obtaining permission from the Parks and Recreation Department, except in emergencies such as storms or accidents, pursuant to BMC 13.04.030. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.060 PUBLIC UTILITIES.

Public utility work affecting trees or shrubs on public areas shall be limited to the actual necessities of the services of the company and such work shall be done in a neat and professional manner. The utility shall notify the Parks and Recreation Department of any plans for maintenance on public areas and consult with the Parks and Recreation Department should any trees need to be topped or removed so that they may suggest ways to preserve the beauty or symmetry of the tree and keep removals to a minimum. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.070 MASTER URBAN TREE PLAN.

A Master Urban Tree Plan shall be developed by the Parks and Recreation Department for park and municipal trees and approved by Council resolution. It will be based upon an inventory of existing municipal trees in these areas and an evaluation of the site and space factors which will aid in the determination of those trees best suited for Bremerton’s urban environment and result in the development of a long-range plan for future planting and maintenance. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.080 PLANTING, PRUNING, REMOVAL, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.

The following standards are hereby established for the planting, pruning, removal, and maintenance of municipal trees and shrubs in the public areas of the City. All planting of trees and other landscaping in public areas of the City, including the rights-of-way, shall be in conformance with the City’s engineering design and construction standards:

(a)    Planting.

(1)    All trees will be not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) inch caliper and be No. 1 grade, as described by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN).

(2)    Soil amendments, in accordance with the Stormwater Manual in BMC 15.04.020, shall be provided in all planting areas prior to planting.

(3)    No tree or shrub will be planted closer than two (2) feet from the curbline or ten (10) feet from a driveway or alley. Trees shall be spaced at intervals of at least twenty (20) feet depending upon species and the expected height of the tree at maturity. Plantings at or near intersections shall be spaced in accordance with sight distance specification in the City’s engineering design and construction standards.

(4)    Sidewalk cuts, where necessary, shall be approved by the Engineering Division and will be a minimum of four (4) feet in diameter so as to allow the natural percolation of water. Paver blocks, cobblestones or tree grates or other permeable surfaces will be used to fill the sidewalk cuts around trees.

(5)    All young trees, for a minimum of one (1) year, shall be securely staked and guyed until the roots become established.

(6)    Municipal trees and shrubs planted prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this section are exempt from these planting standards.

(7)    A list of recommended species of municipal trees is available from the Parks and Recreation Department for those desiring to plant municipal trees in City areas adjacent to their properties. Approval of the tree species is required by the City Arborist prior to planting, if it is not on the recommended species list.

(8)    Public education programs regarding tree planting, care and maintenance will be provided by the Parks and Recreation Department in conjunction with Arbor Day festivities each year in April to encourage public involvement in tree planting. Additionally, the Parks and Recreation Department will maintain a tree library available for use by the public.

(b)    Pruning. Pruning of any municipal tree on any public area must be authorized by the Parks and Recreation Department’s City Arborist or performed by City employees at the discretion of the Department. Trees are pruned to preserve their health and appearance, and to eliminate safety and utility concerns, which will increase their longevity in the urban area.

(1)    Pruning Defined.

(i)    Fine pruning: removal of dead, diseased, objectionable and/or weak branches which are larger than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter.

(ii)    Medium pruning: removal of dead, diseased, objectionable and/or weak branches which are larger than one (1) inch in diameter.

(iii)    Safety pruning: removal of the dead, diseased and/or weak branches to a size that in falling would injure a person and/or property.

(iv)    Cut back to topping: cutting back, drop crotching or topping consists of the reduction of tops, sides, underbranches, or individual limbs with attention given to symmetrical appearance.

(2)    All trees and shrubs which have branches overhanging a public street or boulevard shall have said branches pruned to a clearance height of fourteen (14) feet. Those overhanging a public sidewalk shall be pruned to a clearance height of eight (8) feet. The provisions of this section may be waived by the Parks and Recreation Department in the case of newly planted trees so long as they do not interfere with public parking, travel or safe viewing distances at intersections, or endanger public safety as determined by the Engineering Division. Any tree or shrub on private property which hangs over a city right-of-way which is not pruned as herein provided shall be subject to the provisions of BMC 13.10.090.

(3)    All dead wood, stubs, broken branches, badly formed branches, diseased branches, and branches interfering with public travel, lighting, existing buildings and traffic signs, shall be removed during the pruning operation, with consideration given to the symmetry and beauty of the municipal tree or shrub.

(c)    Removal.

(1)    All municipal trees and shrubs which have fallen or been authorized for removal shall be completely removed from the growing site and disposed of in an authorized manner. The stump shall be ground out to a depth suitable for future planting of trees or turf.

(2)    When municipal trees or shrubs are removed because of inappropriate location, a more appropriate site for replacement will be selected, when possible, in as close a proximity as spacing permits. Trees removed due to health, age, size for its location, or undesirable species type shall be replaced, when appropriate/available, with a suitable tree or shrub which will not produce the same problem in accordance with this section.

(3)    No municipal tree or shrub shall be removed from any public area for the sole purpose of providing a view for any private property or individual.

(d)    Maintenance.

(1)    All municipal trees will receive routine maintenance on a four (4) year cycle.

(2)    Special consideration will be given to the watering, weeding and protection of young trees during the first three (3) years.

(3)    The use of biological controls and sprays will be encouraged and used by City employees whenever possible in the treatment of insect infestation in trees on city lands and rights-of-way. 

(4)    Preserve and maintain park soils for long-term tree health. Protect soils from compaction, allow plant debris or its equivalent to be left on the soil surface to replenish organic matter, and reduce chemical inputs to soil, where possible. For lawns and high-nutrient-demand landscapes, consider adding one-quarter (1/4) to one-half (1/2) inch of compost raked into landscape in spring or fall. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4856 §6, 2003; Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.090 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.

On Private Properties. Abatement of nuisances on private property with trees or shrubs determined to be hazardous or public nuisance to public areas, such as streets and sidewalks, will be handled in accordance with the nuisance abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 6.08 BMC. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 5154 §3, 2011: Ord. 4584, Amended, 02/28/1997; Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996)


13.10.100 COST OF PLANTING, REMOVING, MAINTAINING AND PROTECTING TREES AND SHRUBS.

The costs of planting, removing, maintaining and protecting trees and shrubs on all public areas of the City, when done by Parks and Recreation Department and Public Works Department, shall be borne by the City out of the Parks and Recreation Department and Public Works Department budgets as assets allow, and from funds donated or grant monies received specifically for that purpose. When a private party plants, removes, maintains or protects trees pursuant to BMC 13.10.080, that party shall be responsible for all incurred costs. (Ord. 5309 §1 (part), 2016: Ord. 4553, Repealed & Replaced, 06/20/1996. Formerly 13.10.110)


Chapter 13.12 PARKS PROTECTION

Sections:

13.12.010    TITLE.

13.12.020    PROPERTIES.

13.12.030    PROCEDURES TO SURPLUS OR CHANGE USE.

13.12.040    PRIOR SALES - RESTORATION.

13.12.050    SEVERABILITY.


13.12.010 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as "The Ordinance Providing Protection for Bremerton’s Parks, Play Fields, Open Spaces and Recreational Facilities". (Ord. 4283 §1, 1989 Referendum)


13.12.020 PROPERTIES.

(a)    The following commonly known parks of the City of Bremerton shall fall under the provisions of this chapter:

(1)    Warren Avenue Play Field

(2)    Kitsap Lake Park

(3)    East Park (Glenn Jarstad Aquatic Center/YMCA Area)

(4)    Blueberry Park

(5)    NAD Upper Park

(6)    NAD Marine Park

(7)    Evergreen Park

(8)    East Park Nature Area

(9)    Stephenson Canyon

(10)    Lions Community Playfield

(11)    Forest Ridge Park

(12)    Kiwanis Park

(13)    Sheridan Park Community Center and Sheridan Park Lower Area

(14)    Smith Play Field

(15)    Manette Play Field and Senior Center

(16)    SR 3 Park

(17)    S.P. "Pat" Carey Vista

(18)    9th Street Mini Park

(19)    Arvon Park

(20)    Bachmann Park

(21)    Bataan Park

(22)    Bremerton Boardwalk

(23)    Hal’s Corner

(24)    Naval Avenue Site (1133 Naval Avenue)

(25)    Pendergast Regional Park

(26)    Roto Vista Park

(27)    Roto Vista Park (lower)

(28)    Warren Tennis Courts and Community Center

(29)    Lent Lane

(30)    Ivy Green Cemetery

(b)    The City Council may, by a simple majority of those present, add any parks lands to the list above. Any additions made by the Council would fall under the full provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4575, Amended, 11/21/1996; Ord. 4443 §1, 1994; Ord. 4283 §2, 1989 Referendum)


13.12.030 PROCEDURES TO SURPLUS OR CHANGE USE.

The following procedures shall apply to the sale, possible sale, lease or significant change in use of any or a part of any of the above mentioned park lands. A significant change in use shall mean any activity which does not compliment or support a recreational activity.

(a)    The Parks Board of the City of Bremerton shall be consulted and provided all details concerning any proposed sale, lease or significant change in use. The Parks Board shall prepare an advisory report and submit it to the City Council and Mayor.

(b)    The City Council shall hold a minimum of two public hearings concerning the matter, in addition to other statutory hearings.

(c)    In case of a proposed sale, the City Council at a minimum shall evaluate the Parks Board advisory report and must develop findings and conclusions to support declaring the park’s asset in question surplus, prior to concluding any sale. A surplusing declaration means that the park’s asset is no longer suitable for use as a park, play field, open space or recreational activity by the Bremerton community.

(d)    A unanimous vote of the full Council membership is necessary to sell any of the park assets described above or to significantly change their use.

(e)    In the absence of a unanimous vote to sell, or as an alternative to meeting the criteria of Subsection (c) or (d) or the Council may, by a simple majority of those present, refer the matter to the voters at the next scheduled election, or by calling a special election pursuant to law. (Ord. 4283 §3, 1989 Referendum)


13.12.040 PRIOR SALES - RESTORATION.

The City of Bremerton shall take such action as may be necessary, including legal action if required, to restore the City of Bremerton full title and ownership of the City of Bremerton park, play field, open space or recreation facilities named herein which have been sold, transferred or conveyed within one year prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 4283 §4, 1989 Referendum)


13.12.050 SEVERABILITY.

In the event that any portion of this chapter should be declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. (Ord. 4283 §5, 1989 Referendum)


Chapter 13.15 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION

Sections:

13.15.010    CREATED.

13.15.020    REMOVAL.

13.15.030    RULES.

13.15.040    MEETINGS AND OFFICERS.

13.15.050    POWERS AND DUTIES.


13.15.010 CREATED.

That the City of Bremerton Parks and Recreation Board shall be known as the Parks and Recreation Commission. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the City of Bremerton. The appointments shall be for three (3) year terms. Members shall be appointed for staggered terms so that two members shall be appointed for terms commencing September 30, 2001, two members shall be appointed for terms commencing September 30, 2002; and three members shall be appointed for terms commencing September 30, 2003. The current Commission members whose terms expire in 2001, 2002 and 2003 shall continue to serve their terms until September 29 of the year of the expiration of their terms. The members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 4724, Added, 12/08/2000)


13.15.020 REMOVAL.

Any member of the Commission may be removed from office with notice from the Mayor upon the formal recommendation of the Commission for incompetence, incompatibility of office, dereliction of duty, malfeasance in office, lack of attendance at meetings, or other good cause. Members of the Commission may be dismissed from the Commission if they miss more than three (3) consecutive meetings, unexcused, or any five (5) meetings within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 4724, Added, 12/08/2000)


13.15.030 RULES.

The Bremerton Parks and Recreation Commission shall conduct all meetings in accordance with the rules adopted by the Commission which are designated as the Parks and Recreation Commission By-Laws. (Ord. 4724, Added, 12/08/2000)


13.15.040 MEETINGS AND OFFICERS.

The Commission, each year, shall elect its own chairperson and create and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. The Commission’s regular meeting shall be held at 5:30 p.m. on the fourth Tuesday of each month, unless a change in the scheduled date or time is approved and duly noticed by the Commission. (Ord. 4724, Added, 12/08/2000)


13.15.050 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Parks and Recreation Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the Mayor, and the Parks and Recreation staff concerning formulation of policy and plans for development, management, and operation of the City’s parks and recreation programs. Duties of the Commission shall include, but not be limited to:

A.    Assist with review of the Parks and Recreation budget;

B.    Promote parks and recreation programs to the community;

C.    Assist in the establishment of short-term and long-term goals for the future of the City’s park system, including recreational programming and park maintenance; and

D.    Monitor and assess the park system.

In its advisory capacity, the Parks and Recreation Commission may advise, make recommendations, to and guide the Parks and Recreation Department on issues relating to recreational programming and the City’s parks and open space system, and to assist the City in the following:

A.    The development of a broad variety of programs, facilities and services to meet the needs and demands of the community;

B.    Education of the public about the importance of and need for Parks and Recreation programs, facilities and services;

C.    Enhancement of citizen involvement in the planning and development of the parks system and the identification of local needs;

D.    Establishment of an effective public relations program utilizing all appropriate communications media;

E.    Long range capital improvement planning;

F.    Development of a close liaison and coordination with other agencies to ensure total cooperative community effort to provide the most effective and efficient service possible; and

G.    Periodic review of the Parks and Recreation Department’s programs, facilities, services and relationships to assure that its goals and objectives are relevant to community needs. (Ord. 4724, Added, 12/08/2000)


Title 14 (Reserved)


Title 15 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES

Chapters:

15.01    GENERAL PROVISIONS

15.02    WATER

15.03    WASTEWATER

15.04    STORMWATER

15.05    FATS, OILS AND GREASE

15.06    ASSESSMENTS, RATES, FEES AND CHARGES

15.07    UTILITY BILLING

15.08    APPEALS


Chapter 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

15.01.010    UTILITY OPERATIONS.

15.01.015    ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS UPDATES.

15.01.020    DEFINITIONS.

15.01.030    UTILITY SERVICE AGREEMENT.

15.01.040    CONDITIONS OF SERVICE - RETAIL.

15.01.050    CONDITION OF SERVICE - CONTRACT.

15.01.060    PENALTY FOR FALSE INFORMATION.

15.01.070    DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT.

15.01.075    LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.

15.01.080    DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS - FEES.

15.01.090    PUBLIC UTILITY CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT.

15.01.100    DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS - REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.

15.01.110    ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.

15.01.120    BONDING.

15.01.130    AUTHORITY.

Prior legislation: Ord. 4856.


15.01.010 UTILITY OPERATIONS.

It is the purpose of this title to regulate City utility operations so as to provide continued safe and reliable utility service to the residents of the City of Bremerton and to those nonresidents the City agrees to serve. It is the City’s policy to provide sufficient revenue from those served through the assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC to support the costs of operation, capitalization and debt service of the municipal utilities.

Municipal utilities shall include potable water, wastewater and stormwater systems, and those operations related to the efficient administration of these systems and their assets. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4442 §3, 1993; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.015 ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS UPDATES.

The Public Works and Utilities Director is authorized to update and revise all standards in this title as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §1, 2013)


15.01.020 DEFINITIONS.

The terms used in this title shall mean the following, except where the context otherwise requires:

(a)    Definitions "A":

"Active account" shall mean an account that has an active water meter in place and/or active rate codes as applicable.

"Active water service" shall mean that the service line at the location is functional.

"AKART" shall mean all known, available, and reasonable methods of prevention, control, and treatment. See also the State Water Pollution Control Act, RCW 90.48.010 and 90.48.520 and WAC 173-218-030.

"As-graded" shall mean the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.

"Average daily" shall mean the total quantity divided by the number of days of waste or stormwater discharge or water use by the typical user in a user class.

(b)    Definitions "B":

"Backflow" shall mean the flow of water or other liquids in the reverse direction, or flow of mixtures or substances into the distribution system of the public water supply from any source or sources other than the intended source.

"Backflow prevention device" shall mean a device to prevent back siphonage or flow in the reverse direction.

"Best management practices (BMPs)" means the schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and structural and/or managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce the release of pollutants and other adverse impacts to waters of Washington State.

"BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)" means an indirect measure of the concentration of biologically degradable materials present in organic wastes. The amount of free oxygen utilized by aerobic organisms when allowed to attack the organic material in an aerobically maintained environment at a specified temperature (twenty (20) degrees centigrade) for a specific time period (five (5) days), and thus stated as BOD5. It is expressed in milligrams of oxygen utilized per liter of liquid waste volume (mg/L) or in milligrams of oxygen per kilogram of waste solution (mg/kg = ppm = parts per million parts). Also called "biological oxygen demand."

"Bulkhead" shall mean a seawall or rock embankment constructed along the waterfront to protect the land behind it from erosion by waves and tidal action of the sea.

(c)    Definitions "C":

"Capital costs" shall mean the total costs of physical system improvements (exclusive of repair and replacement costs covered under operation and maintenance costs), including, but not limited to, the costs of direct construction, engineering, financing, legal fees, real estate, right-of-way, debt service, and other costs associated with such improvements.

"City" means City of Bremerton.

"Clearing" shall mean the destruction and removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods. This definition shall include grubbing vegetation.

"Clearing and grading permit" shall mean the written approval of the City of Bremerton Building Inspector to proceed with the act of clearing property within the City limits of Bremerton. The clearing and grading permit includes the associated approved plans and any conditions of approval as well as the permit form itself.

"Combined sewer" shall mean a sewer intended to convey sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, and storm and surface water in a single system.

"Commercial I" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharges whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand is less than two hundred one (201) mg/L.

"Commercial II" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharges whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from two hundred one (201) to four hundred (400) mg/L.

"Commercial III" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharges whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from four hundred one (401) to six hundred (600) mg/L.

"Commercial IV" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharge whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from six hundred one (601) to eight hundred (800) mg/L.

"Commercial V" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharge whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from eight hundred one (801) to one thousand (1,000) mg/L.

"Commercial VI" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharge whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from one thousand one (1,001) to one thousand two hundred (1,200) mg/L.

"Commercial VII" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharge whose total suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand ranges from one thousand two hundred and one (1,201) to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) mg/L.

"Commercial account with high conductivity" shall mean an account that discharges conductivity greater than (>) 6.0 mS/cm for any interval equal to or exceeding five (5) minutes three (3) times during any thirty (30) day period. The account will be billed the commercial special rate as published in the City of Bremerton utility rates and fee schedule.

"Commercial agriculture" shall mean those activities conducted on lands defined in RCW 84.34.020(2), and activities involved in the production of crops or livestock for wholesale trade. An activity ceases to be considered commercial agriculture when the area on which it is conducted is proposed for conversion to a nonagricultural use or has lain idle for more than five (5) years, unless the idle land is registered in a federal or state soil conservation program, or unless the activity is maintenance of irrigation ditches, laterals, canals, or drainage ditches related to an existing and ongoing agricultural activity.

"Commercial business with living units" shall mean a business with residential living units attached; the utility rates will be based on the business type and the number of residential units.

"Commercial property" shall mean a parcel of property which is developed for nonresidential purposes.

"Commercial special" shall mean any user whose business or nonresidential wastewater discharge whose total suspended solids (TSS) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) exceeds one thousand eight hundred (1,800) mg/L and/or has a conductivity discharge greater than (>) 6.0 mS/cm. These users will be charged for wastewater services on the basis of their specific discharge, which provides equitable recovery of the City’s cost of conveying, owning, operating, and maintaining the wastewater treatment system, rather than average class strength.

"Condominium (condo)" shall mean an apartment that is individually owned but the land is jointly owned by all homeowners.

"Conductivity" shall mean the measurement of electrical conductivity as an indicator of water quality. Conductivity data can determine concentration of solutions, detect contaminants and determine the purity of water. A conductivity sensor measures conductivity by AC voltage applied to nickel electrodes. These electrodes are placed in a water sample (or other liquid), where the current flows through the electrodes and the sample. Current level has a direct relationship with the conductivity of the solution. The basic unit of conductivity is the Siemens (S), sometimes referred to as mho. Since cell geometry affects conductivity values, standardized measurements are expressed in specific conductivity units (S/cm) to compensate for variations in electrode dimensions. Conductivity measurements, along with temperature, also allow for salinity values to be calculated through algorithms.

"Connection fee" shall mean charges made for connection to the utility system. The connection fees will include the costs of tapping the water main, sewer main or storm main, installing the service and meter, restoring the surface, and all other costs associated with the physical connection of the customer system to the City utility system.

"Construction charge and special fees" shall mean those charges made by the City to cover its unreimbursed construction costs for installing special facilities not covered by connection fees and general facility fees.

"Contract user" shall mean any user who, by virtue of the amount, strength, or location of its discharge or the conditions of service, requires a contractual basis for service to be equitably served.

"Creek" shall mean those areas where surface waters flow sufficiently to produce a defined channel or bed. A defined channel or bed is indicated by hydraulically sorted sediments or the removal of vegetative litter or loosely rooted vegetation by the action of moving water. The channel or bed need not contain water year around. This definition is not meant to include stormwater runoff devices or other entirely artificial watercourses unless they are used to store and/or convey pass-through stream flows naturally occurring prior to construction.

"Critical area" shall mean any area designated as a critical area pursuant to RCW 36.70A.170 and Chapter 20.14 BMC.

"Cross connection" shall mean any physical arrangement whereby the City water system is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality that may be capable of imparting contamination to the City water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removal sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections.

"Cubic feet (CF)" shall mean cubic feet of measure.

(d)    Definitions "D":

"Deactivated meters" shall mean utility accounts where the customer requests the water meter to be shut off and locked, and the water/wastewater services and associated billings be temporarily suspended. The account will continue to be billed for stormwater.

"Degradation" shall mean deterioration of an area including, but not limited to, impacts such as sedimentation, erosion, and loss of shading, light, and noise.

"Department" shall mean the Department of Public Works and Utilities, unless otherwise identified.

"Developed lot" shall mean a lot or parcel of land upon which a structure(s) is located, which cannot be more intensively developed pursuant to the Bremerton zoning code, and which cannot be further subdivided pursuant to City subdivision regulations.

"Development" shall mean any new development and/or redevelopment activity that requires federal, state, or local approval for the use or modification of land or its resources. These activities include, but are not limited to, subdivision and short subdivisions; binding site plans; planned unit developments; variances; shoreline substantial development; clearing activity; excavation; embankment; fill and grade work; converting fallow land or undeveloped land to agricultural purposes; activity conditionally allowed; building or construction; revocable encroachment permits; and septic approval.

"Development area" shall mean an area where the movement of earth or a change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the existing soil topography occurs as a result of an applicant’s development plans.

"Director" shall mean the Director of Public Works and Utilities or any other duly authorized representative designated by the Director as the person responsible for technical direction of this code, unless otherwise identified.

"Driveway drain" shall mean a drain typically located below street grade at the bottom of a sloped driveway.

"Duplex" shall mean a residential unit containing two (2) separate dwelling units with any configuration or two (2) dwelling units located on one (1) parcel.

(e)    Definitions "E":

"Earth" shall mean the natural mineral and organic material forming the soil and its underlying substance. For the purposes of this chapter, earth shall include sand, gravel, and ledge rock.

"Ecology" shall mean the Washington State Department of Ecology.

"Emergency" shall mean a situation demanding immediate action with threat to life, property or environment.

"Engineered fill" shall mean soil fill, which is wetted or dried to near its optimum moisture content, placed in lifts of twelve (12) inches or less and each lift compacted to a minimum percent compaction as specified by a geotechnical engineer.

"Engineering Design and Construction Standards" shall mean the City of Bremerton’s Standards for Work in Rights-of-Way.

"Equivalent residential unit (ERU)" shall mean a unit of measurement equivalent to an average single-family residence. This measurement shall be used to determine sewer general facility charges. ERUs cannot be transferred from one property or account to another property or account.

"Excavate" shall mean the mechanical removal of earth material, including soil, sand, gravel, rock, concrete or asphalt.

"Existing service" shall mean a functioning water service line or sewer lateral that is physically located at the parcel.

"Existing site conditions" shall mean:

For developed sites with stormwater facilities that have been constructed to meet the standards in the minimum requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, "existing site conditions" shall mean the existing conditions on the site;

For developed sites that do not have stormwater facilities that meet the minimum requirements, "existing site conditions" shall mean the conditions that existed prior to local government adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. If in question, the existing site conditions shall be documented by aerial photograph records, or other appropriate means;

For all sites in water quality sensitive areas, "existing site conditions" shall mean undisturbed forest for the purpose of calculating runoff characteristics; and/or

For all undeveloped sites outside of water quality sensitive areas, "existing site conditions" shall mean the existing conditions on the site.

"Expanded service" shall mean the increase in water and wastewater service based on the addition in number of services or increase in size in water meter(s) serving the customer or the increase in stormwater service based on impervious/hard surface units.

"Extended main" shall mean a privately financed water, wastewater or stormwater main constructed with the written approval of the Director.

(f)    Definitions "F":

"Fats, oils and greases" means organic compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations Part 136 (40 CFR 136). Commonly referred to as "polar."

"Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means to increase the ground surface elevation or to replace excavated material.

"Food" means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, or ingredient used or intended for use or sale in whole or in part for consumption.

"Food processing establishment (FPE)" means a commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or packaged for consumption.

"Food sales establishment (FSE)" means retail and wholesale grocery stores, retail seafood stores, food processing plants, bakeries, confectioneries, fruit, nuts and vegetable stores and places of business and similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off premises.

"Food service establishments (FSE)" means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products and/or are required to have a food business permit issued by Kitsap County Department of Health. The term includes: restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles, and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called.

"Force main" shall mean a sanitary sewer pressurized pipe system used to transfer wastewater from a sewer lift station to the wastewater treatment facility.

"Fourplex" shall mean a residential unit containing four (4) separate dwelling units with any configuration or four (4) dwelling units located on one (1) parcel.

(g)    Definitions "G":

"General facilities charges (GFC)" shall mean the charge established to reflect the proportionate cost share for existing source, treatment, distribution, transmission, collection, interception, and storage facilities that will be paid on all new and/or expanded utility connections to the City utility.

"Geologically hazardous areas" shall mean areas as defined in the City’s critical areas ordinance and includes areas that because of their susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquake or other geological events are not suited to the siting of commercial, residential or industrial development consistent with public health or safety concerns.

"Geotechnical engineer" shall mean a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Washington, qualified by reason of experience and education in the practice of geotechnical engineering, and designated by the owner as the geotechnical engineer of record for the project.

"Grading" shall mean the movement of earth material through mechanical or other means to create the finished surface and contour of a project site.

"Grease" means rendered animal fat, vegetable shortening, and other such oily matter used for the purposes of and resulting from preparing and/or cooking food.

"Grease interceptor" means an interceptor of at least two hundred fifty (250) gallon capacity whose rated flow exceeds fifty (50) gallons per minute (gpm) to serve one (1) or more fixtures and which is remotely located underground and outside of a food service facility. It is designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste ("gray water") to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity.

"Grease trap" means a device located inside a food service facility designed to retain grease from one (1) to a maximum of four (4) fixtures whose rated flow is fifty (50) gallons per minute (gpm) or less. It is designed to collect, contain or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity or mechanical means.

"Grinder pump" shall mean a system that takes liquid wastes from a home/business and pumps the waste to the City’s sewage conveyance system, located in the public right-of-way. The grinder pump system includes a pump, pump basin, piping, and electrical controls.

"Ground cover" shall mean a dense covering of small plants and grasses with a trunk or stem size less than four (4) inches in diameter and which normally covers the ground.

"Ground water" shall mean water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land or a surface water body.

"Grubbing" shall mean the act of removing vegetation by the roots.

(h)    Definitions "H":

"Hard surface" means an impervious surface, a permeable pavement, or a vegetated roof.

"Hazardous materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

"Health Officer" shall mean the Kitsap Health District Health Officer or designee.

"Hundred cubic feet (HCF)" shall mean hundred cubic feet of measure.

"Hyperchlorinated" means water that contains more than ten (10) mg/L chlorine.

(i)    Definitions "I":

"Illicit connection" means any manmade conveyance that is connected to the stormwater system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include sanitary sewer connections, floor drains, channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the municipal separate storm sewer system.

"Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the City’s storm drain system, except as expressly exempted by this chapter.

"Impervious/hard surface unit (IHSU) (ISU)" shall mean a configuration or conglomeration of impervious surface. One (1) impervious surface unit (IHSU) is equivalent to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of impervious surface area.

"Improper stormwater inflow" or "improper connection" shall mean any kind of stormwater connection or inflow to the wastewater system prohibited by this chapter including, but not limited to: roof drains, parking lot drains, curtain drains, driveway drains and sump pumps.

"Improved premises" shall mean any area which has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than runoff prior to development.

"Inactive account" shall mean an account that has no current usage, billing or payment activity.

"Inactive water service" shall mean that the water meter for the service location has not registered any noticeable consumption. Some of the reasons for inactivity would be by a customer’s request, shutoff for nonpayment, requested deactivation or the water meter has been removed for nonusage.

Industrial User. (See "Commercial special.")

"Infiltration" shall mean ground water entering the wastewater or stormwater system through open pipe joints, cracks in manhole walls, and cracked pipe.

"Infiltration (stormwater)" shall mean the downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.

"Inflow" shall mean rainwater or other clean water that enters the wastewater system through roof leader connections, catch basins, yard and foundation drains, perforated manhole covers, and other openings to the wastewater system.

(j)    Reserved.

(k)    Reserved.

(l)    Definitions "L":

"Lakes" shall mean natural or artificial bodies of water of two (2) or more acres and/or where the deepest part of the basin at low water exceeds two (2) meters (6.6 feet). Artificial bodies of water with a recirculation system approved by the Public Works Department are not included in this definition.

"Land development permit" shall mean a preliminary or final plat for a single-family residential development; a building permit; site plan; preliminary or final planned unit development plan.

"Low impact development (LID)" shall mean a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.

(m)    Definitions "M":

"Mechanical equipment" shall mean all motorized equipment used for earth moving, trenching, excavation, gardening, landscaping, and general property maintenance exceeding twelve (12) horsepower in size.

"Minimum design capability" means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability to or the volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to wastewater system.

"Multifamily units" shall mean a parcel of property which has been legally developed with more than two (2) residential living units.

"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, which are:

(1)    Owned or operated by the City of Bremerton;

(2)    Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; and

(3)    Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and not a combined sewer.

(n)    Definitions "N":

"Native growth protection easement (NGPE)" shall mean an easement granted for the protection of native vegetation within a sensitive area or its associated buffer. The NGPE shall be recorded on the appropriate documents of title and filed with the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office.

"Natural location" shall mean the location of those channels, swales, and other nonmanmade conveyance systems as defined by the first documented topographic contours existing for the subject property, either from maps or photographs, or such other means as appropriate. In the case of outwash soils with relatively flat terrain, no natural location of surface discharge may exist.

"New development" shall mean land disturbing activities, including Class IV - general forest practices that are conversions from timber land to other uses; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or other structure; creation of hard surfaces; and subdivision, short subdivision and binding site plans, as defined and applied in Chapter 58.17 RCW. Projects meeting the definition of redevelopment shall not be considered new development.

"Nonpolar (mineral origin)" means any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fat, oil or grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136.

"Nonstormwater discharge" shall mean any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

"Notice of intent for construction activity" means the application form for coverage under the construction stormwater general permit.

(o)    Definitions "O":

"Occupied property" shall mean real property on which a structure exists that is being served and being billed by an existing or temporary utility service.

"Open space" shall mean land set aside for public or private use within a development that is not built upon.

"Operation and maintenance costs (O&M costs)" shall mean the total cost of operating and maintaining the utility system, including, but not necessarily limited to, costs for labor, supplies and materials, utility services, vendor services, equipment usage, testing, taxes and assessments.

"Outfall" shall mean point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where a discharge leaves the permittee’s MS4 and enters a surface receiving water body or surface receiving waters. Outfall does not include pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances which connect segments of the same stream or other surface waters and are used to convey primarily surface waters (i.e., culverts).

(p)    Definitions "P":

"Parcel" shall mean a distinct tract, section, or plot of a piece of land, usually a division of a larger area.

"Parking lot drain" shall mean any drain or catch basin that collects stormwater runoff located within the confines of a parking lot such as those in pay parking lots, apartment complexes, shopping centers, etc.

"Partially developed lot" shall mean a lot or parcel of land upon which a structure is located and which is of sufficient area so as to be capable of accommodating additional development pursuant to the Bremerton zoning code; or which may be subdivided in accordance with the City of Bremerton subdivision chapter.

"Permeable" shall mean soil or other material that allows the infiltration or passage of water or other liquids.

"Permeable pavement" shall mean pervious concrete, porous asphalt, permeable pavers, gravel pave, or other forms of structural pervious or porous paving material intended to allow passage of water through the pavement section. It often includes an aggregate base that provides structural support and acts as a stormwater reservoir.

"Permit" shall mean a written legal authorization to conduct an action.

"Person" shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner of a premises or as the owner’s agent.

"Pervious surface" shall mean any surface material that allows stormwater to infiltrate into the ground. Examples include lawn, landscape, pasture, native vegetation areas, and permeable pavements.

"Polar (animal and vegetable origin)" means any water or waste which has visible fats, oils or grease floating on the surface or adhering to the sides of the sample containers.

"Pollution" shall mean contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of waters of the state, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of the waters, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive or other substance into any waters of the state as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to alter the ecosystem so as to endanger domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. Further defined in the Washington State Surface Water Quality Standards (Chapter 173-201A WAC), Ground Water Quality Standards (Chapter 173-200 WAC), Sediment Management Standards (Chapter 173-204 WAC), or human health-based criteria in the national Toxics Rule (Federal Register, Vol. 57, No. 246, Dec. 22, 1992, pages 60848-60923).

"Pre-treatment" shall mean any physical, chemical or biological process to remove, neutralize or modify one (1) or more constituents of a waste stream prior to discharge into the public sewers. Pre-treatment may be required to prevent deposition or adherence of substance within the public sewers; to eliminate hazardous exposures of maintenance crews or the public to toxic, noxious or flammable substances; to prevent cumulative or shock loadings that might interfere with the normal performance of treatment processes; to remove substances that are present in sufficient concentration to interfere with the advantageous use of treated sewage sludge as an agricultural fertilizer or soil amendment.

"Premises" shall mean a single tract of land, building, or portion of a building under a single control and ownership.

"Pressure line" shall mean a sanitary sewer through which wastewater must be forced by pumping or gravity pressure to a point of collection.

"Public utilities construction agreement (PUCA)" shall mean an agreement between the City, the developer, and the developer’s contractor to construct utility improvements to serve a proposed development.

"Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" shall mean any device or system used in treatment of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature which is publicly owned.

(q)    Reserved.

(r)    Definitions "R":

"Redevelopment" means conversion of an existing development to another land use, or addition of a material improvement to an existing development.

"Reimbursement agreement" shall mean an agreement entered into between the installer of a utility facility and the City for the purpose of reimbursing the installer for all or part of the costs for installation or extension of the utility system by subsequent development for the facility defined in the agreement.

"Removal" shall mean the actual destruction or causing the effective destruction through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a tree or ground cover.

"Roof drains" shall mean any downspout, scupper or device that collects and conveys stormwater runoff from a roof surface.

"Routine landscape maintenance" shall mean pruning, weeding, planting annuals, mowing turf lands and ground cover management which is undertaken by a person in connection with the normal maintenance and repair of property. This definition does not include falling or topping of trees or removal of invasive plants resulting from lack of regular maintenance.

(s)    Definitions "S":

"Sanitary sewage" shall mean the liquid wastes and all constituents therein that are related to the use of such sanitation facilities, toilets, bathtubs, showers, sinks, dishwashers, washing machines, garbage grinders, and other devices. However, any other water that enters sanitary or combined sewers before or after discharge by a user shall thereafter also be called sewage. "Sewage" is essentially synonymous with the term "wastewater," except that wastewater may also contain liquid wastes discharged from industrial operations or processes.

"Sanitary sewer" shall mean only those portions of the wastewater system which are designated to carry, transport, or dispose of wastewater.

"Sedimentation" shall mean the process of gravity-induced settling, sinking and deposition of fragmented rock, soil, or organic particles displaced, transported, and deposited by erosive water-based processes.

"Septage waste" shall mean waste material pumped from an on-site wastewater disposal system such as a septic tank or cesspool or holding tank.

"Service line" shall mean a water service line constructed between the water main and the right-of-way or easement line in accordance with current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

"Sewer lateral" shall mean a sanitary sewer constructed between the sanitary sewer main and the right-of-way or easement line in accordance with current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

"Siltation" shall mean deposition of soil, sand, and gravel on the surface or in stormwater conveyance systems as a result of erosion in tributary areas and transport by runoff water.

"Single-family parcel or unit" shall mean a parcel which has been developed with a single-family living unit.

"Single-metered building" shall mean a building with more than one unit where the utility account is measured through a single water meter and provides service to all units and/or common areas.

"Site" shall mean the portion of a piece of property which is directly subject to development.

"Slope" shall mean the inclination of a surface expressed in a ratio of horizontal run to vertical rise measured as a numerical ratio, percent, or in degrees. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is the horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance (rise), as 2:1. A 2:1 slope is a fifty (50) percent slope. Expressed in degrees, the slope is the angle from the horizontal plane, with a ninety (90) degree slope being vertical (maximum) and forty-five (45) degrees being a 1:1 or one hundred (100) percent slope.

"Standard construction costs" shall mean the total cost of installation of a utility piping system, including the cost of all manholes, distribution system, or incidental work necessary to place the utility system in service, meeting the minimum size and installation requirements of the utility for the intended service.

"Standard gravity sanitary sewer" shall mean a sanitary trunk sewer conveying flow to a point of collection without pumping and constructed in accordance with current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

"Standard gravity sewer connection" shall mean a connection made to a gravity trunk or lateral sanitary sewer of the City, except those City sewer lines located on the waterfront or pressure sewer line.

"Standard stormwater sewer" shall mean a stormwater line not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter and constructed in accordance with current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

"Standard water main" shall mean a water distribution line constructed in accordance with current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

"Standards" shall mean the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards for the City of Bremerton.

"Stormwater Manual" shall mean the manuals adopted in BMC 15.04.020.

"Stormwater system" shall mean all facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating and discharging stormwater.

"Sump pump" shall mean a pump that conveys ground water or stormwater runoff away from a sensitive area of a property to prevent flooding or property damage. A sump pump that discharges into a sanitary sewer or wastewater system is an improper connection.

"SWMMWW" shall mean the current version of the Washington State Department of Ecology’s Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington.

(t)    Definitions "T":

"Total suspended solids (TSS)" shall mean materials that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering using the current accepted Standard Analytical Laboratory Methods Manual.

"Townhouse" shall mean a row of homes that share common walls but ownership includes the land to each individual owner.

"Triplex" shall mean a multifamily residential unit containing three (3) separate dwelling units with any configuration or three (3) dwelling units located on one (1) parcel.

(u)    Definitions "U":

"Undeveloped parcel" shall mean any parcel of real property that has no structure or improvement requiring utility service or has not been altered by grading or filling of the ground surface, or by construction of any improvement or other impervious surface area that affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.

"Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC)" shall mean the latest version of the Uniform Plumbing Code that has been accepted by the City of Bremerton.

"User" shall mean any person, business, or institution owning or controlling property for which utility service is provided and who is responsible for an account.

"User parcel" shall mean any parcel of land within the utility service area to which water, wastewater, or stormwater service is currently provided or to which a charge is imposed therefor, or any other land with any significant manmade impervious surface.

"Utility" shall mean the water, wastewater, and stormwater utility systems of the City.

"Utility service agreement (USA)" shall mean an agreement that the person requesting utility service signs, which constitutes a contract with the utility.

"Utility service rates" shall mean the rates charged for services. These will include the zero usage fixed fees which are for the maintenance and repair of the utility infrastructure and commodity charge for usage. Based on service location, other associated rates, fees and charges may be applied to the customer’s account.

(v)    Definitions "V":

"Verified strength" shall mean any wastewater discharge that exceeds the strength limits of the Commercial I through VII classes as defined in this section, or who desires to be charged for wastewater service on the basis of its specific discharge rather than average class strength.

(w)    Definitions "W":

"Wastewater" shall mean liquid wastes, and all constituents dissolved or suspended therein, discharged by residential, commercial, or industrial users of the wastewater facilities system. "Wastewater" is essentially synonymous with the term "sewage."

"Wastewater system" shall mean all facilities for collecting, transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage, including biosolid utilization.

"Water meter" shall mean a device used to measure and record the amount of water flowing through a pipe.

"Water system" shall mean all facilities for treatment, storage, pumping, transmission and distribution of water.

"Watershed" shall mean a geographic region within which water drains into a particular river, stream, or body of water as identified and numbered by the State of Washington Water Resource Inventory Areas (WRIAs) as defined in Chapter 173-500 WAC.

"Wetlands" shall mean those areas as defined in the City’s critical areas ordinance and include areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5321 §1, 2017: Ord. 5310 §1, 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §2, 2013)


15.01.030 UTILITY SERVICE AGREEMENT.

(a)    Each customer of the utility and any person requesting utility service from the City for water, wastewater, or stormwater shall be required to make application and enter into a utility service agreement. Agreements shall be executed prior to connection to the utility system or activation of the account.

(b)    The utility service agreement shall include the name and address of the owner and the service address of the premises served together with the service requested. The agreement shall be signed by the owner of the property or the owner’s designated agent and shall be filed with the City before building permit issuance. No partial utility service agreement will be issued or approved; all services requested will be listed on the application. The applicant shall pay all general facility charges (GFCs) and installation and inspection fees for the utility services, as herein provided, prior to making any water, sewer, or storm service connection. The building permit will not be issued until all of the applicable City fees are paid. Any request for deferment shall be in accordance with Chapter 15.06 BMC. 

(c)    The utility service agreement and/or the utility billing owner/tenant change form for service shall constitute a contract between the applicant and the City in which the applicant agrees to pay for service provided at the rate and in the manner specified.

(d)    The agreement shall be effective at the time it is signed by the Director and charges for service to the premises shall be assessed from date of connection.

(e)    Customers may request written quotes from the City for the fees, assessments and charges for utility service. Such quotes are valid for ninety (90) days from the date of the quote, or until the end of the calendar year, whichever is sooner.

(f)    A customer can request in writing a refund of their utility service agreement stating the reason for the request. When the request is received the Director will prorate the amount of refund based on the work performed to date, including consideration of any payments made to third parties in reliance on the utility service agreement. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5288 §1, 2015: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4909 §2, 2004; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4442 §4, 1993; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.040 CONDITIONS OF SERVICE - RETAIL.

(a)    Access. The City shall, as a condition of providing utility service, be granted the authority by the property owner to make reasonable periodic inspections of the service connection and related appurtenances. Such inspections may be by the City or other appropriate agency to enforce any of the provisions of local, state, or federal laws, or any regulation adopted hereunder. Failure to conform to the terms and conditions shall constitute a breach of the agreement, and shall entitle the City to charge fees and enforce penalties or discontinue water service after notice as set forth in BMC 15.07.080 for delinquent (water, wastewater, stormwater) accounts.

(b)    Interruption/Failure of Service. The City reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service at any time without notice to the consumer and the City shall not be liable for damages for such interruption or failure nor be held in breach of contract.

It shall further be provided that the City shall not be held responsible for any damages resulting from defective plumbing or appliances on the premises, and the fact that the agents of the City have inspected the plumbing and appliances shall not constitute a basis of recovery. Damages to premises resulting from the utility system having been interrupted or failed shall not constitute a breach of contract on the part of the City or in any way relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.050 CONDITION OF SERVICE - CONTRACT.

The City may contract for sale of surplus water or collection of wastewater and/or stormwater with other districts or other public agencies providing utility service. Such services shall be through a wholesale contract, under such terms and conditions as shall be deemed fair and equitable by the City and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.060 PENALTY FOR FALSE INFORMATION.

The conveyance to the City of false information in an application for a utility service or adjustment credits shall forfeit the customer’s rights to service or credits, and the customer, in the case of a credit adjustment, shall be required to reimburse the amount of the credit received where based upon such false information. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.070 DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT.

A property owner or owners of any specified area situated within the utility service area requiring utility service in conjunction with development or redevelopment may petition the City to construct public system improvements. The City shall review the petition, and, subject to the utility system plan and engineering and economic feasibility, authorize construction of improvements. When completed and accepted by the City in writing, and upon receiving final payment, the improvements shall become part of the utility’s system and shall be conveyed to the City by deed of conveyance prior to service. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4909 §3, 2004; Ord. 4512 §1, 1995; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.075 LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS.

(a)    If sixty percent (60%) or more of the property owners of a specified area situated within the utility service area petition the City to construct public system improvements, the City may construct said improvements upon execution of a local improvement district agreement between the property owners and the City specifying the improvements, the terms and conditions for the improvements, and the reimbursement of all costs associated with the improvements. Reimbursement at actual costs, as adjusted by state and City regulation, for the improvements may be paid in full or in annual installments, plus interest at a rate determined by the City based on current market rates.

(b)    Deferred payments for the construction of system improvements shall be limited to system improvements and shall exclude connection fees, inspection fees, plan check fees, and general facility charges.

(c)    The City may construct the improvements, on behalf of the property owners, utilizing City staff, negotiated contracts, or competitive bids subject to state statutes governing utility construction. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.01.080 DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS - FEES.

The subsequent connection to the system improvements by the property owner shall be subject to applicable fees for service to include general facility charges, connection fees, and any other applicable fees established under this title. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.01.090 PUBLIC UTILITY CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT.

A permit shall be required by the City for all projects, alterations, repairs, or connections to the utility system. These activities include, but are not limited to, activities associated with the installation of new utility systems to be constructed by others and conveyed to the City under the terms of a public utilities construction agreement; the opening, alteration, repair, or replacement of the utility system; the connection to the utility system; and the abandonment or disconnection from the utility system.

Entering into a public utilities construction agreement with the City shall not relieve the agreement holder of the responsibility for obtaining such other permits and licenses as may be required by the Department, City, county, or other districts in whose jurisdictions the improvements/repairs are made.

The permits shall be available from the City with fees established by the assessment, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.01.100 DEVELOPER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS - REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.

(a)    The City may enter into reimbursement agreements with property owners responsible for the installation of system improvements to provide for reimbursement to owners by others benefiting from the improvements and connecting to the improvements at a later time.

Requests for reimbursement by the property owner pursuant to this section shall be made in writing prior to entering into the public utilities construction agreement. Specific provisions of reimbursement shall be included in the reimbursement agreement. The City shall determine the area that is subject to the reimbursement and shall identify the properties benefiting from the utility system improvements in a description or a drawing that will become part of the public utilities construction agreement.

(b)    Reimbursements will be added to the City’s permitting and licensing computer system.

(c)    Reimbursement from each benefiting property owner shall be determined by the City as stipulated in the system improvement agreement. Cost recovery payments by properties benefiting from connections to developer extensions shall be collected by the City.

(d)    Reimbursement to the property owner constructing the improvement shall be limited to fifteen (15) years from the date of acceptance of the improvement. The City shall retain fifteen percent (15%) of the cost recovery payments for maintaining records and administration of the program and forward the remainder of the payment to the property owner who originally constructed the water, wastewater, or stormwater system improvement. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4909 §4, 2004; Ord. 4512 §2, 1995; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991. Formerly 15.01.090)


15.01.110 ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.

(a)    The Engineering Design and Construction Standards are those as defined and developed by the Department and approved by the Director.

(b)    An applicant may request a deviation pursuant to BMC 11.12.080(b). (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.01.120 BONDING.

The City shall require a performance bond/deposit and warranty bond/deposit for all utility work in accordance with BMC 11.02.220. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.01.130 AUTHORITY.

The Department of Public Works and Utilities by and through its Director is charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title. The Director shall have the authority to:

(a)    Develop and adopt procedures as needed to implement this code and to carry out the responsibilities of the City.

(b)    Request the assistance of other City departments to administer and enforce this code.

(c)    Assign the responsibility for interpretation and application of specified procedures to divisions within the Department of Public Works and Utilities.

(d)    Require or allow a performance or maintenance assurance surety when authorized by a provision of this chapter.

(e)    Act as final authority for requests for variance from requirements of this title.

(f)    Amend, interpret, and allow deviations from the Engineering and Design Construction Standards when the Director finds that said reasons are in the best interest of the community. The Director is further authorized to establish minimum requirements for the design and construction of transportation facilities, utilities, and other public infrastructure, and requirements for protecting existing facilities during construction. The Engineering and Design Construction Standards shall be consistent with this code and adopted City policies. Modifications to or deviations from adopted Engineering Design and Construction Standards must be supported, in writing, and demonstrate that the public interest is protected, and the modification is based upon sound engineering and/or public safety principles and adequately addresses all relevant functional, safety, maintenance, and aesthetic concerns. If a deviation is requested by an applicant, the Director shall require all necessary information to be provided by the applicant, and the applicant shall pay all City costs, including staff time and consultant fees, associated with reviewing and approving the deviation request.

(g)    Apply for grants to conduct transportation improvements. (Ord. 5376 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


Chapter 15.02 WATER

Sections:

15.02.010    PURPOSE.

15.02.020    WATER SYSTEM PLAN.

15.02.030    SERVICE AVAILABILITY.

15.02.040    SERVICE BEYOND CITY LIMITS.

15.02.050    WATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

15.02.060    ABANDONMENT OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.

15.02.070    PRIVATE PRESSURE ADJUSTMENT.

15.02.080    HYDRANTS.

15.02.090    FIRE SERVICE AND IRRIGATION METERING.

15.02.100    SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

15.02.110    CONNECTION SIZE.

15.02.120    METERS.

15.02.130    BACKFLOW/CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND INSPECTION.

15.02.140    WATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

15.02.145    PROHIBITING FLUORIDATION.

15.02.150    INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

15.02.155    WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE.

15.02.160    ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

15.02.180    METER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.

15.02.190    EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION.

15.02.200    WASTE.

15.02.210    PROHIBITED ACTS.

15.02.220    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


15.02.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter establishes availability, conditions of service, system improvement requirements, and the operation and maintenance of the water system. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.020 WATER SYSTEM PLAN.

A water system plan shall be developed by the City as required by WAC 246-290-100. The plan shall be approved by the Mayor, adopted by the City Council, and administered by the Director. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.030 SERVICE AVAILABILITY.

Water service is considered available if the property is situated within the water service area defined in the water system plan and is adjacent to the water system; and further provided that:

(a)    The water system has the capacity and facilities to accommodate the additional demand, or the property is part of a water system local improvement district or utility local improvement district and has been assessed for water improvements.

(b)    The connection is consistent with the water system plan.

(c)    The connection is approved and permitted by the City.

(d)    The connection is in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local rules, regulations and codes.

Any customer or potential customer within the water service area and not adjacent to the water system may be connected to the water system subject to meeting the above requirements and establishing a local improvement district, utility local improvement district, or entering into a public utilities construction agreement with the City for system extension and/or improvements of the water system for service to the premises. For the purposes of this section "adjacent" shall mean water extended to and though the frontage or to and through the property to potential adjacent development. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.040 SERVICE BEYOND CITY LIMITS.

Property that is outside existing City limits shall be permitted water service only upon entering into an outside utility agreement with the City providing for:

(a)    Granting to the City of Bremerton a limited power of attorney to include owner’s consent to annexation of the property as part of any notice of intent or petition for annexation presented to the City of Bremerton;

(b)    Consistency with any proposed extraterritorial comprehensive land use plan and development standards for the property adopted pursuant to RCW 35.13.177 for new development; and

(c)    Consistency with adopted City ordinances and policies for new development;

(d)    Consistency with the adopted City water system plan and Engineering Design and Construction Standards for new developments. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.050 WATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

All water mains and appurtenances shall be installed by the City or a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in compliance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards, and local, state and federal regulations. All water system extensions shall be installed from the existing water main to the proposed development and along the entire frontage of the premises of the development to be served.

No connection shall be made to new water mains until all acceptance documentation has been received and approved by the City. Required documentation includes record drawings, deeds of conveyance, easement(s) and any warranty bond(s).

The City may, at its option, require installation of water mains larger than the minimum sizes specified in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards to provide for adequate future capacity within the water system. The City may authorize the entering into a cost sharing agreement to contribute to the cost for larger mains or other improvements based upon the water system plan. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.060 ABANDONMENT OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.

Upon completion of a new water main, owners of premises adjacent to or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the main, who are being supplied with City water service through a private system or have a connection to a private service, shall make application for a new utility service agreement and shall install a separate service connection to the main. Service to the private main shall be discontinued ninety (90) days following completion of the new main. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.070 PRIVATE PRESSURE ADJUSTMENT.

Where water supply is not available to a premises because of low pressure during periods of peak demands for water, or where property is situated at such an elevation that it cannot be assured of adequate pressure, the owner may, at the owner’s expense, install a pump or pump system to furnish supply pressure, which shall be approved by the City. The City approval shall be based on the protection of the safety and integrity of the water system and not on the adequacy of the private system’s design for its intended use. The auxiliary system shall be separated from the meter box and remain the property of the property owner, who will be solely responsible for its maintenance and operation.

In the event local conditions result in high pressure (exceeding eighty (80) psi), a pressure reducing valve may be required and installed at the expense of the owner. The pressure reducing valve shall be separated from the meter box and remain the property of the property owner who will be solely responsible for its maintenance and operation. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.080 HYDRANTS.

All fire hydrants shall be installed by the City or a licensed contractor in compliance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards. No person other than properly authorized employees or agents of the City shall operate fire hydrants. Location and configuration shall be reviewed by the local fire marshal and Bremerton Fire Marshal. All fire hydrants situated on private property for public use and to be maintained by the City will require access at all times for operation and maintenance and the dedication of an easement to the City prior to acceptance by the City. All fire hydrants located on private property for private use shall be connected to the utility system by a double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure backflow assembly. Such hydrants shall not be maintained by the City and shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.090 FIRE SERVICE AND IRRIGATION METERING.

(a)    Except as provided for in BMC 18.02.170, all fire service lines shall have separate service lines and separate meters. If the existing service to the property does not meet the correct flow requirement, the cost to install the correct size will be assessed and paid to the City before work is completed.

All new and existing automatic or manual fire sprinkler (wet and combination standpipe) systems used for fire protection shall be metered at the expense of the owner. Failure to make application for and payment of all fees for the installation of a meter as required on non-metered fire lines within ninety (90) days of notification shall be cause for the discontinuance of water service to the fire protection system.

(b)    All commercial or industrial sites shall have separate metered service for irrigation if irrigation is part of the approved new development. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4958 §1, 2005: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.100 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

(a)    All service connections shall be installed by the City in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

The service connections shall be extended at right angles from the water system to the property line and installed within the right-of-way not to exceed forty (40) feet from the main. The water service line within the public right-of-way shall be maintained by and kept within the exclusive control of the City. Each service connection shall have its own service line and meter. Installation shall be at the expense of the property owner.

(b)    Whenever an applicant requests and receives water service to a premises that does not front a main, a main shall be installed as a prerequisite to connect to the water system.

(c)    To service property which does not abut on a public right-of-way in which there is a water main, the City may install a connection to the most appropriate main. This connection shall be perpendicular to the main to the right-of-way line, and installed within the right-of-way not to exceed forty (40) feet from the main, and permit connection therewith by the owner at the property owner’s expense.

(d)    Every parcel under separate ownership connected to the water system shall be required to install a separate service connection to the water main, and the premises so supplied will not be allowed to supply water to any other premises or parcel. However, these restrictions shall not apply to existing services unless improvements are done to the parcel and the separate service and meter can be installed for twenty-five percent (25%) or less than the total improvement cost of the project or, in the judgment of the Director, such existing connection should be discontinued.

(e)    When a single parcel of land having more than one (1) residential structure served by a single water meter is subdivided, the installation of new water service(s) shall be required for the structures on the newly established lots. The expense for installation of the new service(s) will be to the owner that subdivided the property, and application for the service(s) will be filed prior to the approval of subdivision. The new service(s) will be subject to all fees including general facility charges.

(f)    When an existing structure is removed and a new structure is constructed on the same property or parcel, a new utility service agreement is required. Any existing water service line that does not meet current Engineering Design and Construction Standards and requirements shall be flow tested and approved by the Director for reuse. Any existing water service line determined to be substandard must be replaced as directed by the Director at the owner’s expense.

(g)    In new and pre-existing water service connections where one (1) water service serves more than one (1) premises, each and every building or trailer, when connected to one (1) meter, must be provided with a separate shut-off valve. Shut-off valves shall be located so that each may be closed without disrupting water service to the remaining units. Each separate water service not already equipped with a shut-off valve as provided herein must install shut-off valves, at the owner’s expense, within ninety (90) days of notice of defect. Failure to provide such valve, or to shut off the water at such unit when unoccupied, will be considered sufficient reason to deny any adjustment in the water bill in the event of leakage due to these causes.

(h)    The City may require or allow additional service connections when such additional service connections are in the best interest of the utility. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.110 CONNECTION SIZE.

The size of each water service and tap shall be determined in accordance with the latest version of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the American Water Works Association (AWWA) guidance on sizing water service lines and meters, except that standby fire-protection services shall be sized based on fire-flow requirements determined by the Fire Marshal. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.120 METERS.

All meters shall be and remain the property of the City and will not be removed unless the use of water on the premises is discontinued, abandoned, or otherwise removed by the City. All meters shall be sized as determined in accordance with the latest version of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the AWWA guidance on sizing water service lines and meters, except that standby fire-protection services shall be sized based on fire-flow requirements determined by the Fire Marshal. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.130 BACKFLOW/CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND INSPECTION.

Service from the water system may be contingent upon the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly for the protection of the water system from actual or potential cross connections.

The City shall require annual testing and inspection of all backflow assemblies within its system to ensure proper function of assemblies and the level of protection is commensurate with the degree of actual or potential hazard to the water system. The City shall notify property owners in writing thirty (30) days prior to the due date of their annual test/inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide the City a satisfactory test/inspection report completed by a Washington State certified backflow assembly tester within thirty (30) days of written notification.

In the event the City does not receive a satisfactory test report within thirty (30) days of written notification, the City will contact a certified tester to test the assembly, and the cost of the test, any necessary repairs, and an administration fee will be added to the customer’s next utility bill. The customer may be assessed additional charges to their bill to cover costs for time, expenses, and other related costs incurred by the City if reasonable access is not granted to the tester to test the assembly.

The City shall inspect backflow assemblies for proper installation and protection commensurate with the degree of hazard, subject to a service fee.

Any actual or potential cross connection, without the appropriate backflow protection, now in existence or hereafter discovered or created, shall be declared a prohibited act and shall be enforced accordingly. The elimination or protection from an actual or potential cross connection shall be in accordance with WAC 246-290-490. Water service shall be discontinued to any property for failure to comply with the provisions of this portion of the code. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5321 §2, 2017: Ord. 5275 §1, 2015: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.140 WATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

The City shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and repair of the water system under its jurisdiction and located within the public right-of-way, dedicated utility easements, and utility-owned property. The City shall not be responsible for servicing private systems beyond its meters, or for public systems purchasing water under a wholesale contract unless otherwise agreed.

When maintenance, repair, or replacement of the water system is required due to user activity resulting in unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions as set forth in this section, any expense incurred by the City to abate such conditions shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.145 PROHIBITING FLUORIDATION.

The water system of the City of Bremerton shall not be artificially fluoridated; i.e., that fluoride in any chemical form shall not be added, now or in the future, unless so ordained by a majority of the voters in an open election. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4647, Added, 02/22/1999)


15.02.150 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

The City may restrict the use of the water system through regulation or control of the use whenever an emergency exists affecting the water system, or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or any other necessary work. Whenever reasonable, and in cases where it has advance knowledge, the City will make a reasonable attempt to provide notice of such emergency using appropriate methods of communication, setting forth any limitations on the use of the water system that may be deemed necessary for public health and safety.

The City shall not be held responsible for any damage to private property resulting from interruption, failure of the water system, or failure of the property owner to comply with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.155 WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE.

It is in the public interest for the City to be prepared with an appropriate response in the event of a water shortage situation to protect the health, welfare, and safety of its users.

(a)    Authority. The Director shall have the authority to declare various stages of water emergencies and to implement the provisions of the Bremerton water shortage contingency plan. The stages of this plan are advisory, voluntary, mandatory restrictions, and emergency curtailment.

(b)    Mandatory Water Restrictions. If mandatory water restrictions are declared, the Director shall issue a public notification of the nature of the restrictions. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.02.160 ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

The City shall be responsible for the integrity, safety, and continuity of the water system. As a condition of the utility service agreement the property owner shall grant the City the authority to make inspections at any reasonable time if the City or other appropriate agency has reasonable cause to believe there exists on premises a nonconforming, unauthorized, or unsafe condition or to verify no such condition exists. The Director may enter onto such property to inspect the condition or to perform any duties imposed upon the City by this code, provided the City shall first make reasonable efforts to contact the owner or person responsible for such property.

The City shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry and abate the condition. Such remedy may include, but not be limited to, securing property owner correction; revocation, suspension, or discontinuation of service, permits, or authorizations; removal, reconstruction, replacement, or alteration of unauthorized condition; or all other powers and remedies which may be available under law, this code, and regulations and procedures adopted hereunder. Any expense incurred by the water utility to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance to the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any cost in collection. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.180 METER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.

The City shall be responsible for all domestic and commercial meters under its jurisdiction.

Where the accuracy of the reading of a water meter is questioned, the meter shall be removed at the customer’s request and tested. The test may be performed in the owner’s presence if requested. A written test report will be made. If the test discloses an over registration error by more than three percent (3%) in the meter registry, the excess of the consumption on the three (3) previous readings shall be credited to the customer’s utility account. In the event that the meter is found to be under registering by more than three percent (3%) in the meter registry, the average loss of consumption of the previous three (3) readings shall be billed to the customer’s utility account. For meter tests in excess of one (1) within a twelve (12) month period, the customer shall pay for each additional test. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.190 EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION.

When excessive consumption periodically overloads the capacity of a meter supplying service to any premises, the Director shall determine the size of the service pipe from the main and the size of the meter necessary to give proper service without damage to the meter and shall notify the property owner of the requirement for replacement. The replacement of service connection shall be at the expense of the property owner. Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with the requirement within thirty (30) days shall be cause for the termination of water service until such requirement has been met. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.200 WASTE.

Any person or owner receiving water service shall not waste water, or allow it to be wasted, by imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes, closets, faucets, or other fixtures, or to use the water for purposes other than those named in the application. Violation shall constitute grounds for the discontinuation of water service. A discontinuance of water service notice will be sent to the customer giving them ten (10) days from the date of the notice to correct the problem or the service will be terminated. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.210 PROHIBITED ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following:

(a)    Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the City, to disturb, repair, interfere with, or damage any water source, water main, pipe, machinery, tools, meters, hydrant, or any building, improvement, or other appurtenances belonging to, connected with, or under the control of the City.

(b)    Contamination. It shall be unlawful for any person to contaminate, bathe in, or fish in any water system of the City.

(c)    Water Use During Emergency. It shall be unlawful for any person receiving water from the City to knowingly use water for lawn or garden sprinkling and irrigation purposes on any premises during the progress of a fire or any other emergency condition after notice of such restriction.

(d)    Obstructing Water Meter or Hydrant. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any water meter or hydrant by placing around or thereon any stones, bricks, lumber, dirt, or other materials; parking or standing vehicles, constructing fences, planting shrubs, or any other obstruction within five (5) feet of any water meter or hydrant.

(e)    Connection to Unauthorized System. It shall be unlawful to connect the water system to any premises or use not authorized through a service application. This includes connecting an adjoining property or building with a garden hose or some other means to bypass the purchase of a meter or service for that property.

(f)    Trespass in Closed Watershed. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on City properties posted as restricted property and facility lands without authorization by the Mayor or the Director. (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.02.220 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5376 §2 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


Chapter 15.03 WASTEWATER

Sections:

15.03.010    PURPOSE.

15.03.020    WASTEWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

15.03.030    SERVICE AVAILABILITY.

15.03.040    SERVICE BEYOND CITY LIMITS.

15.03.050    SERVICE - MANDATED.

15.03.060    CONDITIONS OF SERVICE - BULK TRANSPORT.

15.03.070    WASTEWATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

15.03.080    SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

15.03.090    CONNECTION OWNERSHIP.

15.03.100    WASTEWATER SAMPLING STATIONS.

15.03.110    PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.

15.03.120    BACKWATER VALVES.

15.03.130    ABANDONMENT.

15.03.140    WASTEWATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

15.03.150    INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

15.03.160    ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

15.03.170    REPAIR OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.

15.03.180    EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.

15.03.190    WASTEWATER SYSTEM CLEANING.

15.03.200    CHANGED SITE CONDITIONS.

15.03.210    PROHIBITED ACTS.

15.03.215    LOW PRESSURE SEWERS.

15.03.220    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


15.03.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter establishes availability, conditions of service, system improvement requirements and the operation and maintenance of the wastewater system. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.020 WASTEWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

A wastewater system comprehensive plan shall be developed by the Department in accordance with WAC 173-240-050. The plan shall be approved by the Mayor, adopted by the City Council and administered by the Director. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.030 SERVICE AVAILABILITY.

Wastewater service is considered available if the property is situated within the wastewater service area defined in the wastewater system comprehensive plan and is adjacent to the wastewater system, and further provided that:

(a)    The treatment and wastewater system has the capacity and facilities to accommodate the additional flow, or the property which is part of a wastewater local improvement district (LID) or utility local improvement district (ULID) and has been assessed for sewer improvements.

(b)    The connection is consistent with the wastewater system comprehensive plan.

(c)    The connection is approved and permitted by the Department.

(d)    The connection is in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local rules, regulations and codes.

Any customer or potential customer within the wastewater service area and not adjacent to the wastewater system may be connected to the wastewater system subject to meeting the above requirements and establishing a local improvement district (LID) or utility local improvement district (ULID) and/or entering into a public utilities construction agreement with the City for system extension or improvements of the wastewater system for service to the premises. For the purpose of this section, "adjacent" shall mean sewer extended to and through the frontage or to and through the property to potential adjacent development. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.040 SERVICE BEYOND CITY LIMITS.

(a)    General Policy. It is the general policy of the City of Bremerton that properties located outside the City limits annex into the City before wastewater utility services are provided to those properties. For the purpose of this section, "service" means extensions of and/or service connections to City wastewater utilities to property located outside City limits. "Extension" means to modify, expand, or extend the existing City wastewater infrastructure such as sewer mains and related appurtenances. This policy does not apply to water utilities. Exceptions to this policy are set forth in subsection (b) of this section.

(b)    Exceptions. In cases where an owner of property located outside the City limits requests extension of utility service, the City Council may, in its sole and absolute discretion, provide wastewater utility services to those properties if the property owner executes an outside utility agreement pursuant to the provisions set forth in subsection (d) of this section and:

(1)    Annexation Not Feasible. In cases where the City Council determines that annexation of a property located within the City’s urban growth area is not currently feasible; or

(2)    Failed Systems. In cases where an existing septic system serving property has failed, and:

(i)    The Health District local health official certifies that an existing septic system has failed and is physically incapable of being repaired or replaced in a manner meeting applicable health standards; and

(ii)    Connection is shown to be necessary to protect basic public health and safety and the environment; and

(iii)    For property located outside an urban growth area, the utility services provided by the connection are financially sustainable at rural densities and do not permit urban development pursuant to RCW 36.70A.110(4); or

(3)    Other Circumstances. In any other circumstances where the City Council determines, at its sole and absolute discretion, that it is necessary or appropriate to allow the provision of wastewater utility service.

(c)    Existing Utilities. Nothing in this section is intended to abrogate any existing wastewater utility systems currently in existence outside the City limits. The City does not intend to terminate any wastewater utility service outside the City limits that is in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codifying this section. For purposes of this chapter, "in existence" means the property is currently receiving utility service and/or has a fully signed, valid, City utility service agreement. However, the City will not provide new wastewater utility services to property from existing wastewater utilities located outside the City limits except:

(1)    As provided in subsection (b) of this section; or

(2)    A new service connection to a single parcel of property from a fronting sewer main pursuant to BMC 15.03.080 that does not modify, expand, or extend the City’s wastewater utility infrastructure such as sewer mains and related appurtenances; or

(3)    New utility services from an existing City wastewater utility system as established by a local improvement district (LID) to property that is subject to the LID.

To receive any of these new services, the property owner must execute an agreement pursuant to the provisions set forth in subsection (d) of this section. The Director of Public Works and Utilities is authorized to approve utility service pursuant to subsections (c)(2) and (3) of this section.

(d)    Outside Utility Agreement. In the event that the City Council determines, pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, to provide wastewater utility services beyond the City limits, the owner of the property for which service is authorized must execute an outside utility agreement with the City providing for the owner granting to the City of Bremerton a limited power of attorney to include owner’s consent to annexation of the property as part of any notice of intent or petition for annexation presented to the City of Bremerton.

(e)    The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall review the application for services and forward the same, together with the Director’s recommendation, to the City Council for review and determination under subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5306 §1, 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.050 SERVICE - MANDATED.

Any premises within two hundred (200) feet of a City wastewater system where sewage originates and where the Health District local health officer has determined that a wastewater service connection is required in order to protect public health and safety shall be required to connect to the City wastewater system. The Health District local health officer shall serve the owner with a written notice requiring the connection. A copy of such notice shall be provided to the Department. Such connection shall be made within the time limit as provided for in the notice.

Where connection to City wastewater system is required, the connection shall be made in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards. Whenever connection to the wastewater system is required, the property owner shall be required to remove any connections to cesspools, septic tanks, or other on-site wastewater disposal facilities and install a direct connection to the wastewater system.

All abandoned facilities shall be back-filled by the property owner as required by the Health District local health officer within thirty (30) days from the time of connection to the City’s wastewater system or sooner if such facility constitutes a health hazard or public nuisance.

The Department is authorized and directed to begin billing and collecting at the time of connection for all wastewater system service charges or sixty (60) days after written notice is served by the Health District local health officer, whether or not the owner has completed connection to the City’s wastewater system.

If the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to connect the property, building, or premises to the wastewater system within the time specified by the notice, the City may make such connection. The cost of the connection shall be assessed against the property and shall become a lien. The City is authorized, empowered, and directed to collect the cost of the connection by either foreclosure of the lien or by a suit against the owner. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.060 CONDITIONS OF SERVICE - BULK TRANSPORT.

No person shall discharge materials from a mobile tank into the City wastewater system except at points designated by the Director. Discharge of materials transported from sources outside the wastewater area, and from commercial or industrial sources wherever located, may be prohibited at the discretion of the Director.

Prior to discharge of materials from a mobile tank, a Department manifest shall be completed and submitted to the Department, identifying source, quantity, and nature of the materials to be discharged.

A charge shall be made as provided in BMC 15.06.060, Miscellaneous fees and charges. This charge may include, but not be limited to, discharges containing sewage or leachate from landfills, septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, or similar sewage receptacles. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.070 WASTEWATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

All wastewater sewers and appurtenances shall be installed by the Department or a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in compliance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards and local, state and federal regulations.

No connections shall be made to new sewer mains until all acceptance documentation has been received and approved by the Department. Required documentation includes record drawings, deeds of conveyance, easement(s) and any warranty bond(s).

All wastewater system extensions shall be installed along the entire frontage of the premises or plat to be served. The Department may, at its option, require installation of sanitary sewers larger than the minimum sizes specified in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards to provide for adequate capacity within the wastewater system. The Department is authorized to enter into cost sharing agreements to contribute to the cost for larger sanitary sewers or other improvements based upon the wastewater system comprehensive plan.

Upon completion of a new wastewater system extension, owners of premises adjacent to or within two hundred (200) feet of the wastewater system who are being supplied with City wastewater services through a private sewer or connection shall make application for a new utility service agreement and shall install a separate service connection to the new sanitary sewer. Service from private system shall be discontinued ninety (90) days following completion of the new main. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.080 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

All service connections shall be installed by the Department or by a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in compliance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

The service connections shall be extended at right angles from the wastewater system to a point adjacent to the property line and shall be maintained by and kept within the exclusive control of the City.

Whenever an applicant requests wastewater service to a premises with no fronting sewer main, a standard sewer main shall be required to be installed as a prerequisite to connection to the wastewater system.

Every parcel under separate ownership connected to the wastewater system shall be required to install a separate service connection to the wastewater main, and the premises so supplied will not be allowed to provide service to any other premises. However, these restrictions shall not apply to existing connections unless improvements are done to the parcel and a separate sewer lateral can be installed for twenty-five (25) percent or less than the total improvement cost of the project, or in the judgment of the Director, such existing connection should be discontinued. When a single parcel of land having more than one (1) residential structure served by a single connection is subdivided, the installation of new connections shall be required for the structures on the newly established lots. The application for service will be filed prior to the approval of the subdivision. Separate services will be consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.090 CONNECTION OWNERSHIP.

All connections from the wastewater main to the property line shall be and remain the property of the City and will not be removed unless service to the premises is discontinued or abandoned. Connections shall not be removed or in any way disturbed except by, or as approved by, the Department. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.100 WASTEWATER SAMPLING STATIONS.

When required by the Department, the property owner shall install and maintain at their expense a manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater strength and flow. The manhole shall be located as approved by the Department and constructed in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

Once each year, the Wastewater Manager shall assign a "typical" waste strength to each Commercial I through VII class as defined in BMC 15.01.020, except for a "verified strength," for purposes of determining user charges.

Users in the verified strength class will have their strength determined by direct periodic composite sampling and analysis. Composite samples shall be collected and analyzed at the owner’s expense.

To be eligible to be charged as a verified strength user, the owner must have the discharge(s) to the wastewater system structured in such a way that sampling of the discharge(s) can be reasonably achieved without contamination or dilution by other discharges. If special provisions are required to achieve discharge sampling, such provisions shall be made at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5321 §3, 2017: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.110 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.

Preliminary treatment may be required by the City if the biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or total suspended solids (TSS) of the sewage, industrial waste, or wastewater exceeds two hundred (200) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight, exceeds local limits, or contains prohibited discharges as defined herein, or exceeds other applicable standards or regulations. High conductivity discharges will be carefully evaluated for discharge into the City’s sewer system. Saltwater discharges can cause corrosion, exacerbate odor problems in the treatment plant, interfere with analysis of samples, and could affect the City’s ability to reclaim the wastewater for other uses. Such preliminary treatment facilities shall be approved by the Department and constructed, operated, and maintained by the owner at the owner’s expense.

The daily maximum pollutants allowed into the wastewater system from any service shall not exceed the following limits:

	Arsenic	0.10 mg/L

	Cadmium	0.10 mg/L

	Chromium (total)	1.0 mg/L

	Chromium (hexavalent) 	0.25 mg/L

	Conductivity	6.00 mS/cm

	Copper (total)	0.75 mg/L

	Lead	0.25 mg/L

	Mercury (total)	0.010 mg/L

	Molybdenum	1.0 mg/L

	Nickel	0.60 mg/L

	Selenium	0.10 mg/L

	Silver (total)	0.20 mg/L

	Zinc	2.0 mg/L

	Cyanide (total)	0.64 mg/L

	Cyanide (free) 	0.20 mg/L

	Ammonia	50.0 mg/L

	Benzene	0.07 mg/L

	Ethyl benzene	1.70 mg/L

	Toluene	1.40 mg/L

	TPH	50.0 mg/L

	pH	6.0 - 10.0

Any commercial user that exceeds any of the above limits shall have an appropriately sized, properly installed, regularly maintained and sufficiently documented type of treatment device in place to help reduce the strength of their sewer discharge.

For the purpose of conductivity, exceeding the limit of 6.0 mS/cm shall mean continuous average equal to or exceeding 6.0 mS/cm for any thirty (30) day period.

Failure to comply with the installation of the required treatment device within ninety (90) days of notification shall be cause of the discontinuance of the water service to the premises. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5321 §4, 2017: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.120 BACKWATER VALVES.

When a premises discharges wastewater into a force main or pressure main or wherever a situation exists involving an unusual danger of backflow, a backwater valve shall be required and shall be installed in a manner accessible for maintenance per Engineering Design and Construction Standards. The installation and effective operation of the backwater valve shall be the sole responsibility of the owner connecting to the wastewater system. The installation shall meet the requirements of the Engineering Design and Construction Standards. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.130 ABANDONMENT.

When a property owner demolishes or removes a building which was connected to the wastewater utility collection system, the owner shall be required to expose and plug the side sewer at the property line in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards. A sewer cap permit is required to perform this work. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.140 WASTEWATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

The Department shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance, and repair of the wastewater system and appurtenances under its jurisdiction and located within the public right-of-way, dedicated utility easements, and City owned property. The Department shall not be responsible for servicing private systems connected to the wastewater system, except as provided in this chapter.

When maintenance, repair, or replacement of wastewater system is required due to user activity resulting in unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions as set forth in this chapter, any expense incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.150 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

The Department may restrict the use of the wastewater system through regulation or control of the use whenever an emergency exists affecting the wastewater system, or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or any other necessary work. Whenever reasonable, and in cases where it has advance knowledge, the Department will provide notice of such emergency using appropriate methods of communication, setting forth any limitations on the use of the wastewater system that may be deemed necessary for public health and safety.

The City shall not be held responsible for any damage to private property resulting from interruption, failure of the wastewater system, or failure of the property owner to comply with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.160 ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

The Department shall be responsible for the integrity, safety, and continuity of the wastewater system. As a condition of the utility service agreement the property owner shall grant the Department the authority to make inspections at any reasonable time if the Department or other appropriate agency has reasonable cause to believe there exists on premises a nonconforming, illegal, unauthorized, or unsafe condition or to verify no such condition exists. The Director may enter onto such property to inspect the condition or to perform any duties imposed upon the Department by this code, provided the Department shall first make reasonable efforts to contact the owner or person responsible for such property.

The Department shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry and abate the conditions. Such remedies may include, but not be limited to, securing property owner’s corrections; revocation, suspension, or discontinuation of service, permits, or authorizations; removal, reconstruction, replacement, or alteration of unauthorized condition; or all other powers and remedies that may be available under this title and regulations and procedures adopted hereunder. Any expense incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.170 REPAIR OF PRIVATE SYSTEMS.

Whenever any private wastewater system connected with the City’s wastewater system becomes obstructed, broken, or in need of repair, the owner shall make all repairs within five (5) days after notification by the Health District local health officer or Director. If the owner fails to make repairs within the five (5) day period, the Director may terminate the wastewater service by termination of the water service to the property being serviced by the subject property. When two (2) or more houses or buildings are connected to the same private sewer, the owners shall be jointly and severally liable for work done by the City.

If the repairs are not constructed and completed in accordance with the provisions of this code and/or in compliance with the approved permit, and/or in accordance with the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards, and if the contractor or person doing the work shall refuse to properly construct and complete such work, notice of such failure or refusal shall be given to the owner of the property, for whom the work is being done, as herein provided. The Director may abate the condition, by either causing the correction to be completed in the proper manner, or by termination of the water service until the correction is made. Any expense incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.180 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.

When excessive discharge periodically overloads the capacity of the side sewer supplying service to any premises, the Director shall determine the size of the side sewer from the main necessary to give proper sewer service without damage to the system or causing sewer overflow. The City shall notify the property owner of the required change in the size of the side sewer installation. The replacement of the side sewer shall be at the expense of the property owner. Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with the request within thirty (30) days shall be cause for the termination of wastewater service by termination of the water service to the property being serviced by the subject property. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.190 WASTEWATER SYSTEM CLEANING.

All side sewer cleaning contractors and/or plumbers and owners engaged in cleaning existing side sewers (as distinguished from plumbing and septic tank facilities) shall notify the Department prior to beginning such operations. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.200 CHANGED SITE CONDITIONS.

When an existing structure is removed and a new structure is constructed on the same parcel of property, a new utility service agreement is required. Any existing side sewer will need to meet the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards. The sewer lateral shall be videoed and approved by the Director for reuse. Any existing side sewer determined to be substandard must be replaced as directed by the Director, at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1, 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.210 PROHIBITED ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following:

(a)    Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the Department, to disturb, interfere with, or damage any wastewater system, including pipe, machinery, or tools, or buildings, improvements, or other appurtenances belonging to, connected with, or under the jurisdiction of the Department.

(b)    Prohibited Discharges. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any manhole, lamp hole, flush tank, or sewer opening:

(1)    Any garbage, rubbish, dead animals, or any substance which will obstruct, or have a tendency to obstruct, the flow of any sewer system.

(2)    Discharges containing toxic, poisonous, or flammable solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage collection or treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plants.

(3)    Any strong acid waste, strong alkaline waste or other waste with corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to the structures, equipment, or personnel of the City.

(4)    Any waste that:

(i)    Contains polar and nonpolar fats, oils and greases in amounts that cause a visible sheen on the discharge or in the public sewer system;

(ii)    Causes a build-up of grease in any public sewer facility;

(iii)    Causes an obstruction of the public sewer system;

(iv)    Is found to contain more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fats, oils and grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136; or

(v)    Any discharge that violates Chapter 15.05 BMC, entitled "Fats, Oils and Grease."

(5)    Overflows from unpolluted water storage facilities.

(6)    Clear water from refrigeration, reverse-cycle heat pumps, and cooling or air-conditioning equipment installed hereafter, except for the periodic draining and cleaning.

(7)    Steam exhaust or blow-off, or any heated water until the temperature thereof has been reduced to less than one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit.

(8)    Waste containing suspended solids and/or inorganic materials of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the sewer system or at the wastewater treatment plant.

(9)    Any obnoxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.

(10)    Any septic tank wastes or portable holding tank waste.

(11)    Any new stormwater discharges.

(12)    Any discharge of food waste through a commercial disposal unit into a grease interceptor. Any existing sites that are found to have food waste disposal units will have ninety (90) days to remove the units after notification.

(13)    Any catch basins that collect wastewater runoff from dumpsters serving food service establishments that flow into the stormwater system or wastewater system. Such flow will need to be redirected to flow into a grease interceptor and connect into a sanitary system, unless another plan is approved by the Director. Maximum surface area allowed to flow into the collection system will be two hundred (200) square feet.

(14)    Any single service discharge that exceeds the following daily maximum pollutant limits:**

	Arsenic	0.10 mg/L

	Cadmium	0.10 mg/L

	Chromium (total)	1.0 mg/L

	Chromium (hexavalent)	0.25 mg/L

	Copper (total)	0.75 mg/L

	Lead	0.25 mg/L

	Mercury (total)	0.010 mg/L

	Molybdenum	1.0 mg/L

	Nickel	0.60 mg/L

	Selenium	0.10 mg/L

	Silver (total)	0.20 mg/L

	Zinc	2.0 mg/L

	Cyanide (total)	0.64 mg/L

	Cyanide (free)	0.20 mg/L

	Ammonia	50.0 mg/L

	Benzene	0.07 mg/L

	Ethyl benzene	1.70 mg/L

	Toluene	1.40 mg/L

	TPH	50.0 mg/L

**    Businesses that follow BMPs (best management practices) for their industry can petition the City for a higher limit. This will be limited to businesses contributing less than one (1) percent of the total flow to the City’s wastewater system and treatment plant.

(Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §1, 2007: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.03.215 LOW PRESSURE SEWERS.

Low pressure sewers may be constructed in an area where, in the opinion of the Director, it is impractical to construct gravity sewers and the cost will not be a factor. Low pressure sewers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards. The pump and enclosures shall be owned and operated by the City. The owner shall be financially responsible for and shall own and operate all the electrical installation and all piping and conveyance facilities to the property line. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


15.03.220 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020, Penalties. (Ord. 5374 §1 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014)


Chapter 15.04 STORMWATER

Sections:

15.04.010    PURPOSE.

15.04.015    AUTHORITY.

15.04.020    ADOPTION OF MANUALS.

15.04.030    DEFINITIONS.

15.04.040    STORMWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

15.04.050    STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP).

15.04.060    SERVICE AREA.

15.04.070    REGULATED ACTIVITIES.

15.04.080    EXEMPTIONS.

15.04.090    STORMWATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

15.04.100    LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT - ALTERNATIVE STANDARDS.

15.04.110    SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

15.04.120    ON-SITE PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS.

15.04.130    STORM DRAINAGE SAMPLING STATIONS.

15.04.140    ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

15.04.150    STORMWATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

15.04.160    CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITIES.

15.04.170    INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

15.04.180    CHANGED SITE CONDITIONS.

15.04.190    PROHIBITED ACTS.

15.04.200    ELIMINATION OF IMPROPER STORMWATER INFLOW TO THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM.

15.04.210    VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT - PENALTY.


15.04.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter establishes availability, conditions of service, system improvement requirements, and the operation and maintenance of the stormwater system. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.015 AUTHORITY.

The Department of Public Works and Utilities by and through its Director is charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The Director shall have the authority to:

(a)    Develop and adopt procedures as needed to implement this code and to carry out the responsibilities of the City.

(b)    Request the assistance of other City departments to administer and enforce this Code.

(c)    Act as final authority for requests for variance from requirements of this chapter.

(d)    Amend, interpret and allow deviations from the City of Bremerton Design and Construction Standards (engineering standards) when the Director finds that said reasons are in the best interest of the community. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019)


15.04.020 ADOPTION OF MANUALS.

The following manuals are hereby adopted by reference as currently published and as hereafter amended:

(a)    Department of Ecology Stormwater Management Manual for Western Washington (SWMMWW);

(b)    Kitsap County Stormwater Management Manual for the hydrologic analysis and design of stormwater infrastructure not covered by the SWMMWW;

(c)    Low Impact Development Technical Guidance Manual for Puget Sound (LID Manual) by Washington State University and Puget Sound Partnership; and

(d)    Engineering Design and Construction Standards. 

Where referenced and adopted manuals are in conflict, the SWMMWW shall govern. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.030 DEFINITIONS.

In addition to definitions set forth in BMC 15.01.020, the definitions below and those set forth in the manuals adopted in BMC 15.04.020 are hereby incorporated. Where definitions provided below conflict with the manual, the definitions below shall prevail.

In the context of stormwater management, if definitions in this section conflict with definitions in BMC 15.01.020 or other BMC chapters, the definitions set forth in this section shall prevail. 

"Bioretention" (also referred to as "bioswale" in other chapters of the BMC) means engineered facilities that store and treat stormwater by passing it through a specified soil profile, and either retain or detain the treated stormwater for flow attenuation. Refer to Chapter 7 of Volume V of the Stormwater Manual in BMC 15.04.020 for bioretention BMP types and design specifications.

"Drainage basin" shall mean an area from which runoff water collects to be discharged into a stream or other body of water.

"Dry season" shall mean the months of May 1st through September 30th.

"Low impact development best management practices (LID BMPs)" shall mean distributed stormwater management practices, integrated into a project design, that emphasize predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration. LID BMPs include, but are not limited to, bioretention/rain gardens, permeable pavements, roof downspout controls, dispersion, soil quality and depth, minimal excavation foundations, vegetated roofs, and water reuse.

"Low impact development (LID)" shall mean a stormwater and land use management strategy that strives to mimic predisturbance hydrologic processes of infiltration, filtration, storage, evaporation and transpiration by emphasizing conservation, use of on-site natural features, site planning, and distributed stormwater management practices that are integrated into a project design.

"Low impact development (LID) principles" means land use management strategies that emphasize conservation, use of on-site natural features, and site planning to minimize impervious surfaces, native vegetation loss, and stormwater runoff.

"Maintenance covenant" means a covenant running with the land pursuant to RCW 89.12.060, which shall bind every person having any interest in the property and the stormwater controls, and shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit and burden of the owner, and their respective heirs, successors and assigns, in a format provided by the City. The covenant shall identify stormwater system ownership, responsibility, and liability for the operation, maintenance and reporting for the stormwater system, facility, or LID BMPs and protect them from conversion or elimination in perpetuity. It shall be recorded with the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office.

"Maintenance schedule" means a document detailing required stormwater facility maintenance activities to be performed at specified intervals.

"National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" shall mean a permit issued by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (or by the Washington Department of Ecology under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC Section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.

"Operation and Maintenance Manual" means a written manual that provides a description of operation and maintenance procedures for specific stormwater control facilities, for use by operation and maintenance personnel.

"Owner" means any person or persons having a legal or equitable property right or interest, whether or not said right is legal or equitable in character, including a fee owner, contract purchaser or seller, mortgagor or mortgagee, optionor or optionee, and beneficiary or grantor of a trust or deed of trust.

"Sub-basin" shall mean a drainage area that drains to a watercourse or water body which is contained within a basin.

"Stormwater Manual" shall mean the manuals adopted in BMC 15.04.020.

"Wet season" shall mean the months of October 1st through April 30th. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.040 STORMWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

A stormwater comprehensive plan shall be developed by the City meeting the provisions of RCW 35.67.030. The plan shall be approved by the Mayor, adopted by the City Council and administered by the Director. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.050 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP).

A stormwater management program plan shall be administered by the City pursuant to the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater NPDES Permit currently in effect and issued by the Washington State Department of Ecology in compliance with provisions of the State of Washington Water Pollution Control Law, Chapter 90.48 RCW, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the Clean Water Act), Title 33 United States Code, Section 1251 et seq. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.060 SERVICE AREA.

Stormwater service is considered available to all of the public and private property within the City of Bremerton. Stormwater service area includes all public and private properties within the City of Bremerton through either natural drainages, direct discharge to receiving water or constructed conveyance systems. Service is considered available for all properties in the City of Bremerton; however, storm drainage mitigation may be required pursuant to BMC 15.04.070. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.070 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.

Consistent with the minimum requirements contained in this section, the City shall approve or disapprove the following activities, unless exempted in BMC 15.04.080:

(a)    New development;

(b)    Redevelopment;

(c)    Construction site activities; and

(d)    Property maintenance, repair or replacement activities meeting specific thresholds as defined by SWMMWW. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.080 EXEMPTIONS.

Commercial agriculture, and forest practices regulated under WAC Title 222, except for Class IV - general forest practices that are conversions from timber land to other uses, are exempt from the provisions of this section.

Development undertaken by the Washington State Department of Transportation in state highway rights-of-way is regulated by Chapter 173-270 WAC, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program.

All other new development and redevelopment is subject to the minimum requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.090 STORMWATER SYSTEMS/ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS - GENERAL.

All stormwater sewers and appurtenances shall be installed by the City or a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in compliance with the manuals adopted in BMC 15.04.020. All stormwater system extensions shall be installed along the entire frontage of the premises or plat to be served. The City may, at its option, require installation of stormwater mains larger than the minimum size specified in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards to provide for adequate capacity within the stormwater system. The City is authorized to enter into cost sharing agreements to contribute to the cost for larger stormwater mains or other improvements based upon the stormwater comprehensive plan.

A covenant and/or easement shall be recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor’s office for each property containing or served by stormwater drainage facilities. This covenant/easement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. The covenant/easement shall identify requirements and liability for preservation and maintenance of LID facilities approved under this chapter and privately held in individual or undivided ownership or intended for public ownership, shall restrict conversion of LID facilities, and shall grant the City access to LID facilities on private property to allow inspection. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.100 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT - ALTERNATIVE STANDARDS.

(a)    The City encourages low impact development (LID) best management practices (BMPs), as an alternative to conventional stormwater management systems that rely on detention ponds and closed conveyance. LID is intended to manage runoff close to the source of generation and to mimic the predeveloped hydrologic condition of a site. Beginning January 1, 2017, the City will require the use of low impact development best management practices, for new development and redevelopment, in accordance with its National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit as issued, and as may be amended, by the Washington State Department of Ecology.

(b)    LID is accomplished first through minimizing the impervious surface coverage and second by managing runoff through dispersion, infiltration, evapotranspiration, or a combination of these approaches. Use of LID BMPs may reduce or eliminate the need for conventional detention facilities but does not remove the obligation to comply with the minimum requirements of the Stormwater Manual.

(c)    A variety of BMPs to minimize impervious surfaces and to manage stormwater have been developed and tested for use in Western Washington. These BMPs and the overall LID approach are described in the SWMMWW and additional guidance is provided in the LID Manual.

(d)    The menu of LID BMPs identified in the SWMMWW is accepted by the City for use in stormwater site plans to address the minimum requirements for flow control and runoff treatment in this chapter, subject to the specifications, performance standards, and design criteria in the SWMMWW and review and approval under this chapter.

(e)    A covenant and/or easement shall be recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor’s Office for each property containing or served by storm drainage facilities. This covenant/easement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. The covenant/easement shall identify requirements and liability for preservation and maintenance of low impact development facilities approved under this chapter and privately held in individual or undivided ownership or intended for public ownership, shall restrict conversion of LID facilities, and shall grant the City access to low impact development facilities on private property to allow inspection, maintenance, and repair. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.110 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.

All service connections shall be installed by a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in compliance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards as adopted in BMC 15.04.020. The service connections and stormwater lateral shall be extended at right angles from the stormwater main to the property line and shall be owned and maintained by the property owner. During improvements to a site where the existing stormwater connection does not meet current Engineering Design and Construction Standards, requirements of the standards shall apply if the improvements can be installed for twenty-five percent (25%) or less of the total improvement cost of the project or, if in the judgment of the Director, the improvements are necessary to protect other upstream and downstream properties. IHSUs cannot be transferred from one property or account to another property or account. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.120 ON-SITE PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS.

All new or redevelopment projects shall provide on-site water quality and quantity improvements to include conveyance facilities, retention/detention ponds, under-drains, infiltration facilities, or other on-site stormwater drainage facilities necessary to mitigate any increase in stormwater runoff, control off-site discharge of stormwater and provide stormwater quality treatment. All storm drainage improvements shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards and the requirements of this chapter.

On-site facilities shall be regularly maintained, cleaned, serviced and repaired by the owner. Any facility that has not been serviced or maintained and is not functioning as designed is nonconforming pursuant to this chapter and Engineering Design and Construction Standards and will be subject to abatement under BMC 15.04.140. Constructed facilities shall not be removed. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.130 STORM DRAINAGE SAMPLING STATIONS.

When required by the City, the property owner shall install and maintain at their expense a storm drainage sampling station downstream from the private stormwater drainage facilities to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of surface drainage and stormwater flows prior to discharge into the stormwater system. The storm drainage sampling station shall be located as approved by the City and constructed in accordance with Engineering Design and Construction Standards. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.140 ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING, UNAUTHORIZED OR UNSAFE CONDITIONS.

The City shall be responsible for the integrity, safety, and continuity of the stormwater system. As a condition of the utility service agreement, the property owner shall grant the City the authority to make inspections at any reasonable time if the City or other appropriate agency has reasonable cause to believe there exists on the premises a nonconforming, illegal, unauthorized, or unsafe condition or to verify no such condition exists. The Director may enter onto such property to inspect conditions or to perform any duties imposed upon the City by this code, provided the City shall first make reasonable efforts to contact the owner or person responsible for such property.

The City shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry and abate nonconforming, illegal, unauthorized, or unsafe conditions. Such remedies may include, but not be limited to, securing property owner’s correction; revocation, suspension, or discontinuation of service, permits, or authorizations; removal, reconstruction, replacement, or alteration of unauthorized condition; or all other powers and remedies that may be available under this title, and regulations and procedures adopted hereunder. Any expense incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.150 STORMWATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE - GENERAL.

The City shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and repair of the stormwater mains and catch basins under its jurisdiction which are located within the public right-of-way, dedicated utility easements and City-owned property. The City shall not be responsible for servicing private systems connected to the City’s stormwater system, except as provided in this chapter.

When maintenance, repair, or replacement of the City’s stormwater system is required, due to user activities resulting in unsafe, nonconforming, or unauthorized conditions as set forth in this section, any expense incurred by the City to abate such condition shall be the responsibility of the owner(s), in accordance with the current assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in Chapter 15.06 BMC, including any related cost and cost of collection. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.160 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITIES.

(a)    All stormwater facilities required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained as set forth in the Stormwater Management Manual, the approved permits, and/or in accordance with the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

(b)    Maintenance of Private Stormwater Facilities.

(1)    The person or persons holding title to the property and the applicant required to construct a stormwater facility shall remain responsible for the facility’s continual performance, operation, and maintenance in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Stormwater Management Manual, this chapter, the approved permits, and/or in accordance with the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards and shall remain responsible for any liability as a result of these duties. Language designating the responsible parties shall be printed on the face of the plat documents, covenant, easement or other agreement recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor’s Office for each property containing or served by said stormwater drainage facilities. This covenant/easement shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.

(2)    All new development and redevelopment that installs or expands existing stormwater infrastructure, treatment and/or quantity control shall submit a maintenance covenant and maintenance plan that will run with the property, their heirs and assigns. The covenant shall include a site plan with details of all components used in the system such as pipes, catch basins, LID BMPs, and green stormwater infrastructure; the covenant shall identify parties responsible and liable for the operation and maintenance of said facilities. The maintenance plan shall include all system components, features, maintenance schedules and reporting requirements. Upon acceptance, the covenant shall be recorded with Kitsap County Auditor’s Office.

(3)    A maintenance covenant shall be recorded for rain gardens, or other green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) installed on private property with Bremerton Utilities financial assistance. The property owner accepts responsibility to maintain and operate the feature as defined in the covenant unless released by the City through a recorded instrument filed with Kitsap County Assessor’s Office.

(4)    A maintenance and inspection report for stormwater systems shall be submitted annually to the Director by February 28th of each year to document maintenance of stormwater facilities for the preceding year. The report shall contain: the date maintenance and/or inspection tasks were completed and a summary of stormwater facilities including catch basins, LID BMPs, quantity and quality features.

(5)    The City shall have authority to periodically enter upon the property and inspect the stormwater facilities to ensure such compliance and to issue orders requiring maintenance and/or repair. In event that the titleholders or other responsible parties do not effect such maintenance and/or repairs, the Director may abate the condition, by either making the corrections or by termination of the water service until the correction is made and/or by filing a lien against the property.

(6)    When an inspection identifies an exceedance of the maintenance standard or a nonconforming, unauthorized condition, maintenance/repair shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule:

(i)    Within thirty (30) days for typical maintenance of facilities.

(ii)    Within one (1) year for maintenance that requires capital construction of less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000). (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.170 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE - EMERGENCY.

The City may restrict the use of the stormwater system through regulation or control of the use whenever an emergency exists affecting the stormwater system, or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or any other necessary work. Whenever reasonable, and in cases where it has advance knowledge, the City will provide notice of such emergency using appropriate methods of communication, setting forth any limitations on the use of the stormwater system that may be deemed necessary for public health and safety.

The City shall not be held responsible for any damage to a private property resulting from interruption, failure of the stormwater system, or failure of the property owner to comply with provisions of this code. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.180 CHANGED SITE CONDITIONS.

When an alteration to an existing parcel of property requires a building or grading permit, a new utility service agreement shall be required if any existing stormwater connection does not meet the current Engineering Design and Construction Standards. Prior to entering into a new utility service agreement, the stormwater connection shall be videoed and approved by the Director for reuse. Any existing stormwater connection determined to be substandard must be replaced as directed by the Director, at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.190 PROHIBITED ACTS.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following:

(a)    Tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the City, to disturb, interfere with, or damage any stormwater facilities, including pipes, machinery, tools, buildings, improvements, or other appurtenances belonging to, connected with, or under the control of the City.

(b)    Prohibited Discharges.

(1)    No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause or allow others under his/her control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge into the municipal storm drain system any materials other than stormwater.

(2)    Examples of prohibited contaminants include but are not limited to the following:

Acids, alkalis, or bases;

Animal carcasses;

Antifreeze and other automotive products;

Bark and other fibrous materials;

Batteries;

Chemicals not normally found in uncontaminated water;

Chlorine, bromine, or other disinfectants;

Construction materials;

Decant water;

Degreasers and/or solvents;

Domestic animal wastes;

Drain cleaners;

Dyes, unless approved by the City;

Flammable or explosive materials;

Food wastes;

Heated water;

Lawn clippings, leaves, or branches;

Metals in either particulate or dissolved form;

Paints, stains, resins, lacquers, or varnishes;

Pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers;

Petroleum products including but not limited to oil, gasoline, grease, fuel oil and heating oil;

Radioactive material;

Recreational vehicle waste;

Sewage;

Silt, sediment, concrete, cement, slurry or gravel;

Soaps, detergents, or ammonia;

Steam cleaning wastes;

Swimming pool cleaning wastewater or filter backwash;

Trash or debris;

Any other process-associated discharge except as otherwise allowed in this section; and

Any hazardous material or waste not listed above.

(c)    Allowable Discharges. In accordance with the Western Washington Phase II Municipal Stormwater Permit, the following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

Air conditioning condensation;

Discharges from emergency firefighting activities;

Diverted stream flows;

Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

Footing drains;

Foundation drains;

Irrigation water from agricultural sources that is commingled with urban stormwater;

Rising ground waters;

Springs;

Uncontaminated ground water infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20); and

Uncontaminated pumped ground water.

(d)    Conditional Discharges. The following types of discharges shall not be considered illegal discharges for the purposes of this chapter, if they meet the stated conditions, or unless the City determines that the type of discharge, whether singly or in combination with others, is causing or is likely to cause pollution of surface water or ground water:

(1)    Potable water, including water from water line flushing, hyper chlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water. These planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted, if necessary and in volumes and velocities controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system.

(2)    Lawn watering and other irrigation runoff. These types of discharges shall be permitted if the amount of runoff is minimized through water conservation efforts.

(3)    Dechlorinated swimming pool/hot tub discharges. These discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH-adjusted and reoxygenized if necessary, volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent resuspension of sediments in the stormwater system. Discharges shall be thermally controlled to prevent an increase in temperature of the receiving water. Swimming pool/hot tub wastewater and filter backwash shall not be discharged to the stormwater system.

(4)    Street and sidewalk wash water, water used to control dust, and routine external building wash down that does not use detergents shall be permitted, if the amount of street wash and dust control water used is minimized and catch basin inserts designed to treat and/or filter wash water prior to entry into the stormwater mains are installed. At active construction sites, street sweeping must be performed prior to washing the street and catch basin inserts designed to treat and/or filter wash water prior to entry into the stormwater mains must be installed.

(5)    Nonstormwater discharges covered by another NPDES permit. These discharges shall be in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations.

(6)    Other nonstormwater discharges. These discharges shall be in compliance with the requirements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) reviewed and approved by the City, which addresses control of such discharges by applying AKART to prevent contaminants from entering surface or ground water.

(e)    Prohibited Connections.

(1)    The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater system is prohibited.

(2)    This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.

(3)    A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.200 ELIMINATION OF IMPROPER STORMWATER INFLOW TO THE WASTEWATER SYSTEM.

(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to significantly reduce improper stormwater inflow to the wastewater system in order to eliminate or reduce instances of combined sewer overflow events and surcharged sanitary sewers due to the improper inflows, which are detrimental to public health and welfare; and to maximize efficient operation of the wastewater system and treatment plant.

(b)    Stormwater connections to the wastewater system are prohibited, as of January 1, 2005. A property that maintains a stormwater connection after January 1, 2005, is charged a fee for the connection pursuant to BMC 15.06.050(b), Rates - Stormwater.

(c)    Director’s Authority to Order Disconnection.

(1)    Purpose. The Director has the authority to order the disconnection of improper stormwater inflow to the wastewater system where that disconnection is necessary to meet combined sewer overflow reduction and elimination of sanitary sewer surcharging. The order of disconnection will generally be in target areas as defined elsewhere in this section.

(2)    Notice. Director’s order of disconnection will be provided in writing and will establish an effective date by which the improper stormwater inflow shall be discontinued. The effective date shall be no sooner than ninety (90) days from the date of the letter. The effective date may be extended in writing by the Director.

(d)    Target Areas. The Director may identify target areas within the wastewater service area (sewer or storm drainage basins or sub-basins) which have the highest priority for reduction of improper stormwater inflow to the wastewater system based upon combined sewer overflow events and sanitary sewer surcharge problems.

(e)    Abatement of Improper Stormwater Inflow. Whenever an improper stormwater inflow to the wastewater system exists subsequent to the disconnection requirements specified elsewhere in this section, the Director may abate the condition including: reconstruction, replacement or removal on public or private property as specified elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


15.04.210 VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT - PENALTY

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this title constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020, Penalties. (Ord. 5376 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5310 §2 (part), 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5209 §3 (part), 2013)


Chapter 15.05 FATS, OILS AND GREASE

Sections:

15.05.010    ADMINISTRATION.

15.05.020    PURPOSE.

15.05.030    APPLICABILITY.

15.05.040    GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENT.

15.05.050    STANDARDS.

15.05.060    ENZYMES, BACTERIA AND OTHER AGENTS.

15.05.070    INSPECTION, MONITORING AND REPORTING.

15.05.080    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


15.05.010 ADMINISTRATION.

The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Director. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007)


15.05.020 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of animal- or vegetable-derived fats, oil, and greases discharged to the wastewater system from multifamily complexes and industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities.

The objectives of this program are to use reasonable and technically feasible controls to protect the health and safety of the community and:

(a)    Eliminate sanitary sewer overflows.

(b)    Reduce the amount of fats, oils, and grease discharged to the wastewater system.

(c)    Reduce maintenance costs for the wastewater system.

(d)    Improve operation of wastewater system.

(e)    Reduce maintenance cost for the treatment plant facility operations. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007)


15.05.030 APPLICABILITY.

This chapter applies to all food processing establishments, food sales establishments, food service establishments, and any other facility that discharges polar grease to the wastewater system and is located within the boundaries of the City’s wastewater system on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007)


15.05.040 GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENT.

(a)    Fats, Oils and Grease Control Program. All facilities are required to implement and maintain a fats, oils and grease control program. The goal of the program is to implement reasonable and technically feasible controls of free-floating fat, oil and grease. The basic components of the program should include:

(1)    A written program articulating management and corporate support for the plan and a commitment to implement planned activities and achieve established goals through the implementation and enforcement of best management practices.

(2)    A description of the facility type and a summary of the products made and/or service provided.

(3)    A description of current reduction, recycling and treatment activities.

(4)    Schematics of the process areas illustrating drains and discharge points connected to the sanitary sewer.

(5)    Specific performance goals and implementation schedule.

(6)    Initial training for new employees and refresher training every six (6) months.

(b)    New Facilities. On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments which are newly proposed or constructed shall be required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with requirements as described in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards for interceptor/grease trap of this chapter.

(c)    Existing Facilities with Grease Removal. On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, existing food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments shall be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease interceptors or grease traps; provided, that the equipment is in efficient operating condition. All such establishments are required to develop and implement best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the quantity of fats, oil and grease discharged to the wastewater system. Any facilities that are known to cause grease-related cleaning activities in the wastewater system, a grease-related wastewater system overflow or fail to implement and enforce BMPs will be required to install a properly sized and functioning grease interceptor designed to meet the City’s grease control requirements as described in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards for interceptor/grease trap of this chapter. (Polar and nonpolar fats, oils and greases in amounts that cause a visible sheen on the discharge or in the wastewater system, a build-up of grease in any wastewater, which accumulations, either alone or in combination with other discharges, cause an obstruction of the wastewater system or any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fats, oils and grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136.) Installation must be completed within ninety (90) calendar days from notification by the City or as otherwise specified by other governing agencies.

(d)    Existing Facilities with/without Grease Removal. Establishments that:

(1)    Expand by twenty-five percent (25%) their seating capacity for food service; or

(2)    Renovate or remodel and a grease interceptor can be installed for twenty-five percent (25%) or less than the total cost of the remodel; or

(3)    Are known to cause grease-related cleaning activities in the wastewater system; or

(4)    Contributed to a grease-related wastewater system overflow; or

(5)    Fail to implement and enforce BMPs;

will be required to install a properly sized and functioning grease interceptor designed to meet the City’s grease control requirements as described in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards for interceptor/grease trap of this chapter. (Polar and nonpolar fats, oils and greases in amounts that cause a visible sheen on the discharge or in the wastewater system, a build-up of grease in any wastewater system, which accumulations, either alone or in combination with other discharges, cause an obstruction of the wastewater system or any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fats, oils and grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136.) Installation must be completed within ninety (90) calendar days from notification by the City or as otherwise specified by other governing agencies.

(e)    Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements. Grease interceptors required under this chapter shall be installed unless the City authorizes the installation of a grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology after determining that the installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible due to space constraints or other considerations. The facility bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible and that the variance will not cause the facility any problems in meeting the requirements as described in the Engineering Design and Construction Standards for interceptor/grease trap of this chapter. (Polar and nonpolar fats, oils and greases in amounts that cause a visible sheen on the discharge or in the wastewater system, a build-up of grease in any wastewater system, which accumulations, either alone or in combination with other discharges, cause an obstruction of the wastewater system or any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fats, oils and grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136.) The request for an alternate grease removal device or grease trap shall contain the following information:

(1)    Detailed explanation of the reason(s) that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible.

(2)    Location of the wastewater system in relation to available exterior space outside the building.

Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, devices that are used to trap, separate, and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater system. Any alternative technology must result in a discharge that meets the requirements as described: polar and nonpolar fats, oils and greases in amounts that cause a visible sheen on the discharge or in the wastewater system, a build-up of grease in any wastewater system, which accumulations either alone or in combination with other discharges cause obstruction of the wastewater system or any water or waste which contains more than one hundred (100) parts per million (1,000,000) by weight of fats, oils and grease as measured using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136. The City, prior to installation, must approve any alternative pretreatment technology. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007. Formerly 15.05.050)


15.05.050 STANDARDS.

(a)    Grease Interceptor.

(1)    Each facility is solely responsible for the cost of the grease interceptor installation, inspection, cleaning and maintenance.

(2)    Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the requirements contained in the latest version of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) or other criteria as determined on a case-by-case basis based on review of relevant information, including, but not limited to, grease interceptor performance, waste stream characteristics, facility location, maintenance needs, and/or inspection needs. The aforementioned determinations may or may not conform to the Uniform Plumbing Code construction standards or sizing criteria for grease interceptors or similar devices. The minimum capacity of an exterior grease interceptor will be based on DFUs (Drainage Fixture Unit). Supporting sizing calculations shall be submitted to the City.

(3)    Grease interceptors shall be designed using standard engineering principles for sedimentation and flotation in gravity separators. The grease interceptor will have a minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.

(4)    Grease interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

(5)    Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it is easily accessible for sample collection, inspection, and cleaning and removal of retained grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building, unless preapproved, and the location must meet the approval of the City.

(6)    Grease interceptors shall be located in the food service establishment’s lateral line between all fixtures which may introduce grease into the wastewater system and the connection to the wastewater system. Such fixtures shall include but not be limited to sinks, dishwashers, floor drains for food preparation and storage areas, mop sinks, and any other fixture which is determined to be a potential source of grease.

(7)    Grease interceptors must be vented.

(8)    Flushing the grease interceptor with water having a temperature in excess of one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit is prohibited (maximum temperature for effect on concrete).

(9)    Grease interceptors shall be equipped with a sampling port at the outlet of the interceptor. Inspection tees and manholes must enable the City to monitor and test the discharge for compliance with City requirements or to allow monitoring and testing in accordance with the rules and regulations of other federal, state or local agency having governmental or contractual jurisdiction within the wastewater system.

(10)    Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, cleaning and removal of retained grease and sample collection. Riser maximum will not exceed twenty-four (24) inches.

(11)    Grease interceptors shall be considered out of compliance if the total volume of grease and solids displaces more than twenty-five (25) percent of the effective volume of the final chamber of the interceptor. Grease interceptors must be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required maintaining a minimum design capability or effective volume, but not less than once every ninety (90) calendar days. If a facility determines that cleaning every ninety (90) calendar days is unnecessary in order to remain in compliance with requirements, the facility may make a written application for a variance from the cleaning schedule.

(12)    Sanitary wastes (restroom wastes) cannot be introduced into the grease interceptor.

(13)    Any facility that has a grease interceptor shall maintain a pumping contract with a licensed grease pumping company. The pumping company will pump the interceptor on a regular schedule without notification from the food service. The pumping company will notify the City if the contract is canceled by either party.

(14)    Wastes removed from a grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. Neither grease, solids nor liquids removed from grease interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, private sanitary sewer line, any portion of the wastewater system or any portion of the stormwater system.

(15)    All facilities shall maintain a written record of inspection and maintenance activities and the rendering/disposal company manifest for a minimum of three (3) years. All such records shall be submitted to the City and made available for on-site inspection during all operating hours.

(b)    Grease Trap. Each facility is solely responsible for the cost of the grease trap installation, inspection, cleaning and maintenance.

(1)    Grease trap sizing and installation shall conform to the requirements contained in the latest version of the Uniform Plumbing Code or other criteria as determined on a case-by-case basis based on review or relevant information, including, but not limited to, grease trap performance, waste stream characteristics, facility location, maintenance needs, and/or inspection needs, but in no case will the grease trap be less than twenty (20) gallons per minute flow rate. The aforementioned determinations may or may not conform to the Uniform Plumbing Code construction standards or sizing criteria for grease traps or similar devices.

(2)    Grease traps shall be designed using standard engineering principles for sedimentation and flotation in gravity separators.

(3)    Grease traps shall be installed in accordance with the Engineering Design and Construction Standards.

(4)    Grease traps shall be installed at a location where it is easily accessible for sample collection, inspection, and cleaning and removal of retained grease.

(5)    Grease traps shall be located in the food service establishment’s lateral line between all fixtures which may introduce grease into the wastewater system and the connection to the wastewater system. Such fixtures shall include sinks, drains and other fixtures for food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixture which is determined to be a potential source of grease. Fixtures such as waste disposal units and dishwashers shall not be connected to the grease trap.

(6)    Flushing the grease trap with water having a temperature in excess of one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit is prohibited.

(7)    Grease traps shall be equipped with a device to control the rate of flow through the unit. The rate of flow shall not exceed the manufacturer’s rated capacity recommended in gallons per minute for the unit.

(8)    Grease traps shall be considered out of compliance if the total volume of grease and solids displaces more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the effective volume of the chamber. The facility and inspector will determine and document the mutually agreed upon maintenance schedule and complete debris removal frequency.

(9)    Sanitary wastes (restroom wastes) cannot be introduced into the grease trap.

(10)    Neither grease, solids nor liquids removed from grease traps shall be returned to any grease trap, private sanitary sewer line, any portion of the wastewater system or any portion of the stormwater system.

(11)    All facilities shall maintain a written record of inspection and maintenance activities for a minimum of three (3) years. All such records shall be made available for on-site inspection by representatives of the City during all operating hours. (Ord. 5376 §4, 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007. Formerly 15.05.060)


15.05.060 ENZYMES, BACTERIA AND OTHER AGENTS.

The direct addition into the building plumbing, grease trap or interceptor of enzymes, chemicals or other agents designed to emulsify the grease compounds is prohibited. Grease trap or interceptor design and sizing criteria are based on gravimetric separation for grease and solids removal. The addition of enzymes or chemical emulsion agents would impede the gravimetric separation and defeats the purpose of the grease trap or interceptor. Any attempt to modify the trap or interceptor into a biological reactor by adding bacterial or microbial agents is also prohibited. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007. Formerly 15.05.070)


15.05.070 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND REPORTING.

(a)    The City shall inspect food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments on both a scheduled and unscheduled, unannounced basis to determine whether the requirements set forth in this chapter are being met.

(b)    Food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments shall allow City officials and other duly authorized employees or agents of the City bearing proper credentials and identifications access at all reasonable times or during normal hours of operation to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, records examination, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The City shall have the right to set up on any user’s property devices necessary for conducting wastewater sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. All costs for laboratory collection and analysis shall be the responsibility of the food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments.

(c)    Each food processing establishment, food sales establishment, or food service establishment shall retain maintenance records with the following information for each grease removal device located on the premises. The records shall be kept a minimum of three (3) years and provided to the city upon request.

(1)    Date of service.

(2)    Volume pumped (gallons).

(3)    Name of waste hauler.

(4)    Waste disposal location. (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007. Formerly 15.05.080)


15.05.080 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5250 §1 (part), 2014: Ord. 5009 §2 (part), 2007. Formerly 15.05.090)


Chapter 15.06 ASSESSMENTS, RATES, FEES AND CHARGES

Sections:

15.06.010    PURPOSE.

15.06.015    ASSESSMENTS, RATES, FEES AND CHARGES - ESTABLISHED.

15.06.020    SERVICE CONNECTION AND EXPANSION FEES AND CHARGES.

15.06.025    SEWER CONSERVATION LOAN PROGRAM.

15.06.030    RATES - WATER.

15.06.040    RATES - WASTEWATER.

15.06.050    RATES - STORMWATER.

15.06.060    MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND CHARGES.


15.06.010 PURPOSE.

This chapter provides for the establishment of fees, rates, and other charges for connection to or utilization of the utility system, for providing utility service, administration and maintenance of utility accounts, and for the operation, maintenance, repair, and improvements of the utility system. Fees, rates, and other service charges shall include, but not be limited to, general facility charges, connection charges, utility service rates, account maintenance charges, plan check, and system development fees and charges. All fees, rates, and charges for service outside the City limits, with the exception of general facility charges, will be assessed at a charge of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the City rate for wastewater and one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the City rate for water. (Ord. 5382 §1, 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1999; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.06.015 ASSESSMENTS, RATES, FEES AND CHARGES - ESTABLISHED.

(a)    Assessments, rates, fees, and charges for services relating to the Department for water, wastewater, stormwater utilities, and other related services are on file with the City Clerk and posted on the City of Bremerton’s website. See Chapter 3.01 BMC for the link to the City of Bremerton’s website for rates and fees.

(b)    Commencing on January 1, 2018, and on January 1st of each successive year thereafter, the established utility rates, fees and charges identified in Chapter 3.01 BMC, not otherwise adjusted by the City Council during the previous six (6) month period, shall automatically be adjusted as follows:

(1)    The utility GFCs shall be adjusted upward to the nearest dollar based upon the most current ENR (Engineering News-Record) Construction Cost Index - 20 City Average; and

(2)    All other utility rates, fees and charges shall be adjusted upward to the nearest dollar based on the most current Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Seattle. (Ord. 5382 §2, 2019: Ord. 5321 §5, 2017: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5131 §1, 2010: Ord. 5103 §3, 2010; Ord. 5070 §1, 2008; Ord. 5051 §1 (Exh. A), 2008; Ord. 5030 §1 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 5026 §2 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 4990 §1 (Exh. A), 2006; Ord. 4961 §1 (Exh. A), 2005; Ord. 4956 §1 (Exh. A), 2005; Ord. 4909 §§5, 7, 2004; Ord. 4881 §1, 2003; Ord. 4827, Amended, 11/29/2002; Ord. 4794, Amended, 05/07/2002; Ord. 4766, Amended, 08/24/2001; Ord. 4735, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4685, Amended, 12/28/1999; Ord. 4675, Added, 11/30/1999)


15.06.020 SERVICE CONNECTION AND EXPANSION FEES AND CHARGES.

(a)    General Facility Charge.

(1)    A general facility charge (GFC) shall be charged on all new or expanded service connections to the utility system (water, wastewater, and stormwater). Existing approved connections for water and wastewater within the system shall be considered to have paid their proportionate share of the GFC for existing use. Surface area impact for stormwater as of October 7, 2004, shall also be considered to have paid their proportionate share of GFC for existing use.

(2)    The utility GFCs shall be adjusted annually as set forth in BMC 15.06.015 in addition to any other adjustments that may be made by the City Council. GFCs shall not vest. Any vesting requirements set forth in the Bremerton Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, BMC 20.12.170, do not apply to utility GFCs. GFCs shall be paid at the current rate in effect at the time payment is made.

(3)    Parcels and/or facilities which have had utility services but have been inactive can request to have the inactive account reactivated. When the account is restored and/or expanded, the GFCs shall only be charged for the additional demand placed on the water, wastewater, or stormwater facilities. All appropriate GFCs (water/wastewater/stormwater) will need to be paid to reactivate the services.

(4)    Parcels and/or facilities in which no utility services are present shall be defined as new undeveloped parcels and shall receive no credits and shall pay all applicable assessments, rates, fees, and charges.

(5)    Utility services are considered to be present if a water service or a sewer lateral is physically in place and historically served that parcel. Parcels that have utility services currently present, but their facilities have been removed and new facilities constructed, will not have to pay additional GFCs, unless the meter size is increased.

(6)    Change of meter size for the parcel and/or facility, or change of IHSU, which is a reduction in GFCs will not be refunded or credited.

(7)    Change of meter size for the parcel and/or facility which is an increase of GFCs will require the customer to pay for the additional GFCs before work is performed. Similarly, an increase in surface area impact for stormwater shall require the customer to pay the net increase in IHSU before work is performed.

(8)    The calculation of the GFC for stormwater shall be based on the total number of IHSUs added to the parcels.

(9)    The calculation of the GFC for water shall be based on the meter size to be installed for a new or expanded water service.

(10)    The calculation of the GFC for wastewater shall be based on the meter size to be installed for the new or expanded water service.

(11)    The calculation of GFCs for stormwater shall be based on the number of impervious/hard surface units (IHSUs) as defined in BMC 15.01.020. However, all single-family residential parcels as defined in BMC 15.01.020 shall be one (1) IHSU.

(12)    All GFCs shall be assessed and paid at the time of execution of the utility service agreement, prior to making any water, sewer, or storm service connection, and shall be in addition to rates and other fees, assessments, and charges established for utility service.

(13)    Payment of GFC fees for improvements common to multiple parcels on a plat may be proportionally allocated among those parcels with payment deferred as approved by the Director at his or her discretion through a written agreement with the customer. Any deferment shall be in a written agreement recorded on the property. The agreement shall require that all deferred GFCs and related fees and costs be paid prior to issuance of building permits. In consideration for the deferral, the customer shall pay the current GFC in effect at the time of payment, as set forth in BMC 15.06.015, as well as any outstanding recording fees and other fees and costs related to the deferral agreement.

(b)    Connection/Inspection Fee. A connection/inspection fee shall be charged for all service connections to the utility system. Additional fees may be charged if a reinspection is required as a result of the property owner/developer’s failure to comply with the correction notice from a prior inspection, inaccessibility of facilities for scheduled inspections, or an unsafe site. The connection/inspection fee shall be paid at the time of execution of the utility service agreement, prior to making any water, sewer, or storm service connection.

(c)    Capital Reserves. The general facility funds collected under this chapter shall be deposited in the Utilities Capital Reserve Fund and used only for utility system capital improvements. (Ord. 5376 §5, 2019: Ord. 5371 §1, 2019: Ord. 5321 §6, 2017: Ord. 5288 §2, 2015: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4909 §6, 2004; Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1000; Ord. 4512 §3, 1995; Ord. 4496 §2, 1995; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.06.025 SEWER CONSERVATION LOAN PROGRAM.

(a)    Property owners who meet the requirements of this section may qualify for a loan known as a sewer conservation loan pursuant to RCW 35.67.360. A sewer conservation loan under this section is a loan from the City to a property for all, or a portion, of the GFC established under BMC 15.06.020 and any inspection fees related to connection to the City’s wastewater system. The principal amount of the loan authorized by this section shall not exceed the amount of the GFC, together with inspection fees.

(b)    In order for a property owner to qualify for a loan under this section, the property to which the connection is to be made must be:

(1)    Within the City’s wastewater system;

(2)    A developed lot with an existing single-family home; and

(3)    Served by a septic system that has been designated as a failed septic system by the Kitsap Public Health District.

(c)    In order to qualify for a loan under this section, the property owner must:

(1)    Complete a sewer conservation loan application;

(2)    Pay the sewer conservation loan application fee;

(3)    Have no utility shut-offs within the thirty-six (36) months prior to the date of the sewer conservation loan application;

(4)    Execute a promissory note and deed of trust under the terms set out in this section;

(5)    Pay the recording fee to record the deed of trust; and

(6)    If outside City limits, agree not to protest any annexation petition that includes the property being connected to the City’s wastewater system and grant the City a limited power of attorney to include consent to the annexation of said property as part of any notice of intent or petition for annexation presented to the City.

(d)    The terms of the loan shall be as follows:

(1)    The loan will be structured as a simple promissory note.

(2)    The term of the note shall not exceed five (5) years, commencing on the date the property owner executes the promissory note.

(3)    The note will bear interest at the rate which is based on the City’s current investment yield at the time of the loan, plus a two percent (2%) margin to cover administrative costs and interest rate fluctuations over the loan period.

(4)    The loan will be secured by a deed of trust, or such other instrument as may be acceptable to the City Finance Director and City Attorney.

(5)    The note shall provide for acceleration of the principal upon default in any payment. In the event of default, the City shall have all available remedies, including, but not limited to, foreclosure of its interest in the property, notification of credit bureaus, use of collection agencies, and terminating service.

(6)    Loan principal and interest charges will be amortized and billed by the City and due monthly. The monthly payment will be no lower than fifty dollars ($50.00). Appropriate penalties may be imposed by the City for delinquent accounts.

(7)    There shall be no penalty for prepayment.

(8)    The note will contain a due on sale clause which provides for payment in full of all outstanding principal and interest upon sale of the property. Loans shall be limited by available funds. The amount of available funds shall be at the discretion of the City Council and shall be determined periodically by City Council motion, resolution, or ordinance. All funds used for loan purposes shall be derived from operating revenues from the sale of sewer services. (Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5211 §1, 2013)


15.06.030 RATES - WATER.

(a)    Retail Water Rates. A general retail water rate shall be assessed all users of the water system. A property owner becomes a customer/user of the water system at the closing of the sale of the property and entering into an agreement by signing the utility billing owner/tenant change form. The retail rate shall be calculated on a periodic billing with a zero usage charge based on meter size and a commodity charge computed to the nearest HCF.

(1)    Sprinkler and Fire Protection Service. The Department shall levy a general fire service charge to users of the utility water system for fire service provided. The fire service rate shall be billed on a periodic billing and shall be based on the assembly size installed.

Water used for purposes other than extinguishing fires through a fire service connection shall be charged at a rate not less than double the domestic rate provided by this chapter.

(2)    Temporary/Construction Water Meters. Persons desiring temporary water service from a fire hydrant, hose connection, or meter for the purposes of construction, special events, or other activities that are limited in duration shall make application to the Department on the form provided and make a deposit established for temporary/construction water meters. A deposit based on meter size shall be assessed for temporary/construction water meters. The deposit may be retained by the City to recover damage, loss, or any misuse of the water meter.

Temporary/construction water meters shall be limited to twelve (12) month duration. The twelve (12) month limitation allows for billing meter calibration and yearly testing of backflow prevention devices. If the applicant requires a temporary/construction water meter for longer than twelve (12) months, the applicant must reapply. 

Access to the temporary/construction meter must be available to the department to inspect and read at any reasonable time.

The rate shall be calculated on a periodic billing with a minimum service charge based on the water meter size and a commodity charge computed to the nearest HCF.

(b)    Wholesale Water Service. The Department may sell water to water districts or other public agencies. Such service shall be through a metered wholesale water usage contract, under such terms and under such conditions as shall be deemed fair and equitable by the City. All wholesale water contracts shall be subject to Mayoral approval and City Council authorization. (Ord. 5298 §1, 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1999; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.06.040 RATES - WASTEWATER.

(a)    Retail Wastewater Rates. A general retail wastewater rate shall be assessed of all users of the wastewater system. A property owner becomes a customer/user of the wastewater system at the closing of the sale of the property and entering into an agreement by signing the utility billing owner/tenant change form. The retail rate shall be calculated on a periodic billing with a zero usage fixed fee service charge and a commodity charge computed to the nearest HCF.

The retail rate shall be based on flow and strength of sewage discharged by the user of the system.

Flow shall be determined by the metered amount of domestic water usage.

Flows for summer usage for single-family, duplex, and multifamily residential customers shall be determined based on the previous six (6) month average winter domestic water usage by the customer, provided the account was active for at least two (2) billing periods of the preceding six (6) months. The calculation period shall be determined by the Department based on usage and billing cycles. In no case shall this calculation for summer usage result in a volume less than two and one-half (2.5) HCF per month.

In the event the customer is not connected to a City water system that utilizes a domestic water meter, the flow shall be determined by the Department based on the average flow of the like customer class.

Strength shall be determined by the loadings discharged by the customer and shall be segregated into like customer classes based on their respective sewage strengths.

(b)    Multiple Residential/Commercial Units on Single Water Meter. Any commercial account that has residential living units above the commercial business and/or multiple business suites/buildings served by a single water meter will be assessed a monthly flat fee based on the total number of units at that location. The commercial account discharge strength will determine the sewer rate level.

(c)    Commercial or Industrial Out of Class Discharge. Any commercial or industrial account that is connected to the wastewater system and the amount of wastewater discharged or the strength of the wastewater discharge for that property is different than those defined by the current billing rates will need to be assessed on an individual basis. The assessment will be determined and approved by the Department and a special billing rate will be established for that business. (Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5131 §3, 2010: Ord. 5054, Amended, 08/20/2008; Ord. 4766, Amended, 08/24/2001; Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1999; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.06.050 RATES - STORMWATER.

(a)    Surface Drainage/Stormwater Rates. A general retail stormwater rate shall be assessed on all property within the City.

Rates shall be determined by the approximate amount of impervious hard surface area of developed parcel, including publicly owned property and right-of-way.

Impervious surface, measured in equivalent impervious hard surface units (IHSUs) shall be determined for each individually developed property, except single-family or duplex uses which shall be assigned the minimum rate.

Payment of a surface drainage/stormwater rate does not guaranty that property subject to the charges will always or at any time be free from stormwater flooding or flood damage or that stormwater systems capable of handling all stormwater events can be cost effectively operated or maintained.

(b)    Improper Stormwater Inflow to Wastewater System. A rate shall be assessed on all property owners who have an improper stormwater discharge to the wastewater system pursuant to the assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in this chapter established for stormwater by City Council ordinance.

Rates shall be based upon the approximate amount of impervious hard surface area of the property. The impervious surface area, measured in equivalent impervious hard surface units (IHSUs), shall be that used for the stormwater rates elsewhere in this chapter.

Payment of the improper stormwater surcharge shall be terminated when the property has disconnected all sources of the improper stormwater inflow from the wastewater system.

The service rate for maintaining an improper stormwater inflow connection to the wastewater system will be identified on the utility billing statement as "stormwater facilities impact" fee.

(c)    Stormwater rate classes are as follows:

(1)    Residential.

(i)    Stormwater I. The basic stormwater service rate.

(ii)    Stormwater II. This rate consists of the basic stormwater fee, plus fifty percent (50%) of the current stormwater fee as the "stormwater facilities impact" fee. This class may have a driveway drain of not more than four hundred (400) square feet of impervious surface draining into the wastewater system and no other improper connection to the wastewater system.

(iii)    Stormwater III. This rate consists of the basic stormwater fee, plus one hundred percent (100%) of the current stormwater fee as the "stormwater facilities impact" fee. This class has a driveway drain with more than four hundred (400) square feet of impervious surface draining into the wastewater system and/or more than one (1) improper connection to the wastewater system.

(2)    Commercial.

(i)    Commercial I Stormwater. The basic commercial stormwater fee.

(ii)    Commercial II Stormwater. The basic stormwater fee, plus fifty percent (50%) of the current stormwater fee as the surcharge. This class may have no more than four hundred (400) square feet of impervious surface where stormwater runoff is collected by a roof drain, parking lot drain, driveway drain or any other device that conveys this runoff into the wastewater system. This does not include stormwater runoff that is collected from under fueling station canopies since these areas are required to be connected to the wastewater system. However, roof runoff from the canopy is not allowed to be connected to the wastewater system. This class may not have more than one (1) improper connection to the wastewater system.

(iii)    Commercial III Stormwater. The basic stormwater fee, plus one hundred percent (100%) of the current stormwater fee as the "stormwater facilities impact" fee. This class has more than four hundred (400) square feet of impervious surface where stormwater runoff is collected by a roof drain, parking lot drain, driveway drain or any other device that conveys this runoff into the wastewater system. This does not include stormwater runoff that is collected from under fueling station canopies since these areas are required to be connected to the wastewater system. However, roof runoff from the canopy is not allowed to be connected to the wastewater system.

(d)    Rate Adjustments. Rate adjustments for water quantity and water quality pursuant to the assessments, rates, fees, and charges set forth in this chapter will be applied to all multifamily (three (3) or more units), commercial, and industrial development which provide for the installation of on-site water quality and quantity improvements which includes pervious surfaces or any other improvements that meet all Engineering Design and Construction Standards. Eligibility will require the treatment and reduction of the amount of stormwater discharges prior to entry into the stormwater system and the reduction of the amount of stormwater discharges into the stormwater system. This stormwater quality and quantity mitigation shall be required to demonstrate compliance with Minimum Requirement No. 5, Minimum Requirement No. 7, Minimum Requirement No. 8 and the LID Performance Standards as required by the SWMMWW. All new development will be required to install water quality and quantity improvements prior to connection to the stormwater system and will receive the rate adjustment upon successful completion of the installation. For purposes of the rate adjustment, the amounts of discharge shall be segregated into like customer classes based on their respective stormwater discharge quantity and/or discharge quality. Application for building permits or fill/grade permits must include standard stormwater quality and quantity improvement plans.

The facts set forth in this subsection shall apply only if the on-site or other facility that has received an adjustment in its rates is maintained and operated in accord with this chapter and the Engineering Design and Construction Standards applicable at the time of billing. In the event that the Director determines that the system is not properly operated and maintained, the rate reduction shall be discontinued until deficiencies are corrected in addition to other remedies provided in this chapter.

(e)    Exempt Properties.

(1)    All parcels of property that are undeveloped.

(2)    All public rights-of-way.

(f)    Public School District Properties. Parcels owned or leased by public school districts which provide activities which directly benefit the surface and stormwater management program. The activities may include: curriculum specific to the issues and problems of surface and stormwater management and student activities in the community to expose students to the efforts required to restore, monitor, or enhance the surface and stormwater management system. Pursuant to RCW 35.92.021, the amount of the service charge shall be determined by the Director, based upon the cost of the activities to the school district, but not to exceed the value of the activity to the stormwater management program. Determination of which activities qualify for the stormwater management service charge reduction will be made by the Director. Reductions in stormwater management service charges will only be granted to school districts which provide programs that have been evaluated by the Director. The service charge adjustment for the school activity may be applied to any parcel in the stormwater system service area which is owned or operated by the school district. In order to remain eligible for the rates, the applicant shall be required to reapply every year and submit the request to the Department.

(g)    Implementation Schedule for Annexed Properties. When annexed to the City, all multiple-family and commercial properties with two (2) or more IHSUs will receive the rate adjustments described above per IHSU for two (2) years from the date of annexation; provided, the property owner submits engineering plans and specifications for on-site stormwater quantity and quality improvements for their property within nine (9) months of annexation, and said plans are approved by the Department according to Engineering Design and Construction Standards. Failure to comply with any of the aforementioned provisions will result in these accounts being charged at the retail stormwater rate beginning two (2) years from annexation. (Ord. 5310 §3, 2016: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5026 §3, 2007: Ord. 4734, Reaffirmed; 11/30/2000; Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed; 11/30/2000; Ord. 4684, Amended, 12/28/1999; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1999; Ord. 4496 §3, 1995; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4442 §5, 1993)


15.06.060 MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND CHARGES.

The Department shall set fees and charges to recover its administrative and operations expenses related to the services set forth herein.

(a)    Low-Income Senior Citizens and Low-Income Disabled Citizens. Only single-family residential accounts are eligible for the rates described in this section. To qualify for the low-income senior citizen rate, the individual shall meet the criteria established by RCW 74.38.070. To qualify for the low-income disabled citizen rate, the individual shall meet the criteria established by RCW 46.19.010 or 74.18.020(4) and 70.164.020(4). In order to remain eligible for these rates, the applicant shall be required to reapply each year with the Department.

(b)    Service Fee - Field. A service fee shall be charged for all service calls to the owner’s premises. Service calls shall include, but not be limited to, turn-on/turn-off of water services as a result of delinquent payment of accounts, special needs requests for after-hours turn-on/turn-off of water for customer maintenance, after hours utility location requests, and repeat service calls during normal work hours. The service fee shall be added to the regular utility bill.

After hours, weekend, and holiday service requests shall require acknowledgment by signature of the requesting party on the form which identifies the additional service and fee provided by the service specialist. The service fee shall be added to the regular utility bill.

A fee shall be levied in the event it is necessary to remove and restore surface improvements, including but not limited to asphalt concrete and concrete streets and sidewalks, in order to install a service connection or other utility improvements.

(c)    Service Fee - Office. A service fee shall be charged for all account maintenance, including, but not limited to, activation and discontinuation of the utility account, changes in address, designated agents, duplicate billing, and property liens. The service fee shall be added to the regular utility bill.

(d)    Delinquency Charge. A delinquency charge of one percent (1%) per month shall be added to the unpaid balance of each and every utility bill which is not paid on or before such bill becomes delinquent.

(e)    Cross-Connection Control Inspections. The Department shall charge a fee for inspection, reinspection, additional mail notices, or door notices of backflow prevention devices. The service fee shall be added to the regular utility bill.

(f)    Fire Hydrant Services. The Department may enter into agreements with owners of private fire systems for hydrant repairs and maintenance.

(g)    Grinder Pump Surcharge. The Department may enter into agreements to service customers with individual grinder pumps. An individual service charge shall be assessed to the customer for the City’s operation and maintenance of these pumps as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC.

(h)    Abatement Charges. All costs associated with the City’s repair of private systems, including engineering, administration, materials, equipment, labor, and contracted services. (Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5103 §2, 2010: Ord. 4729, Reaffirmed, 11/30/2000; Ord. 4675, Amended, 11/30/1999; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


Chapter 15.07 UTILITY BILLING

Sections:

15.07.010    PURPOSE.

15.07.020    UTILITY SERVICE ACCOUNTS.

15.07.030    ACCOUNT MAINTENANCE.

15.07.040    BILLING STATEMENT.

15.07.050    BILLING AND DUPLICATE BILLINGS.

15.07.060    AUTOMATIC CASH TRANSFER.

15.07.070    DESIGNATED AGENTS.

15.07.080    DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.

15.07.085    TAMPERING WITH WATER SERVICE AFTER TERMINATION.

15.07.090    LIENS.

15.07.100    DEFERRED PAYMENT.

15.07.110    ADJUSTMENTS.

15.07.120    METER FAILURE.

15.07.130    DISCONNECTION.


15.07.010 PURPOSE.

The provisions in this chapter provide for the establishment of a City billing and receipting system for the reimbursement of the costs of providing utility service.

The City is additionally authorized to provide to other municipal corporations billing and accounting services through interlocal agreement approved by the Mayor and authorized by the City Council.

Utility billing shall be processed and administered by the Department of Financial Services. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.020 UTILITY SERVICE ACCOUNTS.

The City shall create a utility service account upon receipt of an executed utility service agreement or an executed owner/tenant form as applicable.

The account shall be in the name of the owner and may be activated or terminated only upon written notice by the owner and payment for services provided.

Owners of a single water-metered building shall be the bill payer responsible for all charges to the account.

Billing for utility services shall commence for each service at the date of connection of each service to the property or the date of the closing of sale for a property.

Billing for mandated wastewater service, as directed by the Health District local Health Official or the Director regardless of connection, shall commence sixty (60) days following written notice by the Health District local Health Official or the date of connection, whichever shall occur first.

All utility billing forms will be available on the City of Bremerton website. Electronic signatures will be accepted for all utility billing online application submittals.

When it benefits the utility to do so and at the discretion of the Director of Financial Services, or designee, a credit may be authorized for a utility customer not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per account. A credit in excess of this amount requires City Council approval by motion or resolution. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5321 §7, 2017: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.030 ACCOUNT MAINTENANCE.

Whenever the owner of a premises connected to the utility system desires to have the service activated or discontinued for his own or another’s use, he shall notify utility billing in writing on the forms provided.

The City, upon payment of a service fee, will activate or discontinue service or prorate the customer bill for partial billing periods upon the request of the owner.

Reconnection of service will require payment for all outstanding fees and charges to the account.

Where a water service has been inactive, meter pulled, house removed, or the house has been vacant for more than one hundred eighty (180) days and the owner petitions to reactivate the service to the premises, in addition to making application, if the service has been vacant for five (5) years or longer, a flow test will be required to evaluate the service to determine if adequate flow is currently available. The City will perform the flow test at no cost to the owner. A service fee and payment for any unpaid previous charges shall be assessed prior to activation of the service. If inadequate flow is determined, a new service will be required by the City and shall be at the expense of the owner. Where the sewer lateral has been (1) capped and the house removed or (2) the sewer account has been inactive for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, the sewer lateral will be videoed by the City. If the video shows that the sewer is in good condition, then the sewer can be reactivated. If the video indicates that the sewer lateral, in the opinion of the City, is defective, then the new sewer lateral will be required and shall be replaced at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.040 BILLING STATEMENT.

The City shall regularly bill each utility service account for all fees, rates, and charges for service during the billing period.

Payments received on each service account shall be applied in the following priority to the outstanding account balances: abatement charges, fees, administrative charges, stormwater impact fee, stormwater charges, wastewater charges, and water charges. Receipts shall be credited to the oldest balances first.

A utility bill shall be considered past due thirty (30) days after date of billing.

A utility bill which remains unpaid after the due date shall be classified as a delinquent account and shall be subject to delinquent charges. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.050 BILLING AND DUPLICATE BILLINGS.

Billing statements shall be mailed to the address requested by the property owner. Duplicate bills sent to a different address shall be assessed a duplicate billing charge, if applicable, sufficient to recover all costs of processing and mailing.

The property owner shall be responsible for all fees, rates and charges on the utility service account regardless of the use of the duplicate billing procedures or their request to send the statement to their tenant or agent. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.060 AUTOMATIC CASH TRANSFER.

A property owner or designated agent may at his option request in writing, on the form provided by the City, direct automatic transfer of funds from a designated account at a financial institution to the City for payment of utility service. The property owner shall receive a statement of the charges to be paid and the transfer shall be made at the time of the due date of the regular billing of the account. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.070 DESIGNATED AGENTS.

Any property owner may designate an agent to receive billing and provide for account maintenance. To designate an agent, the owner must deliver to the utility billing office a properly executed form provided by the City. The owner shall be responsible for notifying the City of any change in the agent’s status. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.080 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.

The City shall have the right at its option to terminate service to the premises for which the account is delinquent, provided service is not to be terminated for those accounts which require utilities for the operation of life-sustaining machines or equipment. Such an exception shall require the submission of written documentation of the requirement signed by a licensed physician, following each notice of delinquency and must be submitted to and approved by the Director.

Failure to receive a billing statement does not relieve the utility account from receiving charges or penalties.

When an account becomes delinquent, the City shall provide written notice to the owner or agent notifying that the account is delinquent.

The written notice shall contain the following information: date of termination which shall be no sooner than ten (10) days from notice; a statement of the reason for the proposed termination of service; a statement of what may be done to avoid termination; a statement that the property owner may file a written appeal with the City, and the rights of the property owner to dispute the proposed termination.

The City shall visit the service address ten (10) days following the written notification and physically place a final notice of termination on the door of the residence. The notice shall contain the following information: the reason for termination of service; the time in which service will be discontinued which shall not be sooner than forty-eight (48) hours from final notice; a statement of what may be done to avoid termination; a statement that the property owner may file a written appeal disputing the proposed termination.

Prior to the shut-off during the forty-eight (48) hour notice the tenant can request to continue service by paying the current charges on the account.

If payment is not received within forty-eight (48) hours following final notice, the service to the premises shall be terminated. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.085 TAMPERING WITH WATER SERVICE AFTER TERMINATION.

A tampering fee shall be assessed to the account of any person that turns on a water service without authorization after it has been shut off by the City. Further incidents of tampering will cause the account to be assessed at twice the tampering fee for each additional occurrence.

After any person has tampered in three (3) consecutive occurrences, the City shall disable the water service in such a manner that there is a physical disconnection of the water service from the city water main. The account shall be charged a disabling fee for the cost to disconnect the service line. The fee shall include the total cost of labor, material, equipment and any administrative or overhead charges. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019)


15.07.090 LIENS.

Any and all charges provided for in this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property served when the charges become delinquent and unpaid. Enforcement and collection of the lien shall include, but not be limited to, the right to discontinue service and deny service thereafter to any and all owners and/or occupants or tenants at the premises until the lien has been satisfied.

In the case where the owner of the premises moves to another location within the service area or applies for service at a new location, service may be denied at such location until the lien at the first location has been satisfied.

The City shall file a lien against the property served at the office of the County Auditor for Kitsap County when a utility account becomes delinquent and unpaid. Such lien shall include the delinquent charges, a charge for the cost of preparing and filing said lien.

Failure to receive a bill does not relieve an owner or user of the responsibility for payment of charges and penalties on the account. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.100 DEFERRED PAYMENT.

A deferred payment arrangement may be extended to customers for the payment of delinquent accounts where the customer can demonstrate a temporary inability to make full payment. Customers who have failed to comply with previous payment arrangements, have a history of payment problems or fail to stay current in utility bills may be denied deferred payment arrangements or have arrangements terminated. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.110 ADJUSTMENTS.

In the event of excessive registration of the water meters caused by broken or leaking water service lines upon the premises of any customer, without knowledge or fault of the customer, an adjustment may be requested upon written application within a thirty (30) day period of receipt of the billing in question. All repairs must be completed satisfactorily and with documentation of satisfactory repair. For all repairs completed within sixty (60) days after notification of the leak, reduction in charges are limited to one-half of the excess water billing and the entire excess sewer billing as determined by the City to be associated with the billing period in question. If the customer fails to make repairs within the sixty (60) days after the notification of the leak, the City will not make any adjustments to the customer’s account for any of the excessive water or sewer usage.

If a customer disputes an adjustment, an appeal may be filed as set forth herein. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.120 METER FAILURE.

In the event of a meter failing to register properly, the user shall be charged an estimate of the consumption from whatever may be considered the most reliable data or method available to the City. The adjustment may be for a period up to three (3) years. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.07.130 DISCONNECTION.

No person or owner of any premises connected to the City’s water supply system shall disconnect the water on said premises, unless they shall first file a written request and pay all arrearages current on water usage for said premises. (Ord. 5376 §6 (in part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


Chapter 15.08 APPEALS

Sections:

15.08.010    APPEALS - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES.

15.08.020    APPEAL - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER.


15.08.010 APPEALS - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES.

A property owner, tenant or developer ("customer") shall have the right to appeal matters dealing with accounting, billing and service termination.

In the case of termination of service, an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Department of Financial Services within fourteen (14) days of the notice of termination. All other complaints shall be filed within thirty (30) days of notice of the action appealed.

The City shall be required to respond in writing to the appellant within thirty (30) days affirming or reversing its decision or requesting additional information for adjudication of the complaint. (Ord. 5376 §7 (part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5103 §4 (part), 2010: Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


15.08.020 APPEAL - ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING EXAMINER.

Any customer aggrieved by the City’s decision after a written complaint has been denied by the City under BMC 15.08.010 may, within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date that the City’s decision was mailed to the customer, appeal such denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds therefor with the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall be submitted with the appeal, which filing fee is required to process the appeal. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures for hearing contested cases set out in Chapter 2.13 BMC. After the hearing thereon, the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall, after appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law, affirm, modify, or overrule the City’s decision, and may impose any terms thereupon.

The decision of the Administrative Hearing Examiner shall be final. The customer and/or the City may seek review of the decision by the superior court of Washington in and for Kitsap County within twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the decision. (Ord. 5376 §7 (part), 2019: Ord. 5250 §1 (in part), 2014: Ord. 5103 §4 (part), 2010: Ord. 4547, Amended, 03/28/1996; Ord. 4526 §5, 1995; Ord. 4512 §4, 1995; Ord. 4454 §1 (in part), 1994; Ord. 4309 §2 (in part), 1991)


Title 17 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

17.04    CITY BUILDING CODE

17.60    FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT


Chapter 17.04 CITY BUILDING CODE

Sections:

17.04.010    PURPOSE.

17.04.020    STATE BUILDING CODE - ADOPTION.

17.04.030    CODE CONFLICTS.

17.04.040    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.

17.04.050    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.

17.04.080    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.

17.04.090    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.

17.04.100    AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE.

17.04.110    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.

17.04.130    BUILDING CODES - FEES.

17.04.140    APPEALS.

17.04.150    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


17.04.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of the City Building Code is to enhance the health, safety and welfare of the public as a whole by ensuring that buildings, dwellings, structures and land will be constructed, maintained and used in a manner so as to reduce hazards, increase durability and require consistent patterns of community development; provided, notwithstanding anything in this chapter or in the codes adopted in BMC 17.04.020 to the contrary, this chapter and the codes adopted in BMC 17.04.020 establish duties owed to the public as a whole and not any duties to protect any person or class of persons. (Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.020 STATE BUILDING CODE - ADOPTION.

In accordance with Chapter 19.27 RCW, the following codes (collectively, the "building codes") together with any additions, deletions, and exceptions currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time by the State of Washington through its Building Code Council pursuant to the Washington Administrative Code ("WAC"), and as further amended in this chapter, are adopted by reference:

(a)    The International Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-50 WAC.

(b)    The International Existing Building Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-50 WAC.

(c)    The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-51 WAC.

(d)    The International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-52 WAC.

(e)    The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-56 WAC and the Uniform Plumbing Code Standards (Appendices A, B, and I to the Uniform Plumbing Code), as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-57 WAC.

(f)    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc.

(g)    The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 52-52 WAC.

(h)    The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code published by the International Code Council, Inc., as amended pursuant to Chapter 51-11 WAC.

One (1) copy of each of these codes is on file with the City’s Building Official. (Ord. 5304 §1, 2016: Ord. 5219 §1, 2013: Ord. 5113 §1, 2010: Ord. 5015 §1, 2007: Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.030 CODE CONFLICTS. 

To the extent allowed by RCW 19.27.040, if a conflict exists between the provisions of the State Building Codes adopted by the Washington State Building Code Council and the provisions of this chapter, the Bremerton Municipal Code provisions shall govern. In cases of conflict among the codes enumerated in BMC 17.04.020(a) through (h), the first named shall govern over those following. (Ord. 5015 §2, 2007: Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.040 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.

The following local amendments to the International Building Code adopted in BMC 17.04.020 are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Building Code:

(a)    General - Building Code Appendices Adopted. Section 101 of the International Building Code, entitled "General," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 101.5:

Sec. 101.5 Building code appendices adopted. Appendices C, H, I, and J to the International Building Code are hereby adopted; however, the public works director shall have the authority to enforce and interpret Appendix J and, accordingly, all references to the "building official" in Appendix J shall be substituted with the words "public works director."

(b)    Duties and Powers of Building Official - Lot Lines and Setback Lines. Section 104 of the International Building Code, entitled "Duties and Powers of Building Official," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 104.12:

Sec. 104.12 Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the building official to administer and enforce the building code, the building official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code, and none shall be implied. 

(c)    Certificate of Occupancy. Section 111 of the International Building Code, entitled "Certificate of Occupancy," is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 111.1 Use and occupancy. A building or structure shall not be used or occupied, and a change in the existing use, occupancy classification, or occupant of a building or structure or portion thereof shall not be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.

Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits in accordance with Section 105.2.

(d)    Board of Appeals. Section 113 of the International Building Code, entitled "Board of appeals," is amended by substituting Section 113 with the following:

Sec. 113 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 17.04.140 of the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(e)    Encroachments. Section 3202 of the International Building Code, entitled "Encroachments," is amended by adding the following new exception to Section 3202.3.2:

Sec. 3202.3.2 Windows, balconies, architectural features and mechanical equipment. Where the vertical clearance above grade to projecting windows, balconies, architectural features or mechanical equipment is more than 8 feet, 1 inch of encroachment is permitted for each additional 1 inch of clearance above 8 feet, but the maximum encroachment shall be 4 feet.

Exception:

Balconies may be permitted over a sidewalk in specific zones identified in Title 20 of the BMC or in affiliated subarea plans in compliance with the following conditions:

1)    A clearance of at least 10 feet is maintained between the sidewalk and the bottom of balconies.

2)    Balconies shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building with a maximum of 4 feet over the sidewalk or right-of-way.

3)    Balconies shall be completely supported by the building structure and shall not be supported by or on the sidewalk or right-of-way.

4)    The encroachment of the balconies do not present a health, safety or welfare issue.

5)    The balconies are constructed of fire-resistant materials.

6)    The balconies serve the public good, such as providing weather protection.

7)    The structure on which the balconies are constructed is located in specific zones that require or encourage weather protection over the public right-of-way (such as the Downtown Waterfront and Downtown Core zones in the Downtown Subarea Plan).

8)    A drainage system shall be provided to prevent water from draining upon the public right-of-way.

9)    As the balcony will reduce lighting, lighting may be required to be installed underneath the balcony to ensure safe sidewalks, especially for those balconies that extend across the entire facade or are placed within 15 feet or less above the sidewalk.

(f)    Appendix H - Signs. Appendix H of the International Building Code entitled "Signs" is hereby amended as follows:

(1)    Section H101.2, entitled "Signs Exempt from Permits," is amended to read as follows:

Sec. H101.2 Signs exempt from permits. The following signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a permit before erection:

1. Temporary signs announcing the sale or rent of property.

2. Signs erected by transportation authorities.

3. The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes shall not be deemed an alteration.

(2)    Section H109.2 entitled "Required clearances" is not adopted. (Ord. 5332 §1, 2017: Ord. 5304 §2, 2016: Ord. 5113 §2, 2010; Ord. 5008 §2, 2007: Ord. 4906 §2, 2004; Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.050 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE.

The following local amendments to the International Existing Building Code adopted in BMC 17.04.020 are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Existing Building Code:

(a)    Section 110 of the International Existing Building Code entitled "Certificate of Occupancy" is hereby amended by amending Subsection 110.1 to read as follows:

Sec. 110.1 Altered area use and occupancy classification. Altered areas of a building and relocated buildings shall not be used or occupied; and change in the existing use, occupancy classification, or occupant of a building or portion thereof shall not be made until the code official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.

(b)    Section 112 of the International Existing Building Code entitled "Board of Appeals" is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 112 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 17.04.140 of the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(Ord. 5304 §3, 2016)


17.04.080 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.

The following local amendments to the International Residential Code adopted in BMC 17.04.020 are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Residential Code:

(a)    Duties and Powers of Building Official - Lot Lines and Setback Lines. Section R104 of the International Residential Code, entitled "Duties and Powers of Building Official," is amended by adding the following new Subsection R104.12:

Sec. R104.12 Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the building official to administer and enforce the building code, the building official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code, and none shall be implied. 

(b)    Board of Appeals. Section R112.1 of the International Residential Code, entitled "Board of Appeals," is amended by substituting Section R112.1 with the following:

Sec. R112.1 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, design, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 17.04.140 of the Bremerton Municipal Code. 

(c)    Design Criteria. Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Building Code entitled "Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria" is amended to insert the design criteria specific to the City into the table categories as designated in Table R301.2(1) below. The remaining parts and footnotes of the table are unchanged.

Table R301.2(1) Climate and Geographic Design Criteria 

	GROUND SNOW LOAD	WIND DESIGN	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

	Speed (mph)	Topographic effects	Special wind region	Wind-borne debris zone	Weathering	Frost line depth	Termite

	30 PSF	110	No	No	No	D2	Negligible	12"	No

	WINTER DESIGN TEMP	ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED	FLOOD HAZARDS	AIR FREEZING INDEX	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP

	29	No	See footnote 1,2,3	113	51.4

	1 Date of entry into NFIP: April, 1987; Community Number 530093

	2 Date of latest study: November 18, 2014

	3 FIRM PANELS# 53035C0335E, 53035C0343E, 53035C0344E, 53035C0345E, 53035C0450E, 53035C0455E, 53035C0352F, 53035C0353F, 53035C0354F, 53035C0360F, 53035C0364F, 53035C065F, 53035C0366F, 53035C0367F, 53035C0368F, 53035C0380F, 53035C0390F

(d)    Existing Basements. Section R310 of the International Residential Building Code entitled "Emergency escape and rescue windows" is amended by substituting Section R310.6 with the following:

Sec. R310.6 Alterations or repairs of existing basement. An emergency escape and rescue opening in compliance with Section R310 in addition to a means of egress complying with Section R311 is required where existing basements undergo alterations, repairs, or change of use from non-habitable space to habitable area. An escape and rescue opening in a sleeping room may be used for compliance for the basement provided the other basement rooms are not used for sleeping.

Exceptions:

1) An emergency escape and rescue window is not required in an existing bedroom or habitable basement that was legally established before 1940 with a building permit and that has the required window for living area in compliance with the code of the time.

2) An emergency escape and rescue window is not required for alterations or repairs of an existing non-habitable basement that will not become habitable area. Construction of a new foundation wall is not considered a repair under this exception.

(e)    Sec. R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems is adopted with the exception of R313.2, One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems.

(f)    Foundation Drainage. Section R405 of the International Residential Code, entitled "Foundation Drainage," is amended to read as follows:

Sec. R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations. Drains shall be provided around concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend not less than 1 foot beyond the outside edge of the footing and 6 inches above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected with strips of building paper. Except where otherwise recommended by the drain manufacturer, perforated drains shall be surrounded with an approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches of washed gravel or crushed rock not less than one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches of the same material.

Exception: A drainage system is not required where the foundation is installed on well-drained ground or sand gravel mixture soils according to the Unified Soil Classification System, Group I soils, as detailed in Table R405.1.

(g)    Roof Drainage. Section R801 of the International Residential Building Code entitled "General" shall be amended to read as follows:

Sec. R801.3 Roof drainage. All structures shall have a controlled method of water disposal from roofs that will collect and discharge roof drainage to the ground surface not less than 12 inches (304 mm) from foundation walls or to an approved drainage system.

(Ord. 5332 §2, 2017: Ord. 5304 §4, 2016: Ord. 5113 §4, 2010; Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.090 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE. 

The following local amendments to the International Mechanical Code previously adopted in BMC 17.04.020 are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Mechanical Code as if fully set forth therein. 

(a)    Violations - Penalties. Section 108 of the International Mechanical Code, entitled "Violations," is amended by substituting Subsection 108.4 with the following:

Sec. 108.4 Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs mechanical work in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building code official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 17.04.150 of the Bremerton Municipal Code or as otherwise provided by law.

(b)    Means of Appeal - Board of Appeals. Section 109 of the International Mechanical Code, entitled "Means of Appeal," is amended by substituting Section 109 with the following:

Sec. 109 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 17.04.140 of the Bremerton Municipal Code. 

(Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.100 AMENDMENTS TO THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE. 

The following local amendments to the Uniform Plumbing Code previously adopted in BMC 17.04.020 are hereby adopted and incorporated into the Uniform Plumbing Code: 

(a)    Title, Scope, and General - Appendices Adopted. Section 101 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled "Title, Scope, and General," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 101.6:

Sec. 101.6 Appendices adopted. The Uniform Plumbing Code standards set forth in Appendices A, B, and I of the Uniform Plumbing Code are hereby adopted.

(b)    Organization and Enforcement - Penalties. Section 102 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled "Organization and Enforcement," is amended by substituting Subsection 102.3.2 with the following:

Sec. 102.3.2 Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs plumbing work in violation of: (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the building code official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 17.04.150 of the

Bremerton Municipal Code or as otherwise provided by law.

(c)    Organization and Enforcement - Board of Appeals. Section 102 of the Uniform Plumbing Code, entitled "Organization and enforcement," is amended by substituting Subsection 102.4, a subsection that was added to the State Code in accordance with WAC 51-56-0100, with the following:

Sec. 102.4 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application and interpretation of the building codes. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 17.04.140 of the Bremerton Municipal Code. 

(Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.110 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.

The following local amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted as if fully set forth therein:

(a)    Section 101 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "General" is amended by amending Subsection 101.1 to read as follows:

Sec. 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Bremerton, hereafter referred to as "this code."

(b)    Section 103 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Department of Property Maintenance Inspection" is not adopted.

(c)    Section 106 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Violations" is amended by amending Subsections 106.1, 106.2 and 106.3 to read as follows:

Sec. 106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, or occupy any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

Sec. 106.2 Notice of violations. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with Chapter 1.04 BMC.

Sec. 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Subsection 106.2 above shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC.

(d)    Section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Notices and Orders" is amended by not adopting certain subsections and by amending Subsection 107.5 to read as follows:

Sec. 107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in Chapter 1.04 BMC to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3.

Sec. 107.2 Form. This subsection is not adopted.

Sec. 107.3 Method of service. This subsection is not adopted.

Sec. 107.5 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.04 BMC.

(e)    Section 108 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Unsafe Structures and Equipment" is amended by amending Subsection 108.3 to read as follows:

Sec. 108.3 Notice. Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner, owner’s authorized agent or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Chapter 1.04 BMC. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Chapter 1.04 BMC.

(f)    Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Means of Appeal" is not adopted.

(g)    Section 112 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Stop Work Order" is amended by amending Subsection 112.4 to read as follows:

Sec. 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine pursuant to Chapter 1.04 BMC.

(h)    Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "General Definitions" shall not include the definitions of "Garbage" and "Rubbish."

(i)    Chapter 3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted with the exception of Subsections 302.4, "Weeds," 302.9, "Defacement of property," 303.2, "Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs - Enclosures," 304.3, "Premises identification," 304.14, "Insect screens," 304.17, "Guards for basement windows," 304.18.1, "Doors," and Section 308, "Rubbish and Garbage," and further amended by amending Subsection 307.1 to read as follows:

Sec. 307.1 General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on at least one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches (864 mm) high or more than 38 inches (965 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces for existing handrails still in place and in good condition, or may be continued at the height in effect in the code at the time of construction. Guards shall not be less than the height prescribed by the code in effect at the time of construction nor 36 inches (914 mm) in height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. Replacement or new guardrails shall comply with the codes for new construction.

Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.

(j)    Section 505 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Water Systems" is amended by amending Subsection 505.1 to read as follows:

Sec. 505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub and shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water.

(k)    Section 602 of the International Property Maintenance Code entitled "Heating Facilities" is amended by amending Subsections 602.2, 602.3 and 602.4 to read as follows:

Sec. 602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.

Sec. 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat of not less than 68° F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.

Sec. 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work space shall be supplied with heat of not less than 65° F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.

(l)    Appendix A. Appendix A: Boarding Standard of the International Property Maintenance Code is adopted in its entirety. (Ord. 5304 §5, 2016: Ord. 5219 §2, 2013: Ord. 5113 §3, 2010; Ord. 5015 §6, 2007)


17.04.130 BUILDING CODES - FEES. 

The fees to be assessed for the codes adopted in this chapter shall be as set forth in BMC 3.01.040, Community Development - Rate Table C, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.140 APPEALS. 

(a)    Appeals to the Hearings Examiner.

(1)    Jurisdiction. The City Hearings Examiner has been designated as the Board of Appeals and shall have jurisdiction over all matters concerning the application of the building codes cited in this chapter. The City Hearings Examiner, however, shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of these codes, nor shall the City Hearings Examiner be empowered to waive requirements of these building codes.

(2)    Filing. Appeals shall be filed with the Hearings Examiner in accordance with Chapter 2.13 BMC.

(3)    Standing. Standing to bring an appeal under this chapter is limited to the following persons:

(i)    The applicant and the owner of property to which the permit decision is directed.

(ii)    Another person aggrieved or adversely affected by the order, determination, or decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or modification of the order, determination, or decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following conditions are present:

a.    The order, determination, or decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that person;

b.    A judgment in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the order, determination, or decision; and 

c.    The appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies to the extent required by law.

(b)    Appeals to Superior Court. Appeals to the Hearings Examiner shall be made pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. (Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


17.04.150 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of the City Building Code, Chapter 17.04 BMC, constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of the City Building Code, Chapter 17.04 BMC, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 4904 §1, 2004)


Chapter 17.60 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT

Sections:

17.60.010    STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.

17.60.020    FINDINGS OF FACT.

17.60.030    STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

17.60.040    METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.

17.60.050    DEFINITIONS.

17.60.060    LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.

17.60.070    BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.

17.60.080    PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.

17.60.090    ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

17.60.100    INTERPRETATION.

17.60.110    WARNINGS AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

17.60.120    ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

17.60.130    DESIGNATION OF CITY ENGINEER AS LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.

17.60.140    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY ENGINEER.

17.60.150    VARIANCE - COUNCIL AUTHORITY GENERALLY.

17.60.160    VARIANCE - ALLEGED ERROR BY ENGINEER.

17.60.170    VARIANCE - APPEAL TO COUNTY COURT.

17.60.180    VARIANCE - CONSIDERATIONS.

17.60.190    VARIANCE - LOTS OF ONE-HALF (0.5) ACRE.

17.60.200    VARIANCE - COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO ATTACH CONDITIONS.

17.60.210    VARIANCE - RECORDS AND REPORTS.

17.60.220    VARIANCE - CONDITIONS GENERALLY.

17.60.230    FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION - GENERAL STANDARDS.

17.60.240    ANCHORING.

17.60.250    CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS.

17.60.260    UTILITIES.

17.60.270    SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.

17.60.280    REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMITS.

17.60.290    FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION - SPECIFIC STANDARDS.

17.60.300    RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.

17.60.310    NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.

17.60.315    CRITICAL FACILITY.

17.60.320    MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES.

17.60.325    RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

17.60.330    FLOODWAYS.

17.60.340    ZONES WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT NO FLOODWAYS.

17.60.350    COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.


17.60.010 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.

The City of Bremerton has the legal authority and responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health and general welfare of its citizenry pursuant to Article XI, Sections 10 and 11 of the Washington State Constitution and Article III of the Bremerton City Charter. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §1.1, 1979)


17.60.020 FINDINGS OF FACT.

(a)    The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(b)    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §1.2, 1979)


17.60.030 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(a)    To protect human life and health;

(b)    To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(c)    To minimize the need for rescue and relief effort associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(d)    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(e)    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(f)    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight resulting from future flood;

(g)    To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(h)    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §1.3, 1979)


17.60.040 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions:

(a)    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or in flood heights or velocities;

(b)    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(c)    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

(d)    Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

(e)    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §1.4, 1979)


17.60.050 DEFINITIONS.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

"Appeal" means a request for a review of the City Engineer’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

"Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

"Base flood" means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

"Base flood elevation" means the water surface elevation corresponding to a flood having a one (1) percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year.

"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

"Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

"Coastal high hazard area" means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on the FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE or V.

"Critical facility" means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include (but are not limited to) schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

"Elevated building" means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers, pilings, or columns.

"Elevations certificate" means the official form (FEMA Form 81-31) used to track development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance premium rate with Section B completed by community officials.

"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(a)    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

(b)    The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

"Flood Insurance Rate Map" or "FIRM" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium applicable to the community.

"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.

"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.

"Habitable floor" means any floor usable for living purposes, which include working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor."

"Increased cost of compliance" or "ICC" means a flood insurance claim payment up to thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) directly to a property owner for the cost to comply with floodplain management regulations after a direct physical loss caused by a flood. Eligibility of an ICC claim can be through a single instance of "substantial damage" or as a result of "cumulative substantial damage."

"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter found at BMC 17.60.300(b).

"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailer, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.

"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

"New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle built on a single chassis, that is four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

"Start of construction" includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

"Structure" means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure:

(a)    Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(b)    If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:

(a)    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct pre-cited existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b)    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.

"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §1, 2007: Ord. 4103 §51, 1987; Ord. 3544 §2.0, 1979)


17.60.060 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Bremerton. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §3.1, 1979)


17.60.070 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Kitsap County and Incorporated Areas" dated November 4, 2010, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in BMC 17.60.140(b) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates data utilized under BMC 17.60.140(b). The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Bremerton Department of Community Development, 345 6th Street, Suite 600, Bremerton, WA 98337. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5127 §1, 2010: Ord 5123 §1, 2010: Ord. 5020 §2, 2007: Ord. 4965 §2, 2006: Ord. 3544 §3.2, 1979)


17.60.080 PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Bremerton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4103 §2, 1987; Ord. 3544 §3.3, 1979)


17.60.090 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §3.4, 1979)


17.60.100 INTERPRETATION.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(a)    Considered as minimum requirements;

(b)    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(c)    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §3.5, 1979)


17.60.110 WARNINGS AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §3.6, 1979)


17.60.120 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.60.070. The permit shall be for all structures including mobile homes, as set forth in BMC 17.60.050, and for all other developments including fill and other activities, also as set forth in BMC 17.60.050. Application for floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City Engineer and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(a)    Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(b)    Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(c)    Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in BMC 17.60.310; and

(d)    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.1, 1979)


17.60.130 DESIGNATION OF CITY ENGINEER AS LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR.

The City Engineer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter, by granting or denying floodplain development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.2, 1979)


17.60.140 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY ENGINEER.

Duties of the City Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)    Floodplain Development Permit Application Review.

(1)    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.

(2)    Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

(3)    Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway.

If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of BMC 17.60.330(a) are met.

(b)    Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with BMC 17.60.070, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the City Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer BMC 17.60.290, Flood Hazard Protection - Specific Standards, and 17.60.330, Floodways.

(c)    Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(1)    Where base flood elevation data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study or required as in subsection (b) of this section, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(2)    For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

(i)    Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and

(ii)    Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in BMC 17.60.120(c).

(3)    Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(d)    Alteration of Watercourses.

(1)    Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Ecology prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(2)    Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

(3)    Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in BMC 17.60.150. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4103 §3, 1987; Ord. 3544 §4.3, 1979)


17.60.150 VARIANCE - COUNCIL AUTHORITY GENERALLY.

The City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(1), 1979)


17.60.160 VARIANCE - ALLEGED ERROR BY ENGINEER.

The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the City Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(2), 1979)


17.60.170 VARIANCE - APPEAL TO COUNTY COURT.

Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Kitsap County Superior Court, as provided by law. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(3), 1979)


17.60.180 VARIANCE - CONSIDERATIONS.

In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

(a)    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b)    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c)    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d)    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e)    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f)    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g)    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h)    The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(i)    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j)    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k)    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(4), 1979)


17.60.190 VARIANCE - LOTS OF ONE-HALF (0.5) ACRE.

Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (0.5) acre or less in size contiguous and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing BMC 17.60.180(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (0.5) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(5), 1979)


17.60.200 VARIANCE - COUNCIL AUTHORITY TO ATTACH CONDITIONS.

Upon consideration of the factors of BMC 17.60.180 and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(6), 1979)


17.60.210 VARIANCE - RECORDS AND REPORTS.

The City Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §4.4-1(7), 1979)


17.60.220 VARIANCE - CONDITIONS GENERALLY.

(a)    Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places that will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

(b)    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(c)    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(d)    Variances shall only be issued upon:

(1)    A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(2)    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(3)    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in BMC 17.60.180, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(e)    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

(f)    Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, or economic or financial circumstances.

They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

(g)    Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria, except this section, and otherwise complies with BMC 17.60.240. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4103 §4, 1987; Ord. 3544 §4.4-2, 1979)


17.60.230 FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION - GENERAL STANDARDS.

In all areas of special flood hazards the standards set out in BMC 17.60.240 through 17.60.280 are required. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §5, 1979)


17.60.240 ANCHORING.

(a)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(b)    All manufactured/mobile homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §3, 2007: Ord. 3544 §5.1-1, 1979)


17.60.250 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS.

(a)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(b)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(c)    Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioned equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4965 §3, 2006: Ord. 4233 §1, 1989; Ord. 3544 §5.1-2, 1979)


17.60.260 UTILITIES.

(a)    All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.

(b)    New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

(c)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(d)    Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §5.1-3, 1979)


17.60.270 SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.

(a)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(b)    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(c)    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

(d)    Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §5.1-4, 1979)


17.60.280 REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMITS.

Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source (BMC 17.60.140(b)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Base flood elevation data and reference marks are generally provided throughout Bremerton and are indicated on Bremerton’s flood insurance map. Failure to elevate at least two (2) feet above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4103 §4, 1987; Ord. 3544 §5.1-5, 1979)


17.60.290 FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION - SPECIFIC STANDARDS.

In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in BMC 17.60.070, the provisions set out in BMC 17.60.300 through 17.60.320 are required. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 3544 §5.2, 1979)


17.60.300 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.

(a)    New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot or more above base flood elevation.

(b)    Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(1)    A minimum of two (2) openings have a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch of every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

(2)    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.

(3)    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 4965 §4, 2006: Ord. 4103 §5, 1987; Ord. 3544 §5.2-1, 1979)


17.60.310 NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.

New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot or more above the level of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(a)    Be floodproofed so that below one (1) foot or more above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(b)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(c)    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in BMC 17.60.140(c)(2).

(d)    Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in BMC 17.60.300(b).

(e)    Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one (1) foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as one (1) foot below that level). (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §4, 2007: Ord. 4965 §5, 2006: Ord. 4233 §2, 1989; Ord. 4103 §7, 1987; Ord. 3544 §5.2-2, 1979)


17.60.315 CRITICAL FACILITY.

Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) one hundred (100) year floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three (3) feet above BFE or to the height of the five hundred (500) year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into the floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013)


17.60.320 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOMES.

All manufactured/mobile homes in the floodplain to be placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured/mobile home is elevated one (1) foot or more above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §5 (part), 2007: Ord. 4965 §6, 2006: Ord. 3544 §5.2-3, 1979)


17.60.325 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

Recreational vehicles placed on sites in the floodplain are required to either:

(a)    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or

(b)    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(c)    Meet the requirements for manufactured/mobile homes as found in BMC 17.60.320. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §5 (part), 2007)


17.60.330 FLOODWAYS.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.60.070 are portions of Gorst and Parish Creeks which are designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(a)    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

(b)    If subsection (a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of BMC 17.60.230 through 17.60.320;

(c)    Construction or reconstruction of residential structures is prohibited within designated floodways, except for:

(1)    Repairs, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which do not increase the ground floor area; and

(2)    Repairs, reconstruction or improvements to a structure, the cost of which does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either:

(i)    Before the repair or reconstruction is started, or

(ii)    If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored before the damage occurred. Work done on structures to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety codes which have been identified by the Code Enforcement or Building Official and are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions shall not be included in the fifty (50) percent determination in subsection (c)(2) of this section;

(d)    Manufactured/mobile homes are prohibited in designated floodways. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5020 §6, 2007: Ord. 4233 §3, 1989; Ord. 3544 §5.3, 1979)


17.60.340 ZONES WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT NO FLOODWAYS.

In areas with base flood elevations (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013)


17.60.350 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 17.60.070 are coastal high hazard areas, designated as Zones V1-30, VE and/or V. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this chapter, the following provisions shall also apply:

(a)    All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones V1-30 and VE (V if base flood elevation data is available) on the community’s FIRM shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that:

(1)    The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated one (1) foot or more above the base flood level; and

(2)    The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one hundred (100) year mean recurrence interval).

A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section.

(b)    Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community’s FIRM and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The local administrator shall maintain a record of all such information.

(c)    All new construction within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community’s FIRM shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.

(d)    Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community’s FIRM have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purposes of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the design proposed meets the following conditions:

(1)    Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

(2)    The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one hundred (100) year mean recurrence interval).

If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation.

(e)    Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community’s FIRM.

(f)    Prohibit manmade alteration of sand dunes within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community’s FIRM which would increase potential flood damage.

(g)    All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s FIRM on sites:

(1)    Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

(2)    In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

(3)    In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

(4)    In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood;

shall meet the standards of subsections (a) through (f) of this section, and manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on other sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones V1-30, V and VE on the FIRM shall meet the requirements of BMC 17.60.320.

(h)    Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V and VE on the community’s FIRM shall either:

(1)    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or

(2)    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(3)    Meet the requirements of BMC 17.60.120 (development permit required) and subsections (a) through (f) of this section. (Ord. 5231 §1 (part), 2013)


Title 18 FIRE

Chapters:

18.02    CITY FIRE CODE

18.03    EXISTING MULTI-FAMILY REQUIREMENTS

18.06    AMBULANCE SERVICES


Chapter 18.02 CITY FIRE CODE

Sections:

18.02.010    PURPOSE.

18.02.020    FIRE CODE - ADOPTED.

18.02.025    AUTHORITY.

18.02.030    CODE CONFLICTS.

18.02.040    AMENDMENTS TO THE IFC - ADMINISTRATION.

18.02.050    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 311, VACANT PREMISES.

18.02.055    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 4, EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS.

18.02.060    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 5, FIRE SERVICE FEATURES.

18.02.070    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 901, GENERAL.

18.02.080    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 903, AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.

18.02.090    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 907, FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS.

18.02.100    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 913, FIRE PUMPS.

18.02.110    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 23, MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES.

18.02.120    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 33, FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION.

18.02.130    AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - APPENDIX D, FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS.

18.02.140    FIRE CODES - FEES.

18.02.150    CITY OF BREMERTON FALSE ALARM CODE.

18.02.160    RESERVED.

18.02.170    AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - BUILDINGS CONTAINING TWO (2) OR LESS DWELLING UNITS.

18.02.180    SPECIFIC VIOLATIONS - FINES.

18.02.190    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

18.02.200    APPEALS.


18.02.010 PURPOSE.

The purpose of the City Fire Code is to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for safeguarding to a reasonable degree of protection the life and property of our citizens from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises. It is understood the fire code and its referenced documents are to provide a framework for the fire and life safety requirements to protect the citizens and emergency responders from the predictable situations the codes regulate. Therefore under no circumstance shall any space, occupancy or other location be allowed to be occupied or otherwise utilized, whether temporarily or permanently, without the Fire Code Official’s written authorization. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.020 FIRE CODE - ADOPTED.

In accordance with Chapter 19.27 RCW, the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., together with any additions, deletions, and exceptions currently enacted or as may be amended from time to time by the State of Washington through its Building Code Council pursuant to Chapter 51-54 of the Washington Administrative Code ("WAC"), and International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, Appendices B, C, D, H, and I, and as further amended in this chapter, is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference.

One (1) copy of the International Fire Code is on file with the City’s Fire Code Official. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.025 AUTHORITY.

The Fire Code Official is authorized to enforce the provisions of the Fire Code. "Fire Code Official" shall mean the City of Bremerton Fire Marshal or other City official designated by the City of Bremerton Fire Chief who shall be the formal administrator of the City Fire Code. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013)


18.02.030 CODE CONFLICTS.

To the extent allowed by RCW 19.27.040, if a conflict exists between the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted and amended by the Washington State Building Code Council and the provisions of this chapter, the Bremerton Municipal Code provisions shall govern. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.040 AMENDMENTS TO THE IFC - ADMINISTRATION.

(a)    General Authority and Responsibilities - Retained Authority. Section 104 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General Authority and Responsibilities," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 104.1.1:

Sec. 104.1.1 Retained authority - Additional conditions. The Fire Code Official retains the authority to impose additional conditions where the official determines it necessary to mitigate identified fire protection impacts. These conditions may include, by way of example and without limitation, increased setbacks, use of fire retardant materials, installation of standpipes, smoke and heat vents, draft curtains, smoke control, fire sprinkler and fire alarm systems, including temporary provisions and without limitation such as fire watch, fire department standby, blocking of roads and additional fire safety inspections.

(b)    General Authority and Responsibilities - Lot Lines and Setback Lines. Section 104 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General Authority and Responsibilities," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 104.12:

Sec. 104.12 Lot lines and setback lines. Notwithstanding the authority of the Fire Code Official to administer and enforce the fire code, the Fire Code Official shall have no duty to verify or establish lot lines or setback lines. No such duty is created by this code and none shall be implied.

(c)    Permits - Fees. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Permits," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 105.1.4:

Sec. 105.1.4 Fees. The Fire Code Official shall prepare a resolution establishing a schedule of fees, if any, for council consideration, which fees shall include the cost involved in the processing, issuance, and renewal of permits and certificates. Any fee schedule adopted by resolution shall govern the fee amount to be assessed for any permit or certificate and the Fire Code Official shall collect those fees as a condition to issuance or renewal of any permit or certificate. Failure to pay for either an original permit or the required renewal within 30 days of the date notice is given, shall result in the City’s termination of the permit or certificate application.

(d)    Permits - Term. Section 105 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Permits," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 105.3.6.1:

Sec. 105.3.6.1 Unsafe Situations: Actions taken outside of the guidelines contained within any permit required by section 105 of the IFC shall be deemed unsafe and shall entitle the Fire Code Official to immediately have all utilities including but not limited to: electricity, water, sewer and gas shut off or otherwise disconnected from the site. Utilities shall not be restored without the conditions of all required permit(s) resolved.

(e)    Board of Appeals. Section 108 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Board of appeals," is amended by substituting Section 108 with the following:

Sec. 108 Board of appeals. The City of Bremerton hearings examiner is designated as the board of appeals in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Fire Code Official relative to the suitability of alternate materials, designs, and methods of construction and appeals of the reasonable application of the Fire Code. Appeals shall be made as set forth in section 18.02.200 of the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(f)    Violation Penalties. Section 109 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Violations," is amended by substituting Subsection 109.3 with the following:

Sec. 109.3 Violation penalties. Any person, company or corporation who violates any provision of this code or fails to comply with any of its requirements or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure or building system in violation or inconsistent with (a) the approved construction documents, (b) a directive of the Fire Code Official, or (c) a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or operates without such permit, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 18.02.190 of the Bremerton Municipal Code or as otherwise provided by law.

(g)    General Definitions. Section 202 of the International Fire Code is amended to add the following general definitions:

APWA is the American Public Works Association.

AWWA is the American Water Works Association.

FIRE FLOW. A measure of the sustained flow of available water for firefighting at a specific building or within a specific area at 20 pounds-per-square-inch residual pressure.

FIRE WALL. An approved wall of not less than 4 hour fire-resistive construction with no openings, which extends vertically from the foundation to terminate in a parapet not less than 30 inches above the roof, and which extends horizontally to the furthest projection of any portion of the building or to a point 30 inches beyond the intersecting exterior wall, whichever is furthest. As an alternative to the horizontal requirements, such fire wall may be extended a minimum of 30 inches along both sides of the intersecting exterior wall, provided there are no projections beyond the intersecting exterior wall.

LIFE SAFETY RESCUE ACCESS. Unobstructed access to all floor levels and each roof level of a building on not less than 20 percent of the building perimeter by utilizing a 35 foot ladder. An alternate method would be at least 1 stairway enclosure with exit doorways from each floor level and with a door opening onto each roof level which conforms to the requirements of the International Building Code.

PRIVATE HYDRANT is a fire hydrant situated and maintained to provide water for firefighting purposes with restrictions as to use.

PUBLIC HYDRANT is a fire hydrant situated and maintained to provide water for firefighting purposes without restrictions as to use for that purpose and is accessible for immediate use at all times.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.050 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 311, VACANT PREMISES.

The following local amendments to Section 311 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection," are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Vacant Premises - Fire Protection Systems. Section 311 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Vacant Premises," is amended by substituting Subsection 311.2.2 with the following:

Sec. 311.2.2 Fire protection. Fire alarm, sprinkler, and standpipe systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times.

Exception: If, in the opinion of the Fire Code Official, the premises (a) has been cleared of all combustible materials and debris, (b) is of the type of construction with sufficient fire separation distance so as to not create a fire hazard, (c) has been secured to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons, and (d) has buildings that will not be heated, potentially exposing fire protection systems to freezing temperatures, then the Fire Code Official may allow fire alarm and sprinkler systems to be placed out of service and may allow standpipes to be maintained as dry systems (without an automatic water supply).

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.055 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 4, EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS.

The following local amendments to Chapter 4 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Emergency Planning and Preparedness," are hereby adopted:

Sec. 401.9 Hardwired Telephones. All occupancies with hardwired telephones, new and existing, when 911 is dialed shall correctly report the address of the actual location dialed from.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010)


18.02.060 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 5, FIRE SERVICE FEATURES. 

The following local amendments to Chapter 5 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Service Features," are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Fire Service Features - Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," is hereby adopted.

(b)    Fire Apparatus Access Roads - Where Required. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 503.1.4:

Sec. 503.1.4 Residential access. For development of Group R-3 occupancies accessed from a fire apparatus access road that does not meet specifications set forth in Section 503 and Appendix D, and automatic fire sprinkler system is required in compliance with BMC 18.02.080(n).

Exception: All residential development on lots that are existing or have received preliminary subdivision approval prior to December 1, 2013, unless otherwise required.

(c)    Fire Apparatus Access Roads - Dimensions. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," is amended by substituting Subsection 503.2.1 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.1 Dimensions. Unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official, the following minimum dimensions shall apply for fire apparatus access roads:

1.    Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6 and Appendix D 103.5, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

2.    In the immediate vicinity of any building or portion thereof in excess of 28 feet in height, the fire apparatus access road shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 26 feet (7924 mm) and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).

(d)    Fire Apparatus Access Roads - Bridges and Elevated Surfaces. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," is amended by substituting Subsection 503.2.6 with the following:

Sec. 503.2.6 Bridges and elevated surfaces. Where a bridge or an elevated surface is part of a fire apparatus access road or likely to be used during emergency operations, including EMS, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with specifications established by the Fire Code Official and the City’s public works director, or their designees; at a minimum, however, the bridge or elevated surface shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges. Bridges and elevated surfaces shall be designed for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed loads of a 35 or more ton fire apparatus, the total imposed load to be determined by the Fire Code Official. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges when required by the Fire Code Official. Where elevated surfaces designed for emergency vehicle use are adjacent to surfaces which are not designed for that use, approved barriers or approved signs, or both, shall be installed and maintained, if required by the Fire Code Official.

(e)    Fire Apparatus Access Roads - Marking. Section 503 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," is amended by substituting Subsection 503.3 with the following:

Sec. 503.3 Marking. Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked whenever necessary to maintain the unobstructed minimum required width of roadways, as determined by the Fire Code Official. Subject to the Fire Code Official’s prior written approval, marked fire apparatus access roads, or "fire lanes" as defined in section 502.1 of the code, may be established or relocated at the time of plan review, pre-construction site inspection, and/or post construction site inspection as well as any time during the life of the occupancy. Only those fire apparatus access roads established by the Fire Code Official can utilize red marking paint and the term "fire lane." Once a fire lane is established it shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times or repair/replaced to maintain visibility. Fire lanes shall be marked as directed by the Fire Code Official with one or more of the following types of marking:

503.3.1 Type 1. The following shall apply to Type 1 marking:

1.    Curbs shall be identified by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the top and front, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

2.    Rolled curbs shall be identified by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the curb, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

3.    Lanes without curbs shall be identified by red traffic paint with a 6 inch wide stripe on the pavement, extending the length of the designated fire lane.

4.    The words "NO PARKING - FIRE LANE" shall be in 3 inch stroke white letters 18 inches in height, and placed 8 inches measured perpendicular from the red paint stripe on the pavement. In most cases, both sides of the access road shall be marked. Where long drives are to be marked, the repetitions shall alternate sides of the drive.

503.3.2 Type 2. The following shall apply to Type 2 marking:

In addition to the requirements for Type 1 marking, Type 2 marking shall also include the addition of metal signs stating "NO PARKING - FIRE LANE" to be installed at intervals or locations designated by the Fire Code Official. The signs shall be approximately 12 inches in width and 18 inches in height and have red letters on a white background. Metal signs shall be installed on either 2 inch metal pipes, for private property, or treated 4 inch by 4 inch wood posts, for public property, and shall be located so that the bottom of the sign is a minimum of 7 feet above the curb. Where fire lanes are adjacent to buildings or structures and when approved or directed by the Fire Code Official, the signs may be placed on the face of the building or structure.

503.3.3 Type 3. The following shall apply to Type 3 marking:

Where directed by the Fire Code Official, specific areas shall be designated and those areas are to be marked with diagonal striping across the width of the fire lane. Diagonal marking shall be used in conjunction with painted curbs and/or edge striping and shall run at an angle of 30 to 60 degrees from one side to the other. These diagonal lines shall be in red traffic paint, parallel with each other, at least 6 inches in width, and 24 inches apart. Lettering shall occur as with Type 1 marking.

503.3.4 Street or Road Signs. Street or road signs shall be provided for all private and public roads. All private street and road signs shall be designed and installed to meet public road sign standards as set by the City of Bremerton Street Department; any expense shall be the responsibility of the property owner. New street and road signs shall be posted within 30 days after receiving approval from the City of Bremerton Engineering Department.

503.3.5 Alternate materials and methods. The Fire Code Official may modify, on a case-by-case basis, any of the marking provisions in this subsection 503.3 where practical difficulties exist. Modification requests shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Code Official setting forth a suggested alternative.

(f)    Access to Building Openings and Roofs - Required Access. Section 504 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Access to Building Openings and Roofs," is amended by substituting Subsection 504.1 with the following:

Sec. 504.1 Required access. The following points of access must be provided:

1.    Exterior doors and openings required by this code or the International Building Code shall be maintained readily accessible for emergency access by the fire department.

2.    Each tenant space provided with a secondary exit to the exterior or exit corridor shall be provided with tenant identification by business name and/or address. Letters and numbers shall be posted on the corridor/exterior side of the door, be plainly legible, and shall contrast with their background.

3.    An approved access walkway shall be provided to connect fire apparatus access roads to exterior openings.

4.    All rescue windows shall be accessible by a 35-foot ground extension ladder placed so that the inclination of the ladder does not exceed 70 degrees. An area of discharge, 36 inches in all directions around the base of the ladder, shall be provided. Ladders and associated areas of discharge shall be located within the property lines.

5.    All occupancies shall be required to provide approved life safety rescue access, as defined in section 202 of the International Building Code or the International Residential Code as applicable.

(g)    Premises Identification. Section 505 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Premises Identification," is amended by adding the following new Subsection 505.1.1:

505.1.1 Address numbers for Commercial Buildings. Address numbers for commercial buildings shall be 12" and contrast with the background. Individual unit/suite or space numbers or letter shall be 6" in size and contrasting with the background and visible from the approach side or angle.

Housing developments which contain 100 or more dwelling units which alley ways are or may be used for access to dwelling units shall have 4" minimum house numbers including street designation included. The street designation may be a smaller size, but no less than 2" in size.

Example:
[IMAGE]


(h)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Where Required. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended by substituting Subsection 507.5.1 with the following:

Sec. 507.5.1 Where required. All buildings or structures shall be located so that there is at least 1 hydrant within 150 feet, and no portion of the building or structure is more than 300 feet from a hydrant, as measured by an approved route.

Exceptions:

1.    For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies the distance required shall be 600 feet (183 m).

2.    For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, or other approved fire protection system, the distance requirement shall be 600 feet (183 m).

(i)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Existing Nonconforming Hydrants. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended to add a new Subsection 507.5.7 as follows:

Sec. 507.5.7 Existing non-conforming hydrants. At such time as an existing hydrant, which does not conform to the requirements and standards of this section, is replaced, it shall be replaced with a hydrant that does conform to the standards and requirements of this section.

(j)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Installation Requirements. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended by substituting Subsection 507.5.8 with the following:

Sec. 507.5.8 Installation requirements. All fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the specifications established by the Fire Code Official and the Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his or her designee, or at a minimum, in accordance with the currently adopted NFPA, APWA, or AWWA standards. In addition, unless modified by written decision of the Fire Code Official, the following requirements shall apply to all building construction projects:

1.    All fire hydrant piping, valves, and related appurtenances shall be approved by the City’s public works department.

2.    The fire hydrant installation and its attendant water system connection shall conform to the City’s specifications and design and construction standards.

3.    An auxiliary gate valve shall be installed at the main line tee to permit the repair and replacement of the hydrant without disruption of water service.

4.    All hydrants shall be plumb, plus or minus 3 degrees, to be set to finished grade with the bottom flange 2 inches above the ground or curb grade and have no less than 36 inches in diameter of clear area around the hydrant for the clearance of hydrant wrenches on both outlets and the operating nut.

5.    The largest port shall face the most likely direction of approach and location of the fire apparatus while pumping as determined by the Fire Code Official. Distance from the pumper port to the street curb shall be no further than 10 feet.

6.    The lead from the service main to the hydrant shall be no less than 6 inches in diameter. Any hydrant leads over 50 feet in length from the water main to hydrant shall be no less than 8 inches in diameter.

7.    All hydrants installed in single family residential areas shall be supplied by not less than 6 inch mains and shall be capable of delivering 1,000 gpm fire flow over and above average maximum demands at the farthest point of the installation except with Fire Code Official approval and the home is installed with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with this code.

8.    All hydrants shall have at least 5 inch minimum valve openings, "O" ring stem seal, two 2-1/2 inch national standard thread hose ports, one 4-1/2 inch steamer port with national standard threads or otherwise determined by the Fire Code Official. In addition, all hydrants shall meet AWWA standards for public hydrants and be of a type approved for use in the City by the City’s public works department. In addition, all hydrants shall be equipped with a 5 inch Storz adapter on the steamer port and, when required by the Fire Code Official, locking Storz caps.

9.    All pipe shall meet the City standards as determined by the public works department. Piping located entirely within private property and maintained by the property owner shall meet the requirements and be approved by the Fire Code Official. The Fire Code Official may approve any piping material that has been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

10.    The maximum distance between hydrants in single family use district zones shall be 600 feet.

11.    The maximum distance between hydrants in commercial, industrial, and apartment (including duplex) use zones shall be 300 feet.

12.    Lateral spacing of hydrants shall be predicated on hydrants being located at street intersections.

13.    The appropriate water authority and the fire department shall be notified in writing of the anticipated date the hydrant installation and its attendant water connection system will be available for use.

14.    All hydrants shall meet City of Bremerton Hydrant Identification standards as established by the Fire Code Official.

(k)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Notification. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended by adding a new Subsection 507.6 as follows:

Sec. 507.6 Notification. The owner of property on which private hydrants are located and the public agencies that own or control public hydrants must provide the Fire Code Official with the following written service notifications:

Sec. 507.6.1 In-service notification. The Fire Code Official shall be notified when any newly installed hydrant or main is placed into service.

Sec. 507.6.2 Out-of-service notification. Where any hydrant is out of service or has not yet been placed in service, the hydrant shall be identified as being out of service and shall be appropriately marked as out of service, by a method approved by the Fire Code Official.

(l)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Dead-End Mains Prohibited. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended by adding a new Subsection 507.7 as follows:

Sec. 507.7 Dead-end mains prohibited. When appropriate, all water mains in any project shall be looped.

(m)    Fire Protection Water Supplies - Building Permit Requirements. Section 507 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Protection Water Supplies," is amended by adding a new Subsection 507.8 as follows:

Sec. 507.8 Building permit requirements. No building permit shall be issued until all plans required by this section have been submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of this section. No combustible construction beyond the foundation shall be permitted until all hydrants and mains required by this section are in place and approved.

(n)    Fire Department Access to Equipment - Identification. Section 509 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Department Access to Equipment," is amended by substituting Subsection 509.1 with the following:

Sec. 509.1 Identification. The following identification requirements shall apply to access to equipment.

1.    Fire protection equipment and fire hydrants shall be clearly identified in an approved manner to prevent parking and/or other obstructions.

2.    Entrances to rooms containing controls for air-conditioning systems, sprinkler risers and valves, or other fire detection, suppression, or control elements shall be identified for the use of the fire department.

3.    Approved signs are required to identify fire protection equipment and equipment location. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials, permanently installed, and readily visible.

4.    All fire department connections shall have a sign approved by the Fire Code Official. The sign shall specify the type of water-based fire protection system it serves and the building areas served.

5.    All main control valves and sectional valves for water-based fire protection systems shall have a sign specifying what the valves control.

6.    All sprinklers and standpipe risers shall have signs to indicate which type of water-based fire protection system is being used.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.070 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 901, GENERAL. 

The following local amendments to Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General," are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Fire Protection Systems - Scope. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General," is amended by substituting Subsection 901.1 with the following:

Sec. 901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all occupancies and buildings, shall specify where fire protection systems are required, and shall apply to the design, installation, inspection, operation, testing, and maintenance of all fire protection systems; however, nothing contained in this chapter shall diminish or reduce the requirements of any duly adopted building codes, including state and local amendments, or other City ordinances, resolutions, or regulations. In the event of any conflict in requirements among these codes, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations, the more stringent provision shall apply.

(b)    Fire Protection Systems - Alterations, Repairs, and Additions. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General," is amended by adding a new Subsection 901.4.2.1 as follows:

901.4.2.1 Fire Alarm Systems no longer required by the Fire Code or any other applicable code or that were not installed as an alternative method to other code provisions may, after the written approval of the Fire Code Official, may be discontinued and removed. The removal of the system shall be pursuant to the regulations of Washington State Department of Labor and Industries Electrical Division as applicable, but as a minimum shall require the removal of visible wiring, fire alarm panels and other related visible devices. The Fire Alarm System may be maintained as a local system rather than be removed. Fire alarm systems that remain in service, either monitored or local, shall be inspected, maintained and tested per the International Fire Code, NFPA 72 and this code.

(c)    Fire Protection Systems - Records. Section 901 of the International Fire Code, entitled "General," is amended by substituting Subsection 901.6.2 with the following:

Sec. 901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests, and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of 3 years. A copy of each inspection, test, or maintenance record shall be forwarded to the Fire Code Official, by an approved electronic method of delivery, within ten (10) business days of the date the inspection, test, or maintenance occurred. All fire protection systems taken off line or out of service, and subsequently returned to service shall be reported to the Fire Code Official’s office by an approved method of delivery.

A copy of all system inspections shall be maintained in a three-ring binder or other folder type cover and located at the fire alarm main panel or other approved location.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.080 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 903, AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. 

The following local amendments to Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2 with the following:

Sec. 903.2 Where required. Approved fire sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout buildings and structures as follows:

1.    In all new buildings and structures without adequate fire flow as required by this code.

Exception: Group U Occupancies and remodels and replacements to existing Group R-3 residential structures as defined in the International Residential Code regardless of the requirements of Chapter 5 of the International Fire Code.

2.    All new buildings and structures with a gross floor area of 10,000 or more square feet (929 m2), or where this code provides a more restrictive floor area requirement, and shall be provided in all locations or where described by the International Fire Code.

Exception: Spaces or areas in communications buildings used exclusively for communications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries, and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by a wall with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and a floor/ceiling assembly with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

3.    Where this code requires the installation of an automatic sprinkler system to protect an occupancy within an otherwise non-sprinkled building, then automatic sprinkler protections will be required throughout the entire building unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Code Official.

4.    Only 4 hour area separation walls without openings shall constitute separate buildings to allow for a fire sprinkler exemption.

(b)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.1 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.1 Group A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used as Group A occupancies as provided in this section. For Group A-1, A-2, A-3, and A-4 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building. For Group A-5 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in the spaces indicated in 903.2.1.5.

(c)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.1.1 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    The gross fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet.

2.    The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.    The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.

4.    The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.

5.    Dance halls where the total gross floor area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2).

(d)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.1.2 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    The fire area of the building exceeds 5,000 square feet.

2.    The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.

3.    The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.

(e)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.1.3 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    The fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet.

2.    The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.    The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.

Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports arena areas where the main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the main entrance and exit.

(f)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.1.4 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    The fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet.

2.    The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.    The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge.

Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports arena areas where the main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the main entrance and exit.

(g)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.3, Group E, with the following:

Sec. 903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows:

1.    Throughout all buildings with a group E fire area.

(h)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.4, Group F-1, with the following:

Sec. 903.2.4 Group F-1: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    Where the fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet; or

2.    Where a Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade.

(i)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.7 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    Where the fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet; or

2.    Where a Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade.

(j)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by amending Subsection 903.2.8 and by adding Subsections 903.2.8.3 and 903.2.8.4 as follows:

Sec. 903.2.8.3 Existing Group R-1 and R-2 buildings shall install a full fire sprinkler system when any one of the following occurs:

1.    A fire occurs which migrates from the unit of origin to involve a neighboring unit.

2.    Two or more separate fires occur, which require a fire department response, in the same complex within a two year span.

Sec. 903.2.8.4 Sprinkler heads in kitchens shall be installed (on the ceiling) with at least one sprinkler head no more than 4 feet out from the front of the stove top.

(k)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Where Required. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.2.9 with the following:

Sec. 903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.    Where the fire area of the building exceeds 10,000 square feet; or

2.    Where a Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade.

(l)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.3.1.1.1 with the following:

Sec. 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the Fire Code Official automatic sprinklers may not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance rated construction, or contains electrical equipment.

1.    Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.

2.    Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the Fire Code Official.

3.    Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

4.    In rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly noncombustible contents.

(m)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.3.1.2.1 with the following:

Sec. 903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks and ground floor patios of dwelling units.

(n)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.3.1.3 with the following:

Sec. 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. The design of NFPA 13D fire sprinkler systems shall comply with the flow-through options listed in NFPA 13D. It is generally understood the flow-through systems be interconnected with the domestic plumbing system, sized accordingly, to provide adequate turnover of potable water as well as the minimum required density required by that of NFPA 13D.

Sec. 903.3.1.3.1 Design. In addition to the general design/coverage of the NFPA 13D fire sprinkler system a single sidewall, or other approved design, shall be installed above the man door between the habitable space and the attached garage. When the garage also contains a fuel fired appliance, the sidewall head, if within the listed spacing, will be adequate coverage for that appliance. All habitable spaces and other spaces with the potential to be occupied are to be covered.

(o)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Installation Requirements. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.3.7 with the following:

Sec. 903.3.7 Fire department connection locations. All fire department connection locations (F.D.C.’s) to automatic sprinklers and/or standpipe systems shall be located not less than 3 feet, nor more than 10 feet from the finished edge of an approved fire apparatus access road. F.D.C.’s shall not be located more than 50 feet from a fire hydrant. F.D.C.’s and F.D.C.’s serving sprinkler systems shall not be located on the wall of a building, unless approved by the Fire Code Official. F.D.C.’s serving class 1 or 3 standpipe systems may be located on walls, provided such walls are of fire resistive or noncombustible construction.

Exception: F.D.C.’s that are not able to be located away from a wall due to physical restrictions may be located in an area approved by the Fire Code Official. F.D.C.’s shall be installed/located at the front of the building not less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above the finished grade of an approved fire apparatus access road. F.D.C.’s shall not be obstructed by vehicle parking, carports, garages, refuse storage containers, fences, landscaping or other obscuring features. F.D.C.’s shall be provided with tight fitting threaded caps or Knox type lockable caps.

(p)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems - Alarms. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.4.2 with the following:

Sec. 903.4.2 Alarms - Exterior notification. Approved audible alarm devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Alarm devices shall be water-motor gong or approved electric bell which operates with water flow and shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an approved location at each riser or riser group.

Exception: NFPA 13D and NFPA 13R sprinkler systems may utilize an electrically operated alarm bell on the exterior of the building in an approved location at each riser or riser group, provided that the electrically operated alarm bell cannot be silenced during water flow.

903.4.2.1 Alarms - Interior notification. Actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate interior audible/visual notification appliances as outlined in NFPA 72 at all exits from all floors or where a fire alarm system is installed. The fire alarm system notification circuits shall provide the interior notification. When a structure exceeds one floor, a flow switch shall be provided for each floor. A flow alarm shall be identified by floor.

Exception: NFPA 13D sprinkler systems do not require interior audible/visual notification appliances, except if a fire alarm system is installed, then the fire alarm system notification circuits shall provide the interior notification.

(q)    Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Section 903 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Automatic Sprinkler Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 903.4.3 with the following:

Sec. 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor on buildings/structures four (4) or more stories in height or 30 feet above grade plane as defined in Chapter 2 of the International Fire Code.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4958 §2, 2005; Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.090 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 907, FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS. 

The following local amendments to Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," are adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - General. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended to add the following to Subsection 907.1.2:

Sec. 907.1.2 Fire Alarm Shop Drawings.

14.    A Bremerton Fire Department submittal checklist.

15.    A copy of the device/zone map.

16.    All fire alarm system drawings shall be submitted on no less than 36"x24" sized drawings and to an approved scale with a digital copy of the design in PDF format.

(b)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Where Required. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended to add the following Subsection 907.1.3.1 as follows:

Sec. 907.1.3.1 All fire alarm systems shall be addressable. A fully functional annunciator panel shall be placed at the main entrance(s) and fire sprinkler room(s).

Graphic annunciators shall be utilized in all high-rises and schools.

Shielded fire alarm cable shall be utilized as required by the Fire Code Official.

(c)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Where Required. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 907.2 with the following:

Sec. 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures. All new and remodeled occupancies where the fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet, an approved and automatic fire alarm system shall be provided. Where automatic sprinkler protection installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 is provided and connected to the fire alarm system, automatic heat detection requirements of this section may be modified upon specific approval by the Fire Code Official.

A prescriptive design will be:

1.    Automatic smoke detection in common areas, corridors and/or means of egress areas.

2.    Automatic heat detection throughout unless covered by a fire sprinkler system or smoke detection.

(d)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Duct Smoke Detectors. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended to add the following to Subsection 907.2.13.1.2:

Sec. 907.2.13.1.2 Duct smoke detectors.

3.    Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building’s fire alarm control panel when a fire alarm system is provided. Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. Duct smoke detectors shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection.

Exception: In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an approved location. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be identified as air duct detector trouble.

(e)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Retroactive R-2 Visible Notification. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended to add Subsection 907.5.2.3.5 as follows:

Sec. 907.5.2.3.5 Retroactive R-2 visible notification. At the request of the tenant, the building owner shall replace an existing audible device to an audible/visible device to assist hearing impaired tenants. Building owners are not required to otherwise change or modify fire alarm systems if due to design or device placement this option is not feasible.

(f)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Monitoring. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended by substituting Subsection 907.6.5 with the following:

Sec. 907.6.5 Monitoring. Where fire alarm systems are required by this chapter or by the International Building Code, a U.L.-listed central monitoring station in accordance with NFPA 72 shall monitor fire alarm systems.

Exception: Supervisory service is not required for:

1.    Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.10.

2.    Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.

3.    Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.

4.    Those existing R-1 and R-2 occupancies that are addressed by section 18.03.120(a) of the Bremerton Municipal Code.

(g)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Testing Prerequisites. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended by adding a new Subsection 907.9.1:

Sec. 907.9.1 Testing Prerequisites. Upon completion of the installation or alteration, a satisfactory test of the entire system and its functions shall be made in the presence of the Fire Code Official within two weeks of completion of installation. Prior to the acceptance test, written documentation shall be provided to the fire department certifying that the system has been installed and pre-tested in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.

(h)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Location/Security. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended by adding a new Subsection 907.10:

Sec. 907.10. Location/Security. The control unit, remote annunciator, alarm panel, and access keys to locked fire alarm equipment shall be installed and maintained in a location approved by the Fire Code Official. All occupancies equipped with a fire sprinkler or alarm system shall install a key safe below an exterior horn strobe and near the access to the remote annunciator or main entrance. Alarm panel access keys and building access keys or master keys shall be provided and kept in an on-site wall mounted entry key safe provided by the building owner and shall meet specifications of the Fire Code Official.

(i)    Fire Alarm and Detection Systems - Monitoring. Section 907 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Alarm and Detection Systems," is amended by adding new Subsections 907.11, 907.12, 907.13, 907.14 and 907.15:

Sec. 907.11. Instructions. Written operating instructions for the fire alarm system shall be provided and kept in an on-site wall mounted entry key safe provided by the building owner and shall meet specifications of Fire Code Official. All alarm systems shall be capable of being silenced without having to be reset. Alarm panels that require a reset code to silence or reset the system shall be programmed with a fire department reset code that is approved by the Fire Code Official.

Sec. 907.12. Designer Qualifications. Persons who design fire alarm systems shall be either a fire protection engineer registered by the State of Washington or NICET III and current with all continuing education and training required by NICET. The designer must be NICET II by July 1, 2008 and NICET III by January 1, 2009.

Sec. 907.13. Installation Requirements. During the course of a fire alarm installation, including all subsequent modifications and annual testing, a NICET level II technician in fire alarms shall personally conduct all programming and testing.

Sec. 907.14. Existing Fire Alarm Systems. All existing fire alarm systems are subject to the provisions of 907.13.

Sec. 907.15. Violations. Violations of section 907.13 and 907.14 constitutes a mandatory $1000 violation per occurrence. Each day constitutes a separate and distinct violation. Any three violations of this provision immediately revokes the affected fire alarm company’s City of Bremerton business license and prohibits re-application for a period of not less than three years.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5137 §1, 2011: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.100 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - SECTION 913, FIRE PUMPS.

The following local amendment to Section 913 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Pumps," is adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code:

(a)    Fire Pumps. Section 913 of the International Fire Code is amended by adding a new Subsection 913.2.2:

Sec. 913.2.2 Fire pumps utilizing electric drivers shall provide a back-up power supply.

Exception: In F and S occupancies when the normal occupant load does not exceed 15, the occupancy would normally be vacated during power outages and with the Fire Code Official’s approval.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007. Formerly 18.02.095)


18.02.110 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 23, MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES.

The following local amendment to Chapter 23 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages," is hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

Sec. 2305.3.1. Required Spill Control Equipment. Every fuel dispensing facility and repair garage shall maintain at least 50 pounds of rice hulls or other approved absorbent and at least 25 approved absorbent pads, minimum dimension 16 inch by 16 inch and/or other spill control equipment as approved by the Fire Code Official.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004)


18.02.120 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - CHAPTER 33, FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION.

The following local amendment to Chapter 33 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Safety During Construction and Demolition," is hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(a)    Water Supply for Fire Protection - When Required. Section 3312 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Water Supply for Fire Protection," is amended by substituting Subsection 3312.1 with the following:

Sec. 3312.1 When required. An approved water supply for fire protection shall be made available as soon as combustible material arrives on the site.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013)


18.02.130 AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE - APPENDIX D, FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS. 

The following local amendments to Appendix D to the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Roads," are hereby adopted and incorporated into the International Fire Code as if fully set forth therein:

(a)    Minimum Specifications - Turning Radius. Section D103 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Minimum specifications," is amended by substituting Subsection D103.3 with the following:

Sec. D103.3 Turning radius. The fire apparatus access road shall have a 23 foot minimum inside turning radius and a 45 foot minimum outside turning radius.

(b)    Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Section D103.5 of the International Fire Code, entitled "Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates," is amended by substituting Subsection D103.5.1 with the following:

Sec. D103.5.1 The minimum gate width shall be 14 feet.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004. Formerly 18.02.140)


18.02.140 FIRE CODES - FEES. 

The fees to be assessed for the codes adopted in this chapter shall be as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC, Fire Department - Rate Table E, as currently enacted or as hereafter amended. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004. Formerly 18.02.150)


18.02.150 CITY OF BREMERTON FALSE ALARM CODE.

(a)    For the purposes of this section, a false alarm shall be deemed and construed as being: the activation of any fire protection system due to some form of maintenance or lack of maintenance element.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to give, signal, or transmit or for any person to cause or permit to be given, signaled, or transmitted, in any manner, any false alarm.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or maliciously injure or activate any fire protection system or equipment maintained for the purpose of transmitting fire alarms to the Fire Department.

(d)    Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sounding of any such signal essential for the carrying out of any system maintenance or fire drill. The Fire Code Official, his designated representative, or the responsible central station monitoring agency shall be notified in advance when such signal will be sounded.

(e)    Any person, firm or corporation who is found to have signaled or transmitted a false alarm shall be guilty of a civil infraction and shall be fined per Chapter 3.01 BMC, Fire Department - Rate Table E.

(f)    Definitions.

(1)    "False alarm" shall mean the activation of a fire protection system at a time when no conditions attributable to a fire or smoke condition are found to exist upon arrival of the Fire Department.

(2)    "Person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

(3)    "Preventable false alarm" shall mean a false alarm caused or initiated or allowed to be caused or initiated by the premises owner, or by a representative, assignee, or other persons that function under the direction or control of the owner, whether caused by direct intent, malicious action or by system neglect or improper system maintenance.

(4)    "Unpreventable false alarm" shall mean a false alarm caused by power failures or interferences unrelated to the operation of the premises.

(g)    Any person having or maintaining a fire alarm shall, within three (3) working days after notice by the Fire Code Official at the scene of a false alarm, make a written report to the Fire Code Official setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service person, and such other information as the Fire Code Official may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm and the prescribed action necessary.

(h)    The determination whether or not a false alarm was preventable shall be made by the Fire Code Official. Any fee resulting from a determination that a false alarm was preventable shall be billed by the City Treasurer’s Office and shall be deposited in the General Fund. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004. Formerly 18.02.160)


18.02.160 RESERVED.

(Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013)


18.02.170 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS - BUILDINGS CONTAINING TWO (2) OR LESS DWELLING UNITS.

(a)    When automatic sprinkler systems are installed in buildings containing two (2) or less dwelling units as defined in the International Residential Code, whether attached or detached, they are permitted to be connected to the domestic service within said unit utilizing an integrated fire/plumbing flow-through system.

(b)    Automatic sprinkler systems installed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be subject to general facility charges, connection fees, inspections fees and other permit fees specifically related to the installation of a fire sprinkler system with a service size up to and including one (1) inch.

(c)    Automatic sprinkler systems installed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section are integrated into and dependent upon the domestic water supply of the residential dwelling unit; therefore, the property owner is responsible for maintaining a connection to and paying for an adequate supply of water to the residential dwelling unit. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4958 §3, 2005)


18.02.180 SPECIFIC VIOLATIONS - FINES.

Any violation of any provision of the City Fire Code identified in this section may be assessed a monetary fine for each incident or occurrence as follows:

(a)    Illegal burning: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00);

(b)    NICET violations: one thousand dollars ($1,000);

(c)    False fire alarms: two hundred dollars ($200.00);

(d)    Fire Code violations with the knowledge of a responsible party: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00);

(e)    Repeat Fire Code violations for failure to correct or comply with the City Fire Code: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00).

Nothing in this section prohibits the City from seeking other remedies as allowed by ordinance, including, but not limited to, those set forth in BMC 18.02.190. The Fire Code Official may, at his or her discretion, reduce the amount of the assessed fine due to mitigating circumstances. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5164 §1, 2011. Formerly 18.02.175)


18.02.190 VIOLATION - PENALTY. 

(a)    Any violation of any provision of the City Fire Code, BMC Title 18, constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any of the provisions of the City Fire Code, BMC Title 18, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4958 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004. Formerly 18.02.180)


18.02.200 APPEALS. 

(a)    Appeals to the Hearings Examiner.

(1)    Jurisdiction. The City Hearings Examiner has been designated as the Board of Appeals and shall have jurisdiction over all matters concerning the reasonable application of the fire codes cited in this chapter.

(2)    Filing. Appeals shall be filed with the Hearings Examiner in accordance with Chapter 2.13 BMC.

(3)    Standing. Standing to bring an appeal under this chapter is limited to the following persons:

(i)    The applicant and the owner of property to which the permit decision is directed.

(ii)    Another person aggrieved or adversely affected by the order, determination, or decision, or who would be aggrieved or adversely affected by a reversal or modification of the order, determination, or decision. A person is aggrieved or adversely affected within the meaning of this section only when all of the following conditions are present:

a.    The order, determination, or decision has prejudiced or is likely to prejudice that person;

b.    A judgment in favor of that person would substantially eliminate or redress the prejudice to that person caused or likely to be caused by the order, determination, or decision; and

c.    The appellant has exhausted his or her administrative remedies to the extent required by law.

(b)    Appeals to Superior Court. Appeals to the Hearings Examiner shall be made pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. (Ord. 5234 §1 (part), 2013: Ord. 5112 §1 (part), 2010: Ord. 5016 §1 (part), 2007: Ord. 4958 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4903 §1, 2004. Formerly 18.02.190)


Chapter 18.03 EXISTING MULTI-FAMILY REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

18.03.010    DEFINITIONS.

18.03.020    REQUIREMENTS.

18.03.030    SMOKE DETECTORS.

18.03.040    FLOOR PLANS.

18.03.050    EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLANS.

18.03.060    FIRE SAFETY TRAINING.

18.03.070    ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTION.

18.03.080    FIRE SAFETY EVALUATION.

18.03.090    CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.

18.03.100    NOTIFICATION TO PROPERTY OWNERS.

18.03.110    AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLERS.

18.03.120    FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.

18.03.140    FIRE SAFETY COMMITTEE.

18.03.150    ENFORCEMENT.

18.03.155    APPEALS.

18.03.160    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

18.03.170    SEVERABILITY.


18.03.010 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

a.    "Administrative Summary" means the "Kitsap County Fire Safety Advisory Committee Report" dated June 28, 1999, attached hereto as Appendix B and incorporated herein by reference. The Administrative Summary was used as a basis for development of this ordinance and shall be used for guidance in interpreting it.

b.    "Approved" means approved by the Chief unless otherwise specified.

c.    "Chief" means the Bremerton Fire Chief or his designee.

d.    "Dwelling Unit" means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as required by the 1997 Uniform Building Code, for not more than one family, or a congregate residence which accommodates ten (10) or fewer persons.

e.    "Fire Department" means the Bremerton Fire Department.

f.    "Fire Safety Advisory Committee" means a group of community representatives appointed by the Board of County Commissioners as provided in KCC 14.10.150.

g.    "Fire Safety Matrix" means the assessment tool, attached hereto as Appendix A and incorporated herein by reference, used by Fire Department personnel to evaluate Level-III Buildings to determine appropriate fire protection features based upon an assigned point value and number of Dwelling Units.

h.    "Floors" means the number of levels in a building, including any basement.

i.    "Group R, Division 1 Building" means a hotel or motel, an apartment building or congregate residence, including condominiums.

j.    "Level-I Building" means all Group R, Division 1 Buildings less than 3 floors in height and more than 4 Dwelling Units;

k.    "Level-II Building" means all Group R, Division 1 Buildings 3 or more floors in height and less than 17 Dwelling Units;

l.    "Level-III Building" means all Group R, Division 1 Buildings 3 or more floors in height and 17 or more Dwelling Units;

m.    "Owner" means the owner of record of a Group R, Division 1 Building or any dwelling unit contained therein. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.020 REQUIREMENTS.

All Group R, Division 1 Occupancy Buildings constructed prior to July 1, 1998 shall meet all the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.030 SMOKE DETECTORS.

On or before January 1, 2001, the Owner shall install in all sleeping areas of all Level-I, -II and -III Buildings, an approved, listed photoelectric device which senses visible or invisible particles of combustion. Such devices may be battery-powered. Using approved forms, the Owner shall certify to the Chief that the devices have been installed as required in this section and are properly working. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.040 FLOOR PLANS.

Upon request by the Fire Department, the Owner shall provide floor plans to assist with pre-fire planning. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.050 EMERGENCY EVACUATION PLANS.

a.    The Fire Department will work with the Owners by providing guidelines for developing an approved emergency evacuation plan. All plans shall be submitted and approved by the Fire Department prior to posting.

b.    Approved emergency evacuation plans shall be posted in common areas of the building by the Owners on or before January 1, 2001.

c.    Emergency evacuation plans shall be reviewed and updated annually by Owners. Revised plans shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review and approval. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.060 FIRE SAFETY TRAINING.

The Fire Department shall develop and offer classroom-training programs for building owners, tenants and homeowners regarding fire safety. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.070 ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTION.

The Chief or his/her designee shall endeavor to inspect annually all Level I, II and III buildings for compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.080 FIRE SAFETY EVALUATION.

Level III buildings shall be evaluated for fire safety utilizing the Fire Safety Matrix. Each Level III building shall achieve a minimum of 80 points on the Matrix within ten (10) years of the date this ordinance is adopted. A comprehensive review of all Level III buildings evaluations will be conducted by the Fire Safety Advisory Committee. During that review, the Chief shall determine if Level III buildings not meeting the 80 points criteria are a distinct hazard to life or property. If the Chief determines a building to be a distinct hazard, he or she may take action pursuant to the Dangerous Buildings Code in this title. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.090 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.

The Chief or his designee shall provide a certificate of compliance for all Level I and II buildings inspected and determined to be in compliance with this chapter. All Level III buildings must meet all requirements of this chapter, including the requirements to achieve a score of at least 80 points in the fire safety evaluation performed pursuant to Section 18.03.080, in order to receive a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.100 NOTIFICATION TO PROPERTY OWNERS.

The Fire Department will design and implement a process to notify property Owners regarding fire calls resulting from property damage or injury on their property.

(Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.110 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLERS.

Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed in all Group R, Division 1 Buildings that contain 10 or more Dwelling Units when, within a three-year period, there has been damage to the building that exceeds 50% of the assessed value of the building, or the costs of remodeling the building exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.120 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.

a.    An approved fire alarm system "non-monitored" shall be installed in all Level II buildings. The fire alarm system must be installed and operational on or before January 1, 2003. There shall be no Department of Community Development permit fees for alarm systems installed for compliance with this chapter.

b.    An approved "monitored" fire alarm system containing a heat detector within each dwelling unit shall be installed in all Level III buildings. The fire alarm system must be installed and operational on or before January 1, 2003. The Department of Community Development, shall waive permit fees for alarm systems installed for compliance with this chapter.

(Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.140 FIRE SAFETY COMMITTEE.

A committee is established under KCC 14.10.150 to review fire safety evaluations as provided in this chapter, periodically review this ordinance and recommend improvements to it: investigate and recommend to the Bremerton City Council funding sources for fire and life safety enhancements to Group R, Division 1 Buildings; when requested by the Board of Appeals, provide recommendations on appeals under this chapter; and develop strategies to enhance fire safety within the community. In performing its responsibilities under this chapter, the committee shall be guided by the standards set forth in the Administrative Summary. The committee shall consist of at least three (3) county residents, three (3) fire service personnel and three (3) owners of Group R, Division 1 Buildings. The committee shall be appointed by the Board of County Commissioners on or before April 1, 2000. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.150 ENFORCEMENT.

The Chief or his/her designee are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this Chapter are intended for the general welfare and safety of the citizens of the City of Bremerton. There is no intention to create a class of persons or property to be specifically benefited hereby. Prior to the issuance of notice of a civil infraction under this Chapter, notice as provided in Article I, Section 103.4.2 of the Uniform Fire Code, shall be provided. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.155 APPEALS.

Appeals of administrative determinations applying the provisions of this Chapter shall be heard by the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC, who shall serve as the Board of Appeals pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 18.02 BMC. (Ord. 4836, Added, 12/20/2002)


18.03.160 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction. Each violation shall constitute a separate infraction for each and every day or portion thereof during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. The maximum penalty and default amount for a civil infraction under this chapter shall be pursuant to Chapter 1.12. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


18.03.170 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this ordinance, or its application to any person, entity or circumstance is for any reason held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the application of the provision to other persons, entities or circumstances is not affected. (Ord. 4715, Added, 07/13/2000)


Chapter 18.06 AMBULANCE SERVICES

Sections:

18.06.010    DEFINITIONS.

18.06.020    APPLICABILITY.

18.06.030    LICENSE REQUIRED - APPLICATION.

18.06.040    INSURANCE.

18.06.050    AMBULANCES AND EQUIPMENT.

18.06.060    PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - COMPLIANCE - RECORDS.

18.06.070    EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION.

18.06.080    RESPONSE TO 911 INITIATED AID CALLS.

18.06.090    MUTUAL AID.

18.06.100    RATES - FILING REQUIRED.

18.06.110    DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

18.06.120    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


18.06.010 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    "Advanced life support (ALS)" means those services requiring medical treatment by a certified paramedic.

(b)    "Aid call" means any 911 initiated call, request or dispatch for emergency medical treatment.

(c)    "Ambulance" means any privately or publicly owned ground transportation vehicle that is especially designed, constructed, equipped, maintained or used for the transportation of patients who are sick, injured or otherwise incapacitated, which is operated as part of an ambulance service.

(d)    "Ambulance service" means any person, as defined in this section, who operates an ambulance for hire which is either stationed within or outside the City limits or dispatched from within or outside the City limits to pick up injured or sick fares within the City or which makes trips to the City, from points outside its City limits, for the purpose of transporting sick or injured fares from points within the City; provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any ambulance which shall pass through the City in the delivery of fares picked up at points beyond the limits of the City.

(e)    "Basic life support (BLS)" means those medical services which can be performed by one who is a certified emergency medical technician.

(f)    "Cencom (911)" means the Central Communication Emergency Dispatch Center.

(g)    "Communication system" means two-way radio communications equipment necessary for communication between ambulances, dispatchers, hospitals and other agencies as needed, including those with a four (4) band multifrequency capability.

(h)    "Department" means City of Bremerton Fire Department.

(i)    "Emergency" means a situation or patient condition (1) in which either of the administration of a drug (except oxygen) or initiation of an intravenous line is performed; or (2) in which a person requesting ambulance assistance requires immediate response by medically trained personnel; or (3) which an EMT would assess, in the interest of good patient care, to require the assistance of at least a paramedic certified pursuant to Chapter 18.71 RCW and regulations promulgated thereunder.

(j)    "Emergency medical technician (EMT)" means a person who is certified as such by the Secretary, pursuant to Chapter 18.73 RCW and regulations promulgated thereunder.

(k)    "Mutual aid" refers to situations in which a licensed nonemergency BLS ambulance service is required, as determined by the Department, to make ambulances and personnel available for emergency response under the City’s direction.

(l)    "Patient" means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.

(m)    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or group of individuals acting together for a common purpose or organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the United States.

(n)    "Secretary" means the Secretary of the Department of Health of the State of Washington. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.010)


18.06.020 APPLICABILITY.

(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to nonemergency BLS ambulance services operating within the City of Bremerton limits.

(b)    Ambulance services providing ALS and BLS interfacility transports shall follow the guidelines established under Chapter 18.71 RCW, Kitsap County EMS Council and Kitsap County Medical Program Director. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.020)


18.06.030 LICENSE REQUIRED - APPLICATION.

(a)    No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated an ambulance or ambulance service within the City without first obtaining a Washington State verification and license in addition to a City business license. No person, firm, or corporation, other than the Department, shall operate or cause to be operated emergency ALS ambulance service within the City limits, except as provided in BMC 18.06.090.

(b)    An application for a business license to operate an ambulance or ambulance service shall contain the following information:

(1)    A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor chassis and VIN number, together with current state license number, the length of time the ambulance has been in use and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant’s ambulance.

(2)    The location and description of the place or places from which the ambulance service is intended to operate and the number of licensed EMTs to be initially employed.

(3)    In the event that the applicant is granted a license, the applicant shall be required to immediately update its application when there is a change in any of the items listed on the application. The failure of the license holder to update its application upon a change in any of the required items will result in a violation of this chapter.

(c)    Upon receiving an application and the fee, the City shall forward the application to the Fire Chief for review and approval. No license shall be issued unless the Fire Chief is satisfied, pursuant to policies duly adopted, that (1) the applicant is properly certified by the State; (2) the applicant’s facilities, ambulances, and equipment meet State and local standards; (3) employees of applicant are EMT certified and in good standing; (4) a record check of the applicant and its employees shows no criminal convictions within five (5) years prior to the date of application of federal, state or local laws involving the custody of incapacitated persons, the custody of narcotic or controlled substances, or the use of motor vehicles; (5) the applicant has fulfilled all the requirements of the laws of the state, including, but not limited to, Chapter 18.73 RCW and Chapter 248-17 WAC, as those chapters currently exist or are hereafter amended, pertaining to emergency medical care and transportation services and ambulance rules and regulations; (6) the applicant has met all the requirements of this chapter; (7) all personnel employed by the applicant are state certified and have regular emergency vehicle driving training. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.030)


18.06.040 INSURANCE.

(a)    Each ambulance service shall obtain from a reputable insurance company and, at all times, maintain in full force the following insurance:

(1)    Comprehensive general liability insurance written on an occurrence basis with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000) general aggregate for personal injury, bodily injury and property damage;

(2)    Automobile liability insurance with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and

(3)    Professional liability insurance with limits no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) limit per occurrence/claim.

(b)    Applicant shall provide an insurance certificate to this effect, naming the City of Bremerton as an additional insured on the comprehensive general liability and automobile liability policies prior to the issuance of a business license. Such policies shall also provide for not less than thirty (30) days’ written notice to the City Clerk of intended cancellation of coverage. The cancellation and/or termination of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate any business license issued for the ambulance service, unless a substitute insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section shall be provided and be in effect at or prior to the time of such cancellation or termination. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.040)


18.06.050 AMBULANCES AND EQUIPMENT.

(a)    Ambulances shall be maintained and inspected pursuant to requirements from time to time adopted by the Secretary. All ambulance services shall provide the Department with copies of reports of inspection submitted to the Secretary pursuant to RCW 18.73.145.

(b)    Inspection by the City. In addition to any other inspection required by state law, the Department shall have the right to inspect the records, equipment, and accessories of all ambulance services up to twice annually at the discretion of the Department. Additionally, the Department shall conduct individual inspections of an ambulance service within three (3) days of the receipt of any complaint about the ambulance service. Notwithstanding the above required inspections or any other provision of this chapter, the Department may, at all reasonable times, inspect the records, equipment and accessories of any ambulance service.

(c)    The ambulance service shall pay an inspection fee for each inspection required under this chapter and further shall pay an inspection fee as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC for each inspection prompted by complaint; provided, however, that no complaint-prompted inspection fee shall be paid where the Chief of the Department has determined the complaint to be unwarranted and without substantial merit.

All inspection fees shall be prepaid to the City Treasurer. Proof of payment must be provided before inspections commence. Any deficiencies identified during inspection shall be remedied within thirty (30) days or the ambulance service business license shall be subject to revocation.

(d)    All ambulances and equipment storage and cleaning areas shall be subject to inspection by the Department, during operating hours, to ensure that they are maintained in a clean and functional state. Disinfection or chemical sterilization of reusable equipment must meet guidelines established by the National Center for Disease Control.

(e)    Each ambulance service shall take immediate action to eliminate any unsanitary condition upon becoming aware of such and shall immediately correct any unsafe situation as directed by the Fire Chief or the Secretary by written notice.

(f)    Ambulances shall not be used without the minimum equipment prescribed by the Secretary. In the event a variance from said requirements is granted by the State, the licensee must notify the Department of the variance granted. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.080)


18.06.060 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - COMPLIANCE - RECORDS.

(a)    All services performed hereunder shall be in accordance with the standards and principles of the course of instruction given EMTs or paramedics, as the case may be, by the State, and pursuant to local medical protocols established from time to time by the Kitsap County Medical Program Director.

(b)    Records of 911 initiated calls shall be logged by ambulance crews and shall include the appearance and status of and treatment administered to injured, sick, or incapacitated persons treated or transported. Copies of such records shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the Kitsap County EMS Office on a monthly basis, or more often if requested for good cause. Subject to the requirements of the State Public Disclosure Act, such records shall be confidential and shall be released only to proper officials of the City or Kitsap County EMS Office. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.090)


18.06.070 EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION.

In the event a call for emergency medical assistance is received by an ambulance service or a representative thereof, the caller shall be directed to call Cencom (911) and the ambulance service representative shall also call Cencom (911). (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.100)


18.06.080 RESPONSE TO 911 INITIATED AID CALLS.

(a)    At each aid call to which a Department ambulance responds, the Department officer in charge shall determine whether the patient is in need of advanced life support (ALS) or basic life support (BLS) services. If the officer decides that the patient is in need of advanced life support services, the patient shall be transported to a hospital in a Department ambulance if available; provided, however, if the patient’s medical interests would be best served by transporting the patient by private ambulance, the officer in charge may arrange for the patient to be transported in that manner.

(b)    No effort shall be made by an ambulance service to assume the custody of a patient before release of custody has been made by the Department officer in charge.

(c)    It is unlawful for an ambulance service, in responding by vehicle to any call requested by the Department, to use emergency lighting or siren, unless (1) responding to emergencies or transporting a patient in accordance with the mutual aid provisions of this chapter or (2) directed to do so by Department.

(d)    In the event there is more than one ambulance service operating in the City which seeks to participate in the 911 aid calls, a representative and/or representatives from each ambulance service shall meet and devise a rotation schedule that shall be submitted to the Department upon request. Said schedule shall: (1) provide for only one (1) company to respond to 911 initiated aid calls during any given month; (2) include a twelve (12) month rotation; (3) be amended only upon thirty (30) day notification to the City Clerk; and (4) provide for substitution by other ambulance service companies in the rotation under circumstances where an ambulance service has no ambulances available to provide service during its rotation. In the event a schedule is not submitted, the Department shall prepare a rotation schedule that shall control the assignment of 911 aid calls to ambulance services licensed under this chapter.

(e)    Each ambulance service shall keep available an adequate supply of ambulances, personnel and equipment which will enable it to respond to a 911 call for assistance within ten (10) minutes of the time of the request ninety percent (90%) of the time, and within fifteen (15) minutes the remainder of the time. Response times shall be measured from the time of request for service is made from Cencom until the ambulance service arrives at the scene. The ambulance service may be requested by the Department to submit monthly reports at the conclusion of its rotation stating response times for all emergency calls served during its rotation.

(f)    In the event that the ambulance service has no ambulances available for emergency calls during its rotation, the ambulance service shall immediately advise the Department and Cencom of such conditions, and shall further advise that the ambulance service is unavailable to respond to any emergency until further notification. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.110)


18.06.090 MUTUAL AID.

(a)    Each ambulance service shall cooperate with any request by the Department for mutual aid assistance within Kitsap County.

(b)    Each ambulance service shall equip its vehicles with radios capable of receiving and transmitting on City and County Fire Department frequencies, which frequencies shall be used by licensees only in the event of a request for service or a mutual aid situation described herein. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.120)


18.06.100 RATES - FILING REQUIRED.

Each ambulance service at the request of the Department shall file with the Department its current schedule of rates to be charged for services. Such schedule or rates shall be a matter of public record open to public inspection in the Fire Department’s office during normal City business hours and such schedule must be adhered to by the licensee throughout the period for which the license is issued. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.130)


18.06.110 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

Any application for a business license and any business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.02 BMC may be denied or revoked for a violation of the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.02 BMC relating to the denial and revocation of general business licenses. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003)


18.06.120 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and enforcement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 5102 §1 (in part), 2010: Ord. 4848 §1 (in part), 2003; Ord. 4367 (in part), 1992. Formerly 5.50.140)


Title 20 LAND USE*

Chapters:

Division I. Permitting

20.02    PROJECT PERMITS

20.04    STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT

Division II. Land Development

20.10    COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS

20.12    LAND DIVISION

20.14    CRITICAL AREAS

20.16    SHORELINE DEVELOPMENT

20.18    TEXT AMENDMENTS

Division III. Zoning

20.40    ADMINISTRATION

20.42    DEFINITIONS

20.44    GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

20.46    SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

20.48    OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

20.50    LANDSCAPING

20.52    SIGN STANDARDS

20.54    NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS

20.58    LAND USE PERMITS

20.60    LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-10)

20.62    GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC)

20.70    DISTRICT CENTER CORE (DCC)

20.74    BUSINESS CORE (BC)

20.75    DOWNTOWN CORE (DC)

20.76    DOWNTOWN WATERFRONT (DW)

20.78    MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-18)

20.79    HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-40)

20.82    NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (NB)

20.86    FREEWAY CORRIDOR (FC)

20.92    EMPLOYMENT CENTER (EC)

20.94    INDUSTRIAL (I)

20.96    CITY UTILITY LANDS (CUL)

20.97    WATERSHED (WS)

20.98    INSTITUTIONAL (INST)

ZONING    MAPS

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 4950 §1 provides as follows: "Title 20 of the Bremerton Municipal Code entitled "Subdivisions" is hereby recodified as Title 20, "Land Use," consisting of three parts: Division I entitled "Permitting," consisting of Chapters 20.02 and 20.04; Division II entitled "Land Development," consisting of Chapters 20.10 through 20.18; and Division III entitled "Zoning," consisting of Chapters 20.40 through 20.98."


Zoning Maps

Map 1.

Map 2.

Map 3.

Map 4.


Chapter 20.02 PROJECT PERMITS

Sections:

20.02.010    PURPOSE AND INTENT.

20.02.020    DEFINITIONS.

20.02.030    GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20.02.040    PROJECT PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURES.

20.02.050    PRESUBMITTAL APPLICATION CONFERENCE.

20.02.060    SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.

20.02.070    VESTING.

20.02.080    OPTIONAL CONSOLIDATED PERMITTING PROCESS.

20.02.090    DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS.

20.02.100    NOTICE OF APPLICATION.

20.02.110    NOTICE OF HEARING.

20.02.120    JOINT PUBLIC HEARING.

20.02.130    NOTICE OF DECISION.

20.02.140    APPEALS.

20.02.150    DESIGN REVIEW.

20.02.160    DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.

20.02.170    PLANNED ACTIONS.


20.02.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

(a)    Fundamental land use planning choices made in adopted Comprehensive Plans and development regulations shall serve as the foundation for project review. This chapter establishes how the City of Bremerton will process applications for project permits.

(b)    These procedures provide for an effective processing and review of permits consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW. This chapter is applied in conjunction with Chapter 2.13 BMC (Administrative Hearing Examiner); Chapter 17.04 BMC (City Building Code); Chapter 20.04 BMC (State Environmental Policy Act); Chapter 20.12 BMC (Land Division); BMC Title 20, Division III; the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program; Chapter 20.14 BMC (Critical Areas); and other applicable codes making reference to this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.020 DEFINITIONS.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

"City" means the City of Bremerton.

"Closed-record appeal" means an administrative appeal on the record on a project permit application following an open-record hearing with no or limited new evidence or information allowed to be submitted and only appeal argument allowed.

"Days" means calendar days.

"Department" means Department of Community Development.

"Director" means the Director of the Department of Community Development of the City of Bremerton or his/her designee.

"Hearing body" means the City Council, Hearing Examiner or any other body designated by the City Council to preside over an open-record hearing or closed-record appeal.

"Hearing examiner" means the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC.

"Open-record appeal hearing" means an open-record hearing held on an appeal when no open-record predecision hearing has been held on the project permit application.

"Open-record hearing" means a hearing that creates the City’s record through testimony and submission of evidence and information, under procedures prescribed by the City by ordinance or resolution. An open-record hearing held prior to the City’s decision shall be known as an "open-record predecision hearing."

"Parties of record" means:

(1)    The applicant;

(2)    The property tax payer as identified by the records available from the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office;

(3)    Any person who testified at the open-record public hearing on the application; and/or

(4)    Any person who submitted written comments during administrative review or has submitted written comments concerning the application at the open-record public hearing (excluding persons who have only signed petitions or mechanically produced form letters).

"Project permit" or "project permit application" means any land use or environmental permit or license required from the City of Bremerton for a project action, including but not limited to building permits, site development permits, land use preparation permits, subdivisions, binding site plans, planned unit developments, conditional uses, shoreline substantial development permits, development plan review, site-specific rezones authorized by the Comprehensive Plan, but excluding adoption or amendment of the Comprehensive Plan and development regulations, zoning of newly annexed land, area-wide rezones, and zoning map amendments except as otherwise specifically included in this subsection.

"Public meeting" means an informal meeting, hearing, workshop, or other public gathering of persons to obtain comments from the public or other agencies on a proposed project permit prior to the City’s decision. A public meeting may include, but is not limited to, a design review meeting, a special committee meeting, such as the short subdivision committee, or a scoping meeting on a draft environmental impact statement. A public meeting does not include an open-record hearing. The proceedings at a public meeting may be recorded and a report or recommendation may be included in the City’s project permit application file.

"SEPA" means the State Environmental Policy Act and includes the provisions of Chapter 43.21C RCW, Chapter 197-11 WAC and Chapter 20.04 BMC.

"Stand alone nonproject SEPA" means a nonexempt proposal involving a decision on policies, plans, or programs that requires SEPA review and that is not associated with the Comprehensive Plan, development regulations, or area-wide rezones subject to Chapter 20.10 BMC, Chapter 20.18 BMC, and BMC 20.58.050, respectively. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(a)    General Exemptions. The following permits or approvals are exempt from the procedures set forth in this chapter:

(1)    Landmark designations;

(2)    Street vacations;

(3)    Right-of-way/street use permits;

(4)    Permits or approvals relating to the use of public areas or facilities;

(5)    Permits or approvals involving the location or development of essential public facilities or utilities;

(6)    Project permits not listed in this chapter which are categorically exempt from SEPA;

(7)    Legislative actions such as the adoption of or amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, subarea plans, area-wide map amendments, and development regulations. Such legislative actions are addressed in Chapters 20.10 and 20.18 BMC and BMC 20.58.050.

(b)    Applicable Procedures. The Director shall determine the proper procedure for the processing of each project permit application pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Disputes shall be resolved in favor of the higher category. Type I is considered the lowest and Type IV is the highest.

(c)    Standard Consistency. The City reviews proposals for consistency to applicable development regulations and the Comprehensive Plan. This determination includes consideration of the following:

(1)    The type of land use permitted, including uses that may be permitted under certain circumstances, provided the criteria for their approval is satisfied;

(2)    The density of development allowed such as units per acre or other measures of density;

(3)    Availability and adequacy of infrastructure, which includes public facilities and services identified in the Comprehensive Plan; and

(4)    Characteristics of the development such as development design standards.

(d)    Conflict with Other Regulations. When any provisions of this chapter conflict with provisions of other City regulations, ordinances or resolutions, the more restrictive shall apply.

(e)    Severability. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application of these regulations to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be confined in its operations to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application of them to other persons or circumstances.

(f)    General Notice Requirements. The available records of the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office shall be used to determine the property tax payer of record. All notices shall be deemed to have been provided or received on the date the notice is deposited in the mail or personally delivered, whichever occurs first. Failure to provide the public notice as described in this chapter shall not be grounds for invalidation of a decision on a permit.

(g)    Optional Public Notice. In addition to required public notice, the City may provide notice to other individuals or organizations interested or possibly affected by the proposal. Failure to provide optional public notice shall not be grounds for invalidation of a decision on a permit. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.040 PROJECT PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURES.

Project permit applications are categorized as Type I, Type II, Type III or Type IV project permits. Permit processing procedures may include determination of completeness, notice of application, notice of public hearing and notice of decision. Applicable procedures for the processing of permits are pursuant to the following provisions:

(a)    Type I Project Permits. These are administrative decisions by the Director who may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. They include permits categorically exempt from SEPA review or that have had SEPA review completed in connection with another application or permit. Type I project permit processing procedures are set forth in Table 040. Examples of Type I permits include administrative code interpretations, building/construction/demolition permits (SEPA exempt), final short subdivisions, permit revocations, etc.

(b)    Type II Project Permit. These are administrative decisions by the Director with limited public notice. The Director has the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. Type II project permit processing procedures are set forth in Table 040. Examples of Type II permits include administrative conditional use permits, short plats/binding site plans, site plan review (requiring SEPA), building/construction/demolition permits (requiring SEPA), stand alone nonproject SEPA, etc.

(c)    Type III Project Permit. These are Hearing Examiner decisions. The Hearing Examiner may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Type III project permit processing procedures are set forth in Table 040. Examples of Type III permits include nonadministrative conditional use permits, preliminary formal subdivisions, variances, etc.

(d)    Type IV Project Permit. These are decisions by the City Council after a closed-record hearing. The City Council may approve, conditionally approve, modify and approve or deny the application. Type IV project permit processing procedures are set forth in Table 040. Examples of Type IV permits include site-specific rezones, development agreements, vacation of subdivisions, etc. 

(e)    Table 040 Permit Processing Procedures.

	Application Type	Determination of Completeness	Notice of Application	Notice of Hearing	Notice of Decision

	Type I Permit	No	No	No	No

	Type II Permit	Yes	Yes	No	Yes

	Type III Permit	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Type IV Permit	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Development Agreement	No	No	Yes	Yes

	Final Subdivision1	No	No	No	No

	Site Specific Rezone2	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

	Stand Alone Nonproject SEPA	No	No	No	No

 1    The Hearing Examiner holds an open-record hearing for preliminary approval. The Director makes the final administrative decision.

 2    The Hearing Examiner holds an open-record hearing. The City Council holds a closed-record hearing for final approval.

(Ord. 5345 §2, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.050 PRESUBMITTAL APPLICATION CONFERENCE. 

(a)    Purpose. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to acquaint the applicant with the review procedures and applicable Bremerton Municipal Code provisions to the proposal. Type II, III and IV permits require a presubmittal application conference prior to submitting an application. Anyone choosing the consolidated permit process set forth in BMC 20.02.060 also requires a presubmittal submittal application conference. Only one (1) meeting is required for all project permit applications related to the same project action.

(b)    Waiver. The Director may waive the requirement for a presubmittal application conference when a proposal is determined not to be of a size and complexity to require a detailed analysis.

(c)    Submission. Presubmittal application conferences may be held at any time before an application is submitted. A completed form and related information in sufficient number of copies as determined by the Director are required. The information does not need to meet the submission requirement set forth in BMC 20.02.060.

(d)    Timeline. The City shall hold the presubmittal application conference within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a completed request, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of this time in writing.

(e)    Nonbinding. The presubmittal application conference is not intended to be an exhaustive review of all potential issues and the discussions shall not be binding or prohibit the enforcement of applicable laws. Failure to provide all pertinent information may prevent the City from identifying all of the issues or providing the most effective presubmittal application conference.

(f)    Lapse of Time. If a time lapse of more than one (1) year occurs between a presubmittal application conference and the submission for permits, or if the Director determines the scope of the project has changed significantly from the presubmittal application conference, a new conference may be required. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009)


20.02.060 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    Application Contents. An application submitted to the Department shall be in a manner determined by the Director. Unless specified otherwise, an application shall at least include the following:

(1)    A completed application form;

(2)    A legal description of the property and associated tax account number(s);

(3)    A vicinity map showing the location of the property including surrounding major streets, shorelines and other reference points;

(4)    A site plan;

(5)    When required, mailing labels containing the names and addresses of all owners of record of parcels within the notification radius;

(6)    When required, SEPA checklist and/or other environmental documentation;

(7)    Additional information required by the Director to support a decision on the application(s);

(8)    The application fee(s) for the permit(s) requested as set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC or by other applicable rule or regulation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005. Formerly 20.02.050)


20.02.070 VESTING.

A project permit application shall vest in the land use regulations in effect on the land at the time of submission of a completed project permit application as defined herein and all application fees are paid. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005. Formerly 20.02.060)


20.02.080 OPTIONAL CONSOLIDATED PERMITTING PROCESS.

(a)    An application which involves two (2) or more permits or procedures may have the processes consolidated under the highest project permit classification and procedures. The applicant shall request if they want their permit processes consolidated or if they want each permit processed individually.

(b)    If a project involving two (2) or more permits has the permits processed individually, the highest project permit classification and procedures shall be finalized before subsequent permits can be issued. The Director may waive this requirement for permits not dependent on the higher classification of permit for their justification or implementation.

(c)    If applicable, a single open-record hearing and no more than one (1) closed-record appeal shall be provided on a consolidated review process. The consolidated process may combine an open-record hearing on one (1) or more permits with an open-record appeal hearing on the other permits. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005. Formerly 20.02.070)


20.02.090 DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS.

When review procedures require a determination of completeness, the following shall apply:

(a)    Determination. Within twenty-eight (28) days of accepting the application, the Department shall provide a written determination to the applicant, stating that:

(1)    The application is complete; or

(2)    The application is incomplete and what is necessary to make the application complete.

To the extent known, the City shall identify other agencies of local, state or federal governments that may have jurisdiction over some aspect of the application.

(b)    Failure to Notify. Failure to provide a written determination within the required time shall automatically deem the application complete.

(c)    Processing. A complete application meets the submission requirements set forth in BMC 20.02.060 and is sufficient for continued processing. The determination of completeness shall not preclude the City from requesting additional information or studies either at the time of the notice or subsequently if new information is required or substantial changes in the proposed action occur. Should additional information be requested, the applicant shall have ninety (90) days from the date notified to submit the requested materials. Should the materials not be submitted within the time limits, the application shall lapse.

(d)    Incomplete Application. An incomplete application shall have ninety (90) days from the date of the written determination in subsection (a)(2) of this section for the necessary information to be submitted. If the applicant either refuses in writing or does not submit the required information within the time limits, the application shall lapse.

(e)    Review of Additional Information. When additional information for an incomplete application is received, the City shall notify the applicant within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the additional information whether the application is complete or what additional information is necessary.

(f)    Review Timeline. Following the date an application is determined complete, the date shall be noted and the one hundred twenty (120) day official review period to render a decision shall begin. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4977 §3, 2006; Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.100 NOTICE OF APPLICATION.

When review procedures require a notice of application, the following shall apply:

(a)    Timeline. The notice shall be provided within fourteen (14) days after the determination of completeness is issued.

(b)    Content. The notice of application shall include the following:

(1)    The file number assigned;

(2)    The date of application, date of the notice of completeness, and the date of the notice of application;

(3)    A description of the proposed project action and a list of permits included with the application and, if applicable, a list of requested studies;

(4)    Identification of known permits not included with the application;

(5)    Identification of existing environmental documents that evaluate the proposal;

(6)    The location where the application and any studies can be reviewed;

(7)    A statement of the public comment period and which shall not be less than fourteen (14) or more than thirty (30) days;

(8)    A statement of the rights of any person to comment on the application, receive notice of and participate in any hearings, request a copy of the decision and any appeal rights;

(9)    Any other information determined appropriate by the City.

(c)    Legal Notice. Notice shall be provided in the following manner as applicable:

(1)    Mail. The notice shall be sent by email, first class or higher mail to the following:

(i)    The applicant;

(ii)    Affected City departments;

(iii)    State, federal and local agencies with jurisdiction; 

(iv)    For Type III permits, mailed notice shall also be sent to all property owners of real property (as shown by the records of the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office) within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. Where any portion of a property abutting the subject property is owned, controlled, or under the option of purchase by the applicant, all property owners within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the total ownership interest shall be notified; and

(v)    Any person who requests such notice in writing to the Department.

(2)    Posting of the Property. Notice shall be posted according to the following:

(i)    At least one (1) location on or adjacent to the subject property and that shall be clearly visible and legible from an adjacent street or public area;

(ii)    The Director shall determine the specifications to the construction and installation of the notice boards.

(3)    Publishing Notice. A published notice in the City’s official newspaper of general circulation within the City boundaries is required. The content shall include the following:

(i)    Project location;

(ii)    Project description;

(iii)    Type of permit(s) required;

(iv)    Comment period and dates;

(v)    Location where the complete application may be viewed.

(d)    Integration of Notices. The City will integrate the notice of application with SEPA review whenever possible. Notification for a notice of application should be combined with the notification for threshold determination and the scoping for a determination of significance whenever possible.

(e)    Issuance of Decisions. Except for a threshold determination, the City may not issue a decision or a recommendation on a permit until the expiration of the public comment period.

(f)    Public Comments. Comments shall be as specific as possible. Comments shall be received by the last day of the comment period specified in the notice. If no comments are received by the date specified in the notice from an affected City department or agency with jurisdiction, which notification was sent to, then it is presumed that the department or agency has no comments. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.110 NOTICE OF HEARING.

When review procedures require a notice of hearing, the following shall apply:

(a)    Notice Integration. A notice of hearing is required for public hearings. A notice of hearing may be integrated with the notice of application.

(b)    Notice Content. A written notice of hearing shall contain the following information:

(1)    The name of the applicant or designated contact;

(2)    A description of the affected property (not including any legal description);

(3)    Project summary/description of each project permit application;

(4)    The application/project file number;

(5)    The date, time and place of the hearing;

(6)    A statement that all interested persons may appear and provide testimony;

(7)    A statement where information may be examined or obtained and the staff contact and phone number;

(8)    A statement how written testimony or comments may be submitted;

(9)    The SEPA threshold determination along with any appropriate statement regarding any shared or divided lead agency status and phased review, and stating the end of any final comment period;

(10)    The deadline (date, time and place) for submitting a SEPA appeal;

(11)    A statement regarding any administrative appeal process including SEPA appeal.

(c)    Project Permit Notification. Notification for a hearing on a project permit shall be provided in the following manner as applicable:

(1)    Mail. The notice shall be sent by email, first class mail or higher to the following:

(i)    The applicant;

(ii)    All property owners of real property (as shown by the records of the Kitsap County Assessor’s Office) within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. Where any portion of a property abutting the subject property is owned, controlled, or under the option of purchase by the applicant, all property owners within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the total ownership interest shall be notified;

(iii)    Any person providing a written request to the Department.

(2)    Preliminary Plat. When adjacent to the right-of-way of a state highway, or within two (2) miles of the boundary of a state or municipal airport, mailed notice shall be given to the Secretary of Transportation, who has fifteen (15) days to respond.

(3)    Posting of the Property. The notice shall be posted in the same manner and location(s) as the notice of application set forth in BMC 20.02.100(c)(2).

(4)    Publishing Notice. A published legal notice in the City’s official newspaper of general circulation within the City boundaries is required. The content of the published notice shall include the following information:

(i)    Project location;

(ii)    Project description;

(iii)    Type of permit(s) required;

(iv)    Comment period and dates;

(v)    Location where the complete application may be viewed.

(d)    Notice Deadlines. Notice shall be given at least ten (10) days before the hearing date except:

(1)    Shoreline permits pursuant to WAC 173-27-110(3) shall be given at least fifteen (15) days.

(2)    An integrated notice of hearing and notice of application shall be given at least fifteen (15) days.

(3)    An integrated notice of hearing and notice of a SEPA threshold determination shall be given at least fifteen (15) days.

(e)    Continuation of Hearing. Continued hearings do not require additional notices of hearing.

(f)    Appeal Notification. Notification for a hearing on an open-record or closed-record appeal shall be provided in the following manner:

(1)    Mail. The notice shall be sent by email, first class mail or higher to the following:

(i)    The applicant/appellant;

(ii)    Parties of record;

(iii)    Affected agencies;

(iv)    Parties requesting notice; and

(v)    Other persons whom the Department believes may be affected by the action.

(g)    Additional Procedures. In addition to the procedures contained in this chapter, the Department may develop general procedures for notification, including mailing packets and the format of the notice and an affidavit of posting/mailing form to be filled out by the party doing notice. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.120 JOINT PUBLIC HEARING.

A hearing on a project permit application may be combined with any other hearing on the action held by another local, state, regional, federal, or other agency pursuant to RCW 36.70B.110 as currently enacted or hereinafter amended. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.130 NOTICE OF DECISION.

The Director, the Hearing Examiner or the City Council issues a decision at the conclusion of applicable project permit review. The notice of decision may be included as part of the decision or project permit.

(a)    The City shall provide a notice of decision. The notice shall include a statement of any threshold determination made under SEPA and the procedures for appeal if a consolidated notice was not given under BMC 20.02.110(d)(3).

(b)    Notification. Notification shall be provided in the following manner as applicable:

(1)    Mail. The notice shall be sent by email, first class mail or higher to the following:

(i)    The applicant;

(ii)    Any person who, prior to the rendering of the decision, requested notice of the decision in writing to the Department, or who submitted substantive comments on the application; and

(iii)    Kitsap County Assessor’s Office.

(c)    Notice Contents. The notice may include a copy of the report of decision on the project permit application; and shall include, when available, the SEPA threshold determination, the permit decision, the conditions of approval or where they may be viewed by the public, and the general procedures and time limits to file an appeal.

(d)    Change of Valuation. The notice shall state that affected property owners may request a change in valuation for property tax purposes notwithstanding any program of revaluation.

(e)    Timelines. The notice shall be issued within one hundred twenty (120) days after the City notifies the applicant that the application is complete pursuant to BMC 20.02.090, except as follows:

(1)    The Director makes written findings that a specified amount of additional time is needed for processing the application; or

(2)    A permit or approval involving the location or development of important public facilities or utilities, or related to the use of public areas or facilities, for public purposes may be excluded from the one hundred twenty (120) day time limit upon a determination of the Director that special circumstances warrant a longer process.

(f)    Extension of Timelines. If the City is unable to issue its final decision on a project permit application within the time limits provided for in this chapter, it shall provide written notice of this fact to the parties of record. The notice shall include a statement of reasons why the time limits were not met, and an estimated date for issuance of the notice of decision.

(g)    Timeline Exclusion. The one hundred twenty (120) day time limit shall exclude any of the following:

(1)    Any period an applicant takes to provide additional information, perform studies or provide corrected plans requested by the City.

(2)    Any period where the City determines that submitted information is insufficient or incorrect, and has requested the applicant provide the necessary information.

(3)    Any period an environmental impact statement (EIS) is being prepared including scoping and preparing the draft and final EIS.

(4)    Any period for administrative appeals and any period for reconsideration of decisions of the Hearing Examiner made on project permit applications. The period for consideration and decision on appeals shall not exceed:

(i)    Ninety (90) days for an open-record appeal hearing; or

(ii)    Sixty (60) days for a closed-record appeal.

(iii)    The parties may agree to extend these periods.

(5)    Any extension of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the City.

(6)    All excluded periods are calculated from the date the City notifies the applicant to when the information satisfies the City’s requirement.

(7)    When the applicant submits the requested information, the City shall have fourteen (14) days to determine if it is satisfactory. If the information is not satisfactory, but the City fails to notify the applicant within the time limit, the information shall be deemed satisfactory.

(8)    The time limits established in this section do not apply if a project permit application:

(i)    Requires an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan or a development regulation; or

(ii)    Requires approval of the location of an essential public facility as provided in RCW 36.70A.200; or

(iii)    Is substantially revised by the applicant, in which case the period shall start from the date at which the revised project application is determined to be complete.

(h)    Liability. The City is not liable for damages due to the City’s failure to make a final decision within the time limits established in this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.140 APPEALS.

(a)    General.

(1)    Those land use and development decisions that are subject to appeal shall become final unless an appeal is filed within the designated time to file an appeal.

(2)    The appellant shall bear the burden of proving the administrative decision was not supported by substantial evidence.

(3)    Appeal of Type I or Type II project permit final decisions shall be to the Hearing Examiner. Appeals shall be filed within fourteen (14) days following the issuance of the notice of decision. A decision involving a SEPA determination of nonsignificance which required public comments shall have the appeal period extended an additional seven (7) days.

(4)    Administrative appeal of a SEPA threshold determination on project permits is to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 20.04 BMC and subsection (a)(3) of this section. The appeal shall consolidate any allowed appeals of procedural and substantive determinations under SEPA with a hearing or appeal on the underlying governmental action in a single simultaneous hearing before the Hearing Examiner consistent with Chapter 36.70B RCW, WAC 197-11-680, this chapter and Chapter 20.04 BMC.

(5)    Appeal of Type III or Type IV project permit final decisions shall be to Kitsap County Superior Court pursuant to Chapter 36.70C RCW. Appeals shall be filed within twenty-one (21) days following the issuance of the notice of decision.

(6)    Final decision relating to the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program may be appealed as follows:

(i)    Director decisions and Type II shoreline permits may be appealed to the Hearing Examiner pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section or may be appealed directly to the Shoreline Hearings Board pursuant to RCW 90.58.180.

(ii)    Hearing Examiner decisions may be appealed to the Shoreline Hearings Board by filing a petition for review within twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing pursuant to RCW 90.58.140(6).

(b)    Standing to Appeal. Only parties of record with standing may initiate an appeal. Standing constitutes the following:

(1)    For Type I project permits, the applicant and the owner of property to which the permit decision is directed have standing.

(2)    For project permits not Type I, the following have standing:

(i)    Applicant;

(ii)    Property owner to which the permit decision is directed;

(iii)    Anyone who participates in the public hearing; or

(iv)    Anyone who submits written comments in response to a legal notice within the required time limits.

(c)    Filing an Appeal. Administrative appeals are filed by submitting a form provided by the Department. The appeal must be received by 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the appeal period. Appeals may be mailed, faxed or delivered to the Department.

(d)    Timing of Decisions.

(1)    An open-record appeal shall be decided within ninety (90) days from the date the complete appeal was filed.

(2)    Should an occasion arise that would require a closed-record appeal hearing, such an appeal shall be decided within sixty (60) days.

(e)    Computation of Time. For purposes of computing the time for filing an appeal, the day the decision is rendered shall not be included. The last day of the appeal period shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, a day designated by RCW 1.16.050 or by the City’s ordinances as a legal holiday; then it also is excluded and the filing must be completed on the next business day.

(f)    Content of Appeal. An administrative appeal shall not be accepted unless it is written, accompanied by the required appeal fee, and contains at least the following information:

(1)    Appellant’s name, address and phone number;

(2)    Appellant’s statement describing his or her standing, as a party of record, to appeal;

(3)    Identification of the application which is the subject of the appeal;

(4)    Statement of grounds for appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based;

(5)    Statement of the relief sought, including the specific nature and extent; and

(6)    A statement that the appellant has read the appeal and believes the contents to be true, followed by the appellant’s signature.

(g)    Effect. The timely filing of an administrative appeal shall stay the effective date of the decision until the appeal is either decided or withdrawn.

(h)    Notice of Appeal. The Director shall provide public notice of the appeal as provided in BMC 20.02.110(f). (Ord. 5326 §3, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005)


20.02.150 DESIGN REVIEW.

Buildings that are proposed for construction in areas having adopted design guidelines are subject to review and recommendation by the Design Review Board (Board). For any development activity that requires Board review, the applicant must comply with the provisions of this section before a building permit can be approved, as follows:

(a)    Public Meetings. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public but are not subject to the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 42.30 RCW.

(b)    Conceptual Design Conference. Before submitting a building permit application, the applicant shall attend a conceptual design conference with the Board. The conference will be scheduled by the Director to occur within thirty (30) days of written request by the applicant. The purpose of this conference is to provide an opportunity for the applicant to discuss the project concept with the Board in the early stages of the project development and:

(1)    To review preliminary sketches of the design proposal presented by the applicant;

(2)    To discuss how the design guidelines pertain to the proposed development;

(3)    For the Design Review Board to designate which design guidelines apply to the proposed development based primarily on the location and nature of the proposed development; and

(4)    Other application materials the applicant will need to submit with the design review application.

(c)    Application. Following the conceptual design conference, the applicant may then submit a building permit application to the Department. The application shall include all documents and exhibits required for the application, as well as all materials required as a result of the conceptual design conference.

(d)    Public Notice. On determination of a complete application for a building permit requiring design review, the Director shall schedule a design response conference with the Board to occur within sixty (60) calendar days. The Director shall provide public notice of the design response conference per the requirements of BMC 20.02.100.

(e)    Design Response Conference. The design response stage allows the Board to review the design plans and provide direction to the applicant on issues to be resolved for final approval. The applicant shall present the proposed project and demonstrate its consistency with the design guidelines as discussed in the conceptual design conference to the Board. The Board will consider the information presented and make a formal recommendation to the Director for project approval, approval with conditions, or denial. The Board may continue the conference if necessary to gather additional information necessary for its recommendation. If the conference is continued to a specific date, no further public notice is required; otherwise notice of continuance shall be mailed to all parties participating in the design response conference. The design response conference may be waived provided:

(1)    The Design Review Board provides a unanimous recommendation of approval and makes findings that the response conference is not necessary; and

(2)    The Director finds that more information is not required for the decision after the Design Review Board makes their unanimous recommendation.

(f)    Approval. Approval of a building permit that is subject to Board review is a Type II Director decision; however, the Board’s recommendation shall hold substantial weight. After reviewing the Board recommendation, the Director may grant, deny or conditionally approve an application for the proposed development. Any deviation from the Board’s recommendation shall be documented in the Director’s findings and conclusions. The decision of the Director may be appealed per the provisions of BMC 20.02.140. (Ord. 5319 §2, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009)


20.02.160 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES.

(a)    The City may enter into a development agreement with a person having ownership or control of real property within its jurisdiction or outside its boundaries as part of a proposed annexation or a service agreement. A development agreement sets forth the development standards and other provisions that shall apply to and govern and vest the development, use, and mitigation of the development of the real property for the duration specified in the agreement.

(b)    A determination of completeness, notice of hearing and a notice of decision are required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The one hundred twenty (120) day time limit for the notice of decision shall not apply to a development agreement.

(c)    When a request for a development agreement is consolidated with a Type III or IV project permit, the public hearing shall be consolidated with the open-record hearing on the permit before the Hearing Examiner. The Hearing Examiner shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the development agreement and approval of the project permit shall be conditioned on City Council approval of the development permit.

(d)    The City Council may approve a development agreement by ordinance or resolution only. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005. Formerly 20.02.150)


20.02.170 PLANNED ACTIONS.

A "planned action" is defined in WAC 197-11-164 as one (1) or more types of project action that has had significant environmental impacts adequately addressed in an environmental impact statement (EIS) prepared in conjunction with the Comprehensive Plan, subarea plan, fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project.

(a)    A project action addressed in a planned action does not require an environmental checklist or threshold determination, but may require the checklist for review to mitigate environmental impacts through the site plan review process.

(b)    To qualify, a project action shall:

(1)    Be subsequent to or implementing projects in a Comprehensive Plan, subarea plan, fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development or a phased project;

(2)    Be located within the City’s adopted urban growth areas;

(3)    Be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;

(4)    Not be an essential public facility, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200.

(c)    The City Council shall designate and approve by ordinance a planned action. The ordinance:

(1)    Shall describe the type(s) of project action being designated as a planned action;

(2)    Shall describe how the planned action meets the criteria in subsection (b) of this section, including specific references to the EIS;

(3)    Shall include findings that the environmental impacts have been identified and adequately addressed in the EIS, subject to project review under WAC 197-11-172;

(4)    Should identify any specific mitigation measures other than applicable development regulations that must be applied to a project for it to qualify as a planned action.

(d)    The planned action may be limited to certain types of development, to specific geographical areas of the City, and/or a time period identified in the EIS, plan, ordinance or resolution.

(e)    Review of a project proposed as a planned action is intended to be simpler and more focused than for other projects. Review of the project shall include:

(1)    Verification that it meets the description and implements any applicable conditions or mitigation measures identified in the designating ordinance or resolution;

(2)    Verification that the proposed significant adverse environmental impacts of the project have been adequately addressed in the EIS.

(f)    Nothing in this section limits the City from using applicable law to place conditions on the project in order to mitigate nonsignificant impacts through normal project review and permitting processes. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §2 (part), 2009: Ord. 4938 §3 (part), 2005. Formerly 20.02.160)


Chapter 20.04 STATE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT

Sections:

20.04.010    STATUTORY AUTHORITY.

20.04.020    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE II - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.030    ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.

20.04.040    RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL - DESIGNATION AND RESPONSIBILITY.

20.04.050    LEAD AGENCY - DETERMINATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

20.04.060    LEAD AGENCY - TRANSFER OF STATUS TO A STATE AGENCY.

20.04.070    TIME LIMITS APPLICABLE TO THE SEPA PROCESS - ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

20.04.080    ADDITIONAL TIMING CONSIDERATIONS.

20.04.090    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE III - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.100    USE OF CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS.

20.04.110    ENVIRONMENTAL CHECKLIST.

20.04.120    MITIGATED DNS.

20.04.130    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE IV - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.140    PREPARATION OF EIS - ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

20.04.150    ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.160    PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

20.04.170    DESIGNATION OF OFFICIAL TO PERFORM CONSULTED AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE CITY.

20.04.180    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VI - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.190    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VII - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.200    SUBSTANTIVE AUTHORITY.

20.04.205    PLANNED ACTIONS.

20.04.210    APPEALS.

20.04.220    NOTICE OF ACTION - STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

20.04.230    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VIII - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.240    ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.250    PURPOSE OF ARTICLE X - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

20.04.260    ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.

20.04.270    FEES.

20.04.280    ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.


20.04.010 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.

The City adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter under the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA), RCW 43.21C.120, and the SEPA Rules, WAC 197-11-904. This chapter contains the City’s SEPA procedures and policies. The SEPA Rules, Chapter 197-11 WAC, must be used in conjunction with this chapter. The City also designates and adopts by reference the following policies and regulations as the basis for the City’s exercise of authority pursuant to this chapter: Comprehensive Plan, Capital Facilities Comprehensive Plans, and the Bremerton Municipal Code including but not limited to: Title 6 (Health and Sanitation), Title 11 (Streets and Rights-of-Way), Title 15 (Municipal Utilities), Title 17 (Buildings and Construction), and Title 20 (Land Use). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5187 §1, 2012: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 1 §A, 1984)


20.04.020 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE II - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains the basic requirements that apply to the SEPA process. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 of the Washington Administrative Code by reference:

WAC 197-11-040 - Definitions.

050    Lead agency.

055    Timing of the SEPA process.

060    Content of environmental review.

070    Limitations on actions during SEPA process.

080    Incomplete or unavailable information.

090    Supporting documents.

100    Information required of applicants.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §A, 1984)


20.04.030 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.

In addition to those definitions contained within WAC 197-11-700 through 197-11-799, when used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(a)    "DEIS" means draft environmental impact statement. See WAC 197-11-405.

(b)    "Department" means any division, subdivision or organizational unit of the City established by ordinance, rule or order.

(c)    "DNS" means determination of nonsignificance. See WAC 197-11-734.

(d)    "DS" means determination of significance. See WAC 197-11-736.

(e)    "Early notice" means the City’s response to an applicant, stating whether it considers issuance of a determination of significance likely for the applicant’s proposal (mitigated DNS procedures).

(f)    "EIS" means environmental impact statement. See, generally, WAC 197-11-400.

(g)    "FEIS" means final environmental impact statement. See WAC 197-11-405.

(h)    "Ordinance" means the ordinance, resolution or other procedure used by the City to adopt regulatory requirements.

(i)    "SEIS" means supplemental environmental impact statement. See WAC 197-11-405.

(j)    "SEPA rules" means Chapter 197-11 WAC, adopted by the Department of Ecology. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §B, 1984)


20.04.040 RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL - DESIGNATION AND RESPONSIBILITY.

(a)    For the proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official shall be the Director or their appointed designee.

(b)    For all proposals for which the City is the lead agency, the responsible official shall make the threshold determination, supervise scoping and preparation of any required environmental impact statement (EIS), and perform any other functions assigned to the "lead agency" or "responsible official" by those sections of the SEPA rules that were adopted by reference in this chapter.

(c)    The City shall retain all documents required by the SEPA rules (Chapter 197-11 WAC) and make them available in accordance with Chapter 42.56 RCW, Public Records Act. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §C, 1984)


20.04.050 LEAD AGENCY -DETERMINATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

(a)    The department within the City receiving an application for or initiating a proposal that involves a nonexempt action shall determine the lead agency for that proposal under WAC 197-11-050 and WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, unless the lead agency has been previously determined or the department is aware that another department or agency is in the process of determining the lead agency.

(b)    When the City is the lead agency for a proposal, the department receiving the application shall refer the proposal to the responsible official, who shall supervise compliance with the threshold determination requirements, and if an EIS is necessary, shall supervise preparation of the EIS.

(c)    When the City is not the lead agency for a proposal, all departments of the City shall use and consider, as appropriate, either the DNS or the final EIS of the lead agency in making decisions on the proposal. No City department shall prepare or require preparation of a DNS or EIS in addition to that prepared by the lead agency, unless required under WAC 197-11-600. In some cases, the City may conduct supplemental environmental review under WAC 197-11-600.

(d)    If the City or any of its departments receives a lead agency determination made by another agency that appears inconsistent with the criteria of WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-940, it may object to the determination. Any objection must be made to the agency originally making the determination and resolved within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the determination, or the City must petition the Department of Ecology for a lead agency determination under WAC 197-11-946 within the fifteen (15) day time period. Any such petition on behalf of the City may be initiated by the Director.

(e)    The City is authorized to make agreements as to lead agency status or shared lead agency duties for a proposal under WAC 197-11-942 and 197-11-944. The City may assume lead agency status in accordance with WAC 197-11-948.

(f)    In making a lead agency determination for a private project the City shall require sufficient information from the applicant to identify which other agencies have jurisdiction over the proposal, i.e., which agencies require nonexempt licenses. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §D, 1984)


20.04.060 LEAD AGENCY - TRANSFER OF STATUS TO A STATE AGENCY.

For any proposal for a private project where the City would be the lead agency and for which one or more state agencies have jurisdiction, the City’s responsible official may elect to transfer the lead agency duties to a state agency. The state agency with jurisdiction appearing first on the priority listing in WAC 197-11-936 shall be the lead agency, and the City shall be an agency with jurisdiction. To transfer lead agency duties, the City’s responsible official must transmit a notice of the transfer together with any relevant information available on the proposal to the appropriate state agency with jurisdiction. The responsible official of the City shall also give notice of the transfer to the private applicant and any other agencies with jurisdiction over the proposal. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §E, 1984)


20.04.070 TIME LIMITS APPLICABLE TO THE SEPA PROCESS - ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

For project permits, see Chapter 20.02 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §F, 1984)


20.04.080 ADDITIONAL TIMING CONSIDERATIONS.

(a)    A final threshold determination or final EIS shall normally precede or accompany the final staff recommendation, if any, in a quasi-judicial proceeding on a nonexempt application by the Administrative Hearing Examiner.

(b)    For nonexempt legislative proposals, the DNS or draft EIS or other threshold determination and SEPA environmental documentation for the proposal shall accompany the City’s staff recommendation to the appropriate advisory body, such as the Planning Commission.

(c)    If the City’s only action on a proposal is a decision on a building permit or other license that requires detailed project plans and specifications, the applicant may request in writing that the City conduct environmental review prior to submission of the detailed plans and specifications. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 2 §G, 1984)


20.04.090 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE III - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains the rules for deciding whether a proposal has a "probable significant, adverse environmental impact" requiring an environmental impact statement (EIS) to be prepared. This article also contains rules for evaluating the impacts of proposals not requiring an EIS. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference, as supplemented in this part:

WAC 197-11-300 - Purpose of this part.

305    Categorical exemptions.

310    Threshold determination required.

315    Environmental checklist.

330    Threshold determination process.

335    Additional information.

340    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

350    Mitigated DNS.

360    Determination of significance (DS)/initiation of scoping.

390    Effect of threshold determination.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 3 §A, 1984)


20.04.100 USE OF CATEGORICAL EXEMPTIONS.

(a)    Whenever a department within the City receives an application for a license or, in the case of governmental proposals, the department within the City initiates the proposal, the Planning Department shall determine whether the license and/or the proposal is exempt. The Planning Department’s determination that a proposal is exempt shall be final and not subject to administrative review. If a proposal is exempt, none of the procedural requirements of this chapter apply to the proposal. The City shall not require completion of an environmental checklist for an exempt proposal.

(b)    In determining whether or not a proposal is exempt, the Planning Department shall make certain that the proposal is properly defined, and shall identify the governmental licenses required (WAC 197-11-060). If a proposal includes exempt and nonexempt actions, the Planning Department shall determine the lead agency even if the license application that triggers the Department’s consideration is exempt.

(c)    If a proposal includes both exempt and nonexempt actions, the City may authorize exempt actions prior to compliance with the procedural requirements of this chapter, except that:

(1)    The City shall not give authorization for:

(i)    Any nonexempt action;

(ii)    Any action that would have an adverse environmental impact; or

(iii)    Any action that would limit the choice of alternatives;

(2)    The responsible official may withhold approval of an exempt action that would lead to modification of the physical environment, when such modification would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved; and

(3)    The responsible official may withhold approval of exempt actions that would lead to substantial financial expenditures by a private applicant when the expenditures would serve no purpose if nonexempt action(s) were not approved.

(d)    Threshold Levels for Categorical Exemptions. Pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) and (1)(d), cities may adopt raised levels of threshold exemptions for certain types of actions, except as provided in WAC 197-11-305 and 197-11-800(1)(a). As authorized pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(1)(c) and (1)(d), the following threshold exemptions are adopted:

(1)    The construction or location of thirty (30) or fewer single-family residential units.

(2)    The construction or location of sixty (60) or fewer multifamily residential units.

(3)    The construction of an office, school, commercial, recreational, service or storage building with thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area, and with associated parking facilities designed for ninety (90) parking spaces.

(4)    The construction of a parking facility designed for ninety (90) parking spaces.

(5)    Any landfill or excavation of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards throughout the lifetime of the fill or excavation, and any fill or excavation classified as Class I, II, or III forest practice under RCW 76.09.050 or regulations thereunder. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §2, 2013: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 3 §B, 1984)


20.04.110 ENVIRONMENTAL CHECKLIST.

(a)    A completed environmental checklist (or a copy), in the form provided in WAC 197-11-960, shall be filed at the same time as an application for a permit, license, certificate or other approval not specifically exempted in this chapter; except, a checklist is not needed if the City and applicant agree an EIS is required, SEPA compliance has been completed, or SEPA compliance has been initiated by another agency. The City shall use the environmental checklist to determine the lead agency and, if the City is the lead agency, for determining the responsible official and for making the threshold determination.

(b)    For private proposals, the City will require the applicant to complete the environmental checklist, providing assistance as necessary. For City proposals, the department initiating the proposal shall complete the environmental checklist for that proposal.

(c)    The City may require that it, and not the private applicant, will complete all or part of the environmental checklist for a private proposal, if either of the following occurs:

(1)    The City has technical information on a question or questions that is unavailable to the private applicant; or

(2)    The applicant has provided inaccurate information on previous proposals or on proposals currently under consideration. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 3 §C, 1984)


20.04.120 MITIGATED DNS.

(a)    As provided in this section and in WAC 197-11-350, the responsible official may issue a determination of nonsignificance (DNS) based on conditions attached to the proposal by the responsible official or on changes to, or clarifications of, the proposal made by the applicant.

(b)    An applicant may request in writing early notice of whether a DS is likely under WAC 197-11-350. The request must follow submission of a permit application and environmental checklist for a nonexempt proposal for which the department is lead agency, and precede the City’s actual threshold determination for the proposal.

(c)    The responsible official should respond to the request for early notice within ten (10) working days. The response shall be written; state whether the City currently considers issuance of a DS likely and, if so, indicate the general or specific area(s) of concern that are leading the City to consider a DS; and state that the applicant may change or clarify the proposal to mitigate the indicated impacts, revising the environmental checklist and/or permit application as necessary to reflect the changes or clarifications.

(d)    As much as possible, the City should assist the applicant with identification of impacts to the extent necessary to formulate mitigation measures.

(e)    When an applicant submits a changed or clarified proposal, along with a revised environmental checklist, the City shall base its threshold determination on the changed or clarified proposal and should make the determination within fifteen (15) days of receiving the changed or clarified proposal; if the City indicated specific mitigation measures in its response to the request for early notice, and the applicant changed or clarified the proposal to include those specific mitigation measures, the City shall issue and circulate a determination of nonsignificance under WAC 197-11-340(2); if the City indicated areas of concern, but did not indicate specific mitigation measures that would allow it to issue a DNS, the City shall make the threshold determination, issuing a DNS or DS as appropriate; the applicant’s proposed mitigation measures (clarifications, changes or conditions) must be in writing and must be specific. For example, proposals to "control noise" or "prevent stormwater runoff" are inadequate, whereas proposals to "muffle machinery to X decibel" or "construct two hundred (200) foot stormwater retention pond at Y location" are adequate; mitigation measures which justify issuance of a mitigated DNS may be incorporated in the DNS by reference to agency staff reports, studies or other documents.

(f)    A mitigated DNS is issued under WAC 197-11-340(2), requiring a fifteen (15) day comment period and public notice. The optional DNS process may be used in WAC 197-11-355 to combine the SEPA comment period with the notice of application comment period, if any, for the underlying permit. If a notice of application is not required for the underlying permit, the SEPA comment period shall follow issuance of the DNS and shall be concluded prior to the decision on the underlying action.

(g)    Mitigation measures incorporated in the mitigated DNS shall be deemed conditions of approval of the permit decision, and may be enforced in the same manner as any term or condition of the permit, or enforced in any manner specifically prescribed by the City.

(h)    If the City’s tentative decision on a permit or approval does not include mitigation measures that were incorporated in a mitigated DNS for the proposal, the City should evaluate the threshold determination to assure consistency with WAC 197-11-340(3)(a) (withdrawal of DNS).

(i)    The City’s written response under subsection (b) of this section shall not be construed as a determination of significance. In addition, preliminary discussion of clarifications or changes to a proposal, as opposed to a written request for early notice, shall not bind the City to consider the clarification or changes in its threshold determination. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 3 §D, 1984)


20.04.130 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE IV - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains the rules for preparing environmental impact statements. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference, as supplemented by this part:

WAC 197-11-400 - Purpose of EIS.

402    General requirements.

405    EIS types.

406    EIS timing.

408    Scoping.

410    Expanded scoping.

420    EIS preparation.

425    Style and size.

430    Format.

435    Cover letter or memo.

440    EIS contents.

442    Contents of EIS on nonproject proposals.

443    EIS contents when prior nonproject EIS.

444    Elements of the environment.

448    Relationship of EIS to other considerations.

450    Cost-benefit analysis.

455    Issuance of DEIS.

460    Issuance of FEIS.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 4 §A, 1984)


20.04.140 PREPARATION OF EIS - ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

(a)    Preparation of draft and final EIS and SEIS is the responsibility of the Planning Department under the direction of the responsible official. Before the City issues an EIS, the responsible official shall be satisfied that it complies with this chapter and Chapter 197-11 WAC.

(b)    The DEIS and FEIS or draft and final SEIS shall be prepared by City staff, or by a consultant selected by the City, or the applicant, as determined by the responsible official. If the applicant is required to prepare the EIS, the applicant shall select a consultant subject to approval of the responsible official. Said individual or firm shall have demonstrated expertise relevant to the information required for the EIS. If the responsible official requires an EIS for a proposal and determines that someone other than the City will prepare the EIS, the responsible official shall notify the applicant within five (5) working days of completion of the threshold determination. The responsible official shall also notify the applicant of the City’s procedure for EIS preparation, including approval of the DEIS and FEIS prior to distribution.

(c)    The City may require an applicant to provide information the City does not possess, including specific investigations. However, the applicant is not required to supply information that is not required under this chapter or that is being requested from another agency. (This does not apply to information the City may request under another ordinance or statute.) (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 4 §B, 1984)


20.04.150 ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains rules for consulting, commenting and responding on all environmental documents under SEPA, including rules for public notice and hearings. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

WAC 197-11-500 - Purpose of this part.

502    Inviting comment.

504    Availability and cost of environmental documents.

508    SEPA register.

535    Public hearings and meetings.

545    Effect of no comment.

550    Specificity of comments.

560    FEIS response to comments.

570    Consulted agency costs to assist lead agency.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 5 §A, 1984)


20.04.160 PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    Whenever the City issues a DNS under WAC 197-11-340(2), 197-11-355 or 197-11-360(3), the City shall give public notice as follows:

(1)    If public notice is required for a nonexempt license, the City shall state whether a DS or DNS has been issued and a DS notice when comments are due;

(2)    If no public notice is required for the nonexempt proposal, the City shall give notice of the DNS or DS by publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, City or general area where the proposal is located;

(3)    Whenever the City issues a DS under WAC 197-11-360(3), the City shall state the scoping procedure for the proposal in the DS as required in WAC 197-11-408 and in the public notice.

(b)    Whenever the City issues a DEIS under WAC 197-11-455(5) or a SEIS under WAC 197-11-620, notice of the availability of those documents shall be given by:

(1)    Indicating the availability of the DEIS in any public notice required for a nonexempt license;

(2)    Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, City or general area where the proposal is located.

(c)    Whenever possible, the City shall integrate the public notice required under this section with existing notice procedures for the City’s nonexempt permit(s) or approval(s) required for the proposal.

(d)    The City may require an applicant to complete the public notice requirements for the applicant’s proposal at his or her expense. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 5 §B, 1984)


20.04.170 DESIGNATION OF OFFICIAL TO PERFORM CONSULTED AGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE CITY.

(a)    The Director shall be responsible for preparation of written comments for the City in response to a consultation request prior to a threshold determination, participation in scoping and reviewing a draft EIS.

(b)    The Director shall be responsible for the City’s compliance with WAC 197-11-550 whenever the City is a consulted agency, and is authorized to develop operating procedures that will ensure that responses to consultation requests are prepared in a timely fashion and include data from all appropriate departments of the City. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 5 §C, 1984)


20.04.180 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VI - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains rules for using and supplementing existing environmental documents prepared under SEPA or National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for the City’s own environmental compliance. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

WAC 197-11-600 - When to use existing environmental documents.

610    Use of NEPA documents.

620    Supplemental environmental impact statement - Procedures.

625    Addenda - Procedures.

630    Adoption - Procedures.

635    Incorporation by reference - Procedures.

640    Combining documents.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 6 §A, 1984)


20.04.190 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VII - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains rules (and policies) for SEPA’s substantive authority, such as decisions to mitigate or reject proposals as a result of SEPA. This part also contains procedures for appealing SEPA determinations to agencies or the courts. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference:

WAC 197-11-650 - Purpose of this part.

655    Implementation.

660    Substantive authority and mitigation.

680    Appeals.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 7 §A, 1984)


20.04.200 SUBSTANTIVE AUTHORITY.

(a)    The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those in the existing SEPA authorization of the City.

(b)    The City may attach conditions to a permit or approval for a proposal so long as:

(1)    Such conditions are necessary to mitigate specific probable adverse environmental impacts identified in environmental documents prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

(2)    Such conditions are in writing; and

(3)    The mitigation measures included in such conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished; and

(4)    The City has considered whether other local, state or federal mitigation measures applied to the proposal are sufficient to mitigate the identified impacts; and

(5)    Such conditions are based on one or more policies in subsection (d) of this section and cited in the license or other decision document.

(c)    The City may deny a permit or approval for a proposal on the basis of SEPA so long as:

(1)    A finding is made that approving the proposal would result in probable significant adverse environmental impacts that are identified in a final EIS or final supplemental EIS prepared pursuant to this chapter; and

(2)    A finding is made that there are no reasonable mitigation measures capable of being accomplished that are sufficient to mitigate the identified impact; and

(3)    The denial is based on one or more policies identified in subsection (d) of this section, and identified in writing in the decision document.

(d)    The City designates and adopts by reference the following policies as the basis for the City’s exercise of authority pursuant to this section:

(1)    The City shall use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:

(i)    Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

(ii)    Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

(iii)    Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

(iv)    Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage;

(v)    Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

(vi)    Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life’s amenities; and

(vii)    Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

(2)    The City recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

(e)    Applications not requiring a final decision by the City Council that are conditioned or denied on the basis of SEPA by a nonelected official shall be appealable to the Administrative Hearing Examiner pursuant to Chapter 2.13 BMC. Such appeal may be perfected by appellant by giving notice to the responsible official within fourteen (14) days of the decision being appealed. The hearing before the Hearing Examiner shall be an open-record appeal. However, the decision of the SEPA Official shall be presumed correct. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 4798, Amended, 05/10/2002; Ord. 4778, Amended, 11/05/2001; Ord. 3934 Art. 7 §B, 1984)


20.04.205 PLANNED ACTIONS.

The City adopts by reference and codifies in this chapter the State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA) rules, WAC 197-11-164, 197-11-168, and 197-11-172, that establish the definitions, procedures, and project review requirements for planned actions. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5187 §2, 2012)


20.04.210 APPEALS.

(a)    The City establishes the following administrative appeal procedures under RCW 43.21C.075 and WAC 197-11-680:

(1)    Project Permits. Any agency or person may appeal the City’s procedural compliance with Chapter 197-11 WAC for issuance of the following (the appeal must be made to the Administrative Hearing Examiner within fourteen (14) days of the date of issuance). A decision involving a SEPA determination of nonsignificance which required public comments shall have the appeal period extended an additional seven (7) days:

(i)    A final DNS;

(ii)    A DS; or

(iii)    A final EIS.

(2)    Legislative Proposals. There is no administrative appeal of a DNS, DS or final EIS adequacy associated with a legislative decision.

(3)    For any administrative appeal under this section, the City shall provide for a record that shall consist of the following:

(i)    Findings and conclusions;

(ii)    Testimony under oath; and

(iii)    A taped or written transcript.

(4)    The procedural determination by the City’s responsible official shall carry substantial weight in any appeal proceeding.

(b)    The City shall give official notice under WAC 197-11-680(5) whenever it issues a permit or approval for which a statute or ordinance establishes a time limit for commencing judicial appeal. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4977 §4, 2006; Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 4778, Amended, 11/05/2001; Ord. 3934 Art. 7 §C, 1984)


20.04.220 NOTICE OF ACTION - STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.

(a)    The City, applicant for, or proponent of an action may publish a notice of action pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080 for any action.

(b)    The form of the notice shall be substantially in the form provided in WAC 197-11-990. The notice shall be published by the City Clerk, applicant or proponent pursuant to RCW 43.21C.080. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 7 §D, 1984)


20.04.230 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE VIII - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains uniform usage and definitions of terms under SEPA. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference, as supplemented by WAC 173-806-040:

WAC 197-11-700 - Definitions.

702    Act.

704    Action.

706    Addendum.

708    Adoption.

710    Affected tribe.

712    Affecting.

714    Agency.

716    Applicant.

718    Built environment.

720    Categorical exemption.

722    Consolidated appeal.

724    Consulted agency.

728    County.

730    Decision maker.

732    Department.

734    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

736    Determination of significance (DS).

738    EIS.

740    Environment.

742    Environmental checklist.

744    Environmental document.

746    Environmental review.

748    Environmentally sensitive area.

750    Expanded scoping.

752    Impacts.

754    Incorporation by reference.

756    Lands covered by water.

758    Lead agency.

760    License.

762    Local agency.

764    Major action.

766    Mitigated DNS.

768    Mitigation.

770    Natural environment.

774    Nonproject.

776    Phased review.

778    Preparation.

780    Private project.

782    Probable.

784    Proposal.

786    Reasonable alternative.

790    SEPA.

792    Scope.

793    Significant.

796    State agency.

797    Threshold determination.

799    Underlying governmental action.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 8 §A, 1984)


20.04.240 ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

The City adopts sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference, the following rules for categorical exemptions, as supplemented in this chapter, including Section B (Use of exemptions), and WAC 173-806-190 (Environmentally sensitive areas):

WAC 197-11-800 - Categorical exemptions.

880    Emergencies.

890    Petitioning DOE to change exemptions.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 9 §A, 1984)


20.04.250 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE X - ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

This article contains rules for agency compliance with SEPA, including rules for charging fees under the SEPA process, designating environmentally sensitive areas, listing agencies with environmental expertise, selecting the lead agency, and applying these rules to current agency activities. The City adopts the following sections of Chapter 197-11 WAC by reference and this article:

WAC 197-11-900 - Purpose of this part.

902    Agency SEPA policies.

916    Application to ongoing actions.

920    Agencies with environmental expertise.

922    Lead agency rules.

924    Determining the lead agency.

926    Lead agency for governmental proposals.

928    Lead agency for public and private proposals.

930    Lead agency for private projects with one agency with jurisdiction.

932     Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one agency, when one of the agencies is a City.

934    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from a local agency, not a county and one or more state agencies.

936    Lead agency for private projects requiring licenses from more than one state agency.

938    Lead agencies for specific proposals.

940    Transfer of lead agency status to a state agency.

942    Agreements on lead agency status.

944    Agreements on division of lead agency duties.

946    DOE resolution of lead agency disputes.

948    Assumption of lead agency status.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 10 §A, 1984)


20.04.260 ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS.

(a)    The Director shall designate environmentally sensitive areas under the standards of WAC 197-11-908, and shall file maps designating such areas, together with the exemptions from the list in WAC 197-11-908 that are inapplicable in such areas, with the Planning Department and the Department of Ecology, Headquarters Office, Olympia, Washington. The environmentally sensitive area designations shall have full force and effect of law as of the date of filing.

(b)    The City shall treat proposals located wholly or partially within an environmentally sensitive area no differently than other proposals under this chapter, making a threshold determination for all such proposals. The City shall not automatically require an EIS for a proposal merely because it is proposed for location in an environmentally sensitive area.

(c)    Certain exemptions do not apply on lands covered by water, and this remains true regardless of whether or not lands covered by water are mapped. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 10 §B, 1984)


20.04.270 FEES.

The City shall require fees for its activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Those fees shall be established, from time to time, by City Council resolution. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 10 §C, 1984)


20.04.280 ADOPTION OF WAC PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE.

The City adopts the following forms and selections by reference:

WAC 197-11-960 - Environmental checklist.

965    Adoption notice.

970    Determination of nonsignificance (DNS).

980    Determination of significance and scoping notice (DS).

985    Notice of assumption of lead agency status.

990    Notice of action.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §5 (part), 2005: Ord. 3934 Art. 11 §A, 1984)


Chapter 20.10 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS

Sections:

20.10.010    ANNUAL AMENDMENTS.

20.10.020    APPLICATIONS.

20.10.030    TIME OF FILING.

20.10.040    SUSPENSION OF APPLICATIONS.

20.10.050    AMENDMENTS OUTSIDE THE ANNUAL PROCESS.

20.10.060    SEPA REVIEW.

20.10.070    CUMULATIVE EFFECT.

20.10.075    PRELIMINARY REVIEW AND EVALUATION CRITERIA.

20.10.080    DECISION CRITERIA.

20.10.090    HEARING PROCEDURES - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

20.10.100    CITY COUNCIL ACTION.

20.10.110    APPEALS.


20.10.010 ANNUAL AMENDMENTS.

The City Council shall consider amendments to the Bremerton Comprehensive Plan no more than once each calendar year, except as provided in BMC 20.10.050. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.020 APPLICATIONS.

Comprehensive Plan amendments may be initiated by the Department of Community Development or other administrative staff of the City, private citizens, private or public entities or agencies, the Planning Commission, or the City Council. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.030 TIME OF FILING.

Applications to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development between the first business day in August and November 15th (or the next business day if it falls on a weekend) to be considered for the following year’s amendments. Applications shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the Department, and a presubmittal meeting is required prior to submittal. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for filing. Requests received after the deadline shall be resubmitted during the next calendar year amendment process. The Director of Community Development may, at his or her sole discretion, accept applications filed after the deadline if review has not begun on the pending applications and acceptance of the late application will not have a significant impact on the processing of the pending applications. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4971 §3, 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.040 SUSPENSION OF APPLICATIONS.

The City Council may, by motion or resolution, suspend the amendment process for any given calendar year. However, in no case shall the amendment process be suspended for two (2) consecutive calendar years. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.050 AMENDMENTS OUTSIDE THE ANNUAL PROCESS.

Pursuant to RCW 36.70A.130, the City Council may consider amendments to the Comprehensive Plan outside the annual review process set forth in BMC 20.10.010 under the following circumstances:

(a)    Subarea Plan. The initial adoption of a subarea plan that does not modify the Comprehensive Plan policies and designations applicable to the subarea; and

(b)    Shoreline Master Program. The adoption or amendment of a Shoreline Master Program under the procedures set forth in Chapter 90.58 RCW; and

(c)    Capital Facilities Element. The amendment of the capital facilities element of the Comprehensive Plan that occurs concurrently with the adoption or amendment of the City’s budget; and

(d)    Planned Actions. The adoption of Comprehensive Plan amendments necessary to enact a planned action under RCW 43.21C.031(2); and

(e)    Emergency Amendments. At any time an emergency situation exists, emergency Comprehensive Plan amendments may be processed separately and in addition to the standard annual amendment process even though such emergency amendment results in a Comprehensive Plan amendment more frequently than once per year. Prior to considering an emergency amendment, the City Council shall, by resolution or motion, make a finding that an emergency situation exists. The following shall constitute a basis for emergency amendments:

(1)    Situations involving official, legal, or administrative actions, such as those to immediately avoid an imminent danger to public health and safety, prevent imminent danger to public or private property or to prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation;

(2)    To address the absence of adequate and available public facilities or services;

(3)    To resolve an appeal of the Comprehensive Plan filed with the Central Puget Sound Growth Management Hearings Board or court, or to comply with a decision of the Board or court or of a State agency or office or the State Legislature necessitating an emergency Comprehensive Plan amendment; or

(4)    Council confirmation of the Director’s finding of a conflict, inconsistency, deficiency or other internal defect in the Comprehensive Plan that requires correction for clear, complete and consistent policy direction. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.060 SEPA REVIEW.

After the annual Comprehensive Plan amendment docket is established, the City’s responsible official shall review the cumulative environmental effect of all proposed Comprehensive Plan amendments, pursuant to the Washington State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA). If the responsible official determines that a draft final or supplemental environmental impact statement (EIS) or other appropriate environmental review is warranted, applicants may be responsible for a full or proportionate share of the costs of preparing the environmental analysis as determined by the responsible official. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.070 CUMULATIVE EFFECT.

In considering annual amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall consider all proposed amendments concurrently to assess their cumulative effect. The analysis of cumulative effect shall be conducted pursuant to BMC 20.10.060 and shall be entered into the hearing records of the Planning Commission and City Council prior to any action. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.075 PRELIMINARY REVIEW AND EVALUATION CRITERIA.

(a)    Prior to the Planning Commission recommendation to City Council, the Department shall conduct a preliminary review and evaluation of proposed amendments and assess the extent of review that would be required under the SEPA in this chapter. The preliminary review and evaluation shall include any review by other departments deemed necessary by the Department and shall be based on the following criteria:

(1)    Is the proposed amendment consistent with the county-wide planning policies, the Growth Management Act (GMA), other state or federal law, or the Washington Administrative Code?

(2)    Would the proposed amendment cause little or no adverse environmental impacts, and is the time required to analyze impacts available within the time frame of the standard annual review process?

(3)    Is sufficient analysis completed to determine any need for additional capital improvements and revenues to maintain level of service, and is the time required for this analysis available within the time frame for this annual review process?

(4)    Can the proposed amendment be considered now without conflicting with some other Comprehensive Plan established timeline?

(5)    Can the proposed amendment be acted on without significant other amendments or revisions not anticipated by the proponents, and is the time required for processing those amendments or revisions available within the time frame of this annual review process?

(6)    If the proposed amendment was previously reviewed, ruled upon or rejected, has the applicant identified reasons to review the proposed amendment again?

(b)    If the Department determines that the answer to any of the above questions is no, it may recommend to the Planning Commission that the proposed amendment or revision not be further processed in the current amendment review cycle. Upon direction from the Planning Commission, Department staff will inform those whose proposed amendments or revisions will not be considered because (a) impact analysis beyond the scope of the amendment process is needed; (b) the request does not meet preliminary criteria; or (c) likelihood of inclusion of the proposal in a department’s work program. Proponents may resubmit proposals to the Department at any time, subject to the timelines contained in this chapter. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019)


20.10.080 DECISION CRITERIA.

The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may adopt or adopt with modifications, an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan if:

(a)    There exists an obvious technical error in the pertinent Comprehensive Plan provisions; or

(b)    All the following criteria have been met:

(1)    The amendment is consistent with the Growth Management Act;

(2)    The amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan or other goals or policies of the City;

(3)    If the amendment was reviewed but not adopted as a part of a previous proposal, circumstances related to the proposed amendment have significantly changed, or the needs of the City have changed, which support an amendment;

(4)    The amendment is compatible with existing or planned land uses and the surrounding development pattern; and

(5)    The amendment will not adversely affect the City’s ability to provide urban services at the planned level of service and bears a reasonable relationship to benefitting the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.090 HEARING PROCEDURES - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

The Department of Community Development shall prepare a report on proposed plan amendments which shall be presented to the Planning Commission at a public hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold one (1) or more hearings on the proposed amendments. Following the public hearing by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for action. For proposed text amendments, notice of the first Planning Commission and the first City Council public hearing shall be given in at least one (1) publication in the local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to said hearing. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.100 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.

Following receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall affirm, deny, modify or return the application to the Commission for further consideration. In the event the City Council modifies the recommendation, it shall make its own findings and set forth in writing the reasons for the action taken. If the City Council makes a substantial modification to the Planning Commission recommendation, it shall hold at least one (1) additional hearing on the modified recommendation prior to adoption. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


20.10.110 APPEALS.

Appeals from a decision of the Bremerton City Council shall be pursuant to Chapter 36.70A RCW. (Ord. 5366 §3 (part), 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4994 §1 (part), 2006: Ord. 4950 §4 (part), 2005: Ord. 4852 §1 (in part), 2003)


Chapter 20.12 LAND DIVISION

Sections:

20.12.010    PURPOSE.

20.12.020    APPLICABILITY.

20.12.030    EXEMPTIONS.

20.12.040    DEFINITIONS.

20.12.050    ADMINISTRATION.

20.12.060    GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20.12.070    SURVEY REQUIREMENTS.

20.12.080    SUBDIVISION CATEGORIES.

20.12.090    REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVALS.

20.12.100    APPROVAL CRITERIA - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION.

20.12.110    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION.

20.12.120    APPROVAL CRITERIA - FINAL SUBDIVISION.

20.12.130    SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - FINAL SUBDIVISION.

20.12.140    MODIFICATIONS TO PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.

20.12.150    RECORDING FINAL SUBDIVISIONS.

20.12.160    EXPIRATION OF FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVALS.

20.12.170    SUBDIVISION VESTING.

20.12.180    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


20.12.010 PURPOSE.

These regulations are for the purpose of regulating the subdivision of land and support the rights of property owners to develop their property while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, to establish procedures for the subdivision and resubdivision of land in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, to guide the future growth and development of the community in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and to ensure compliance with the City’s development and engineering requirements. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.020 APPLICABILITY.

(a)    This chapter shall apply to all divisions of lands including short subdivisions, formal subdivisions, and binding site plans hereafter established within the incorporated areas of the City of Bremerton.

(b)    This chapter is applied in conjunction with Chapter 2.13 BMC, Administrative Hearing Examiner; Chapter 20.02 BMC, Project Permits; Chapter 20.04 BMC, State Environmental Policy Act; BMC Title 20, Division III, Zoning; the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program; Chapter 20.14 BMC, Critical Areas; and other applicable codes referencing this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.030 EXEMPTIONS.

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the exemptions specified in the State law, including but not limited to:

(a)    Cemeteries and other burial plots while used for that purpose.

(b)    Divisions of land made by testamentary provisions, or the laws of descent.

(c)    A division of land for the purpose of lease when no residential structure, other than mobile homes or travel trailers, are to be placed upon the land.

(d)    Division of land due to condemnation or sale under threat thereof by an agency or division of government vested with the power of condemnation.

(e)    A division of land into lots or tracts of less than three (3) acres that is recorded in accordance with Chapter 58.09 RCW (Survey Recording Act) and is used or to be used for the purpose of establishing a site for construction and operation of consumer-owned or investor-owned electric utility facilities. The exemption only applies to electric utility facilities that will be placed into service to meet the electrical needs of a utility’s existing and new customers. "New customers" are defined as electric service locations not already in existence as of the date that electric utility facilities subject to the provisions of this section are planned and constructed.

(f)    A division of land for the purpose of leasing land for facilities providing personal wireless services while used for that purpose.

(g)    A division of land for the purpose of dedicating to the public such tracts of lands for open spaces, drainage ways, roads, alleys, easements, parks, playgrounds, sites for schools, school grounds, water supplies, sanitary wastes and other general purposes that may be required to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(h)    Condominiums, pursuant to RCW 58.17.040. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.040 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions apply to this chapter and they should be used in conjunction with other definitions found in BMC Title 20. However, these definitions are not intended to replace or alter similar definitions found elsewhere within the Bremerton Municipal Code except when specifically applied to the provisions of this chapter.

"Auditor, County" means the person defined in Chapter 36.22 RCW or the office of the person assigned such duties under the Kitsap County Charter.

"Binding site plan" means a drawing to a scale specified by this chapter which: (a) identifies and shows the areas and locations of all streets, roads, improvements, utilities, open spaces, and any other matters specified by local regulations; (b) contains inscriptions or attachments setting forth such appropriate limitations and conditions for the use of the land as are established by the local government body having authority to approve the site plan; and (c) contains provisions making any development be in conformity with the site plan.

"Block" means a group of lots, tracts, or parcels within well-defined and fixed boundaries.

"Bond" means a satisfactory security to insure performance and/or warranty.

"Buildable lot" means a tract or parcel of land, legally created, which is intended for use for the placement of structures separate from other parcels.

"City" means the City of Bremerton.

"Comprehensive Plan" means the City of Bremerton Comprehensive Plan as adopted and amended.

"Concurrency" means the requirement that development applications demonstrate that adequate public facilities be available at prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact or occupancy of development as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

"Day(s)" means calendar days and includes Monday through Sunday and all holidays.

"Dedication" means the deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public uses, reserving to himself or herself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted.

"Department" means the City of Bremerton Community Development Department.

"Director" means the City of Bremerton Director of Community Development and/or his/her designee. 

"Division of land" means any segregation of land that creates lots, tracts, parcels, or sites not otherwise exempted by this title that alters or affects the shape, size or legal description of any part of the owner’s land.

"Electric utility facilities" means unstaffed facilities except for the presence of security personnel that are used for or in connection with, or to facilitate the transmission, distribution, sale, or furnishing of, electricity including, but not limited to, electric power substations.

"Hearing Examiner" means the person appointed by the Mayor, with the powers and duties prescribed in Chapter 2.13 BMC.

"Lot" means a fractional part of divided lands having fixed boundaries being of sufficient area and dimension to meet the minimum and maximum underlying zoning district requirements for width, area and street frontage. The term shall include tracts or parcels.

"Personal wireless services" means any federally licensed personal wireless service. "Facilities" means unstaffed facilities that are used for the transmission or reception, or both, of wireless communication services including, but not necessarily limited to, antenna arrays, transmission cables, equipment shelters, and support structures.

"Plat" means a map or representation of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets and alleys, or other divisions and dedications.

"Plat certificate" means a title report or subdivision guarantee that is prepared by a title company for the property contained in a proposed short subdivision, subdivision or binding site plan, to include, as a minimum, all owners of record, easements and encumbrances affecting said property.

"Plat, final" means the final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for filing for record with the County Auditor and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this chapter and Chapter 58.17 RCW.

"Plat, formal" means the map or representation of a formal subdivision.

"Plat, preliminary" means a neat and approximate drawing of a proposed subdivision showing the general layout of streets and alleys, lots, blocks, and other elements consistent with the requirements of this chapter. The preliminary plat shall be the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a subdivision or short subdivision.

"Plat, short" means the map or representation of a short subdivision.

"State Environmental Policy Act (SEPA)" means environmental review procedures required under Chapter 43.21C RCW, Chapter 197-11 WAC and Chapter 20.04 BMC.

"Subdivision" means the division or redivision of land through short subdivision, formal subdivision, or binding site plan.

"Subdivision, formal" means the division or redivision of land into ten (10) or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership.

"Subdivision, short" means the division or redivision of land into nine (9) or fewer lots, tracts, parcels, sites, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership.

"Title notice" means a written notice attached to the title of a parcel of land by the property owner at the request of the City of Bremerton with a recording of said notice at the Kitsap County Auditor’s Office per a legal description of said parcel for the purpose of notifying the property owner or future property owner of particular circumstances related to said parcel such as warning statement(s), limitation(s), restriction(s) or other.

"Title report" means the written analysis of the status of title to real property, including a property description, names of titleholders and how title is held (joint tenancy, etc.), encumbrances (mortgages, liens, deeds of trusts, recorded judgments), and real property taxes due.

"Tract" means land reserved for special uses such as open space, surface water retention, utilities, or access. Tracts are not counted as lots nor considered as building sites. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.050 ADMINISTRATION.

The Director is vested with the duty of administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(a)    Submittal. All applications made pursuant to this chapter shall be to the Department.

(b)    Minimum Requirements. The provisions set forth in this chapter shall constitute the minimum requirements necessary to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(c)    Preliminary Consultation. Any person who desires to subdivide land within the boundaries of the City should consult with the Department at an early date to become familiar with the requirements of this chapter and for assistance in understanding the engineering requirements and the construction standards of the City.

(d)    Compliance. Whenever any parcel of land is divided into two (2) or more lots, no person, firm, corporation or agents of them shall sell, transfer or advertise for sale or transfer any such lot without having a subdivision recorded unless preliminary subdivision approval expressly conditions a performance of an offer or agreement to sell, lease, or otherwise transfer a lot, tract, or parcel of land on the recording of the final plat pursuant to RCW 58.17.205.

(e)    Critical Areas Environmental Consideration. Lands designated as critical areas such as wetlands, aquifers, streams, flood hazards, geological hazards and wildlife habitats shall not be subdivided or have lot lines adjusted unless adequate safeguards are provided as prescribed in Chapter 20.14 BMC, Critical Areas.

(f)    Critical Areas Notice on Title. When a critical area is verified on a property by an assessment or delineation, a notice of its presence shall be recorded by the applicant at the office of the Kitsap County Auditor. The notice may be on the face of a subdivision, or it may be on a form specified by the Department. The notice shall be notarized and proof must be submitted that the notice was legally recorded before final approval for development is issued. The notice shall run with the land and failure to record such notice shall be in violation of this chapter.

(g)    Fees. The applicant shall pay a fee according to the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC, which shall accompany the application.

(h)    Bonding of Improvements. In lieu of the completion of the actual construction of any required improvements prior to the approval of a final subdivision, the City may accept a bond providing for and securing the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the City. In addition, the City may provide for methods of security, including the posting of a bond securing the successful operation of improvements for up to two (2) years after final approval.

(i)    Severability. If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected.

(j)    Phasing. Phased development may be permitted with a preliminary formal subdivision application, provided all of the following criteria are met:

(1)    Phasing Timelines. The first phase submitted for final subdivision approval must be completed prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat (five (5) years or as otherwise defined by RCW 58.17.140). For each subsequent phase, required infrastructure shall be completed and a final subdivision application shall be submitted within two (2) years of the date of the previous phase’s final subdivision approval. No project shall include more than a maximum of four (4) phases. Provided no extensions are granted, this allows for a total of eleven (11) years for project completion.

(2)    Phasing Plan. A phasing plan must be submitted and approved with the preliminary subdivision application and must include a minimum of the following materials:

(i)    The proposed time limits for each phase shall be clearly indicated; and

(ii)    The plan shall identify the number, density of lots, open space areas, parks, roads, and stormwater facilities to be located and developed in accordance within each phase. Said feature location and size shall be clearly identified on the plans; and

(iii)    The plan shall include an analysis and supplemental plans as necessary that identify how each phase or as established in RCW 58.17.140 will adequately provide for services such as roadway design, utility, and public service systems, safe walking routes, stormwater, etc.

(k)    Expiration and Extension of Preliminary Formal Subdivisions. The approval given to a preliminary formal subdivision shall expire within five (5) years following approval (or as outlined in RCW 58.17.140), unless a complete final subdivision application, meeting the conditions of approval, is submitted to the City prior to expiration. Should extenuating circumstance arise, the applicant may apply for a one (1) year extension provided all of the following criteria are met:

(1)    The application for an extension is filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the preliminary subdivision expiration; and

(2)    No project may receive more than two (2) extensions for the life of the project. This applies to standard and phased projects. Each extension shall not be granted for more than a single, one (1) year extension; and

(3)    The applicant can demonstrate tangible progress and reasonable diligence being made toward infrastructure completion such that it is clear that project completion will occur within the timeline of the extension requested (no more than one (1) year); and

(4)    The applicant demonstrates that the extension requested is the minimum necessary to finalize the necessary infrastructure/improvements required for final subdivision approval; and

(5)    The director finds there are no substantial changes in conditions that would render approval of the extension contrary to public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5261 §2 (part), 2014: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.070 SURVEY REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    A Washington State licensed land surveyor registered pursuant to Chapter 18.43 RCW shall prepare, stamp, and seal all proposed subdivisions.

(b)    A survey is required for all final approvals of subdivisions and shall meet the survey standards of Chapter 58.09 RCW and Chapter 332-130 WAC.

(c)    The surveyor shall certify on the final document to be recorded that it is a true and correct representation of the lands actually surveyed.

(d)    Whenever a survey reveals a discrepancy, the discrepancy shall be noted on the face of the subdivision. "Discrepancy" means: (1) a boundary hiatus; (2) an overlapping boundary; or (3) a physical appurtenance, which indicates encroachment, lines of possession, or conflict of title. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.080 SUBDIVISION CATEGORIES.

When reference to "subdivision" is made in this code, it is intended to refer to "short subdivision," "formal subdivision," "and "binding site plan" unless one is specified.

(a)    Short subdivision: a subdivision of nine (9) or fewer lots. Land within a short subdivision may not be further divided in any manner within a period of five (5) years without filing of a final plat, except the original owner may file an alteration within five (5) years to create up to a total of nine (9) lots within the original plat boundaries. 

(b)    Formal subdivision: a subdivision of ten (10) or more lots.

(c)    Binding site plan: a land division for commercial and/or industrial developments. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.090 REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVALS.

Each subdivision type is processed as a different action "type" as described in Chapter 20.02 BMC, Table 040, Project Permit Processing Procedures, and summarized as follows:

(a)    Subdivision. Approval of all subdivisions requires a four (4) step process: approval of a preliminary subdivision, installation or bonding of required improvements, approval of the final subdivision, and recording of the subdivision with the Kitsap County Auditor.

(1)    Short Subdivision.

(i)    A preliminary short subdivision: Type II Director decision.

(ii)    A final short subdivision: Type I Director decision.

a.    The final short subdivision shall be submitted to the Director within five (5) years of the date that the preliminary approval became final or the short subdivision shall become null and void.

(2)    Formal Subdivision.

(i)    A preliminary formal subdivision: Type III Hearing Examiner decision.

(ii)    A final formal subdivision: Type I Director decision.

a.    The final formal subdivision shall be submitted to the Director within five (5) years of the date that the preliminary approval became final or as approved through phasing and/or timeline extensions per BMC 20.12.060, General Provisions. Should the project fail to comply with these timelines, the formal subdivision shall become null and void. 

b.    The following signatures on the final plat are required:

i.    Director. Whose signature approves compliance with all terms of the preliminary plat approval of the proposed plat subdivision or dedication.

ii.    City Engineer. Whose signature approves the layout of streets, alleys and other rights-of-way, design of bridges, sewage and water systems and other structures. Additionally, the City Engineer’s signature approves the adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply if City services are provided. 

iii.    Kitsap County Health District. Whose signature approves the adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply if City services are not provided.

iv.    Kitsap County Treasurer. Whose signature confirms a statement that all taxes and delinquent assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged.

v.    Property Owner. Whose signature confirms a statement that the subdivision has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s).

(3)    Binding Site Plan.

(i)    A preliminary binding site plan - Type II Director decision.

(ii)    A final binding site plan - Type I Director decision.

a.    The final binding site plan shall be submitted to the Director within two (2) years of the date that the preliminary approval became final or the binding site plan shall become null and void.

b.    The following signatures on the binding site plan are required before the Director can approve the final binding site plan:

i.    City Engineer. Whose signature approves the layout of streets, alleys and other rights-of-way, design of bridges, sewage and water systems and other structures. Additionally, the City Engineer’s signature approves the adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply if City services are provided. 

ii.    Kitsap County Health District. Whose signature approves the adequacy of the proposed means of sewage disposal and water supply if City services are not provided.

iii.    Kitsap County Treasurer. Whose signature confirms a statement that all taxes and delinquent assessments for which the property may be liable as of the date of certification have been duly paid, satisfied or discharged.

iv.    Property Owner. Whose signature confirms a statement that the division of land has been made with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owner(s). (Ord. 5345 §3, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5261 §2 (part), 2014; Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.100 APPROVAL CRITERIA - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION.

The following criteria shall be used to review and approve preliminary short subdivisions, formal subdivisions, and binding site plans:

(a)    The subdivision is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, Shoreline Master Program, and any other City-adopted plans;

(b)    Provisions have been made for water, storm drainage, erosion control and sanitary sewage disposal for the subdivision that are consistent with current standards and plans as adopted in City code or ordinance;

(c)    Provisions have been made for roads, utilities, street lighting, street trees and other improvements that are consistent with the zoning code and Engineering Standards;

(d)    Provisions have been made for dedications, easements and reservations;

(e)    The design, shape and orientation of the proposed lots are appropriate to the proposed use. In addition to meeting the minimum lot size density requirement, each residential lot must provide a building envelope. Therefore, corner lots, lots with easements, or lots with environmental constraints may have to be larger than other lots in the subdivision;

(f)    The subdivision complies with the relevant requirements of the zoning code and all other relevant local regulations;

(g)    Appropriate provisions are made to address all impacts identified by any special reports that have been prepared;

(h)    Appropriate provisions for maintenance and monitoring of privately owned common facilities have been made;

(i)    Appropriate provisions, in accordance with RCW 58.17.110, are made for:

(1)    The public health, safety, and general welfare and for such open spaces, drainage ways, streets or roads, alleys or other public ways, transit stops, potable water supplies, sanitary wastes, parks and recreation, playgrounds, schools and school grounds and all other relevant facts, including sidewalks and other planning features that assure safe walking conditions for students who only walk to and from school; and

(2)    The public use and interest will be served by the platting of such subdivision and dedication. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.110 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION.

An applicant seeking approval of a short subdivision, formal subdivision, or binding site plan must submit a complete application requesting approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide all of the necessary information before the application is processed. In conjunction with the appropriate fee, a complete application for a preliminary subdivision approval shall contain, but is not limited to, the following:

(a)    Application Form and Project Narrative Description. Application shall be made on the appropriate forms prescribed by the Department and shall be signed and dated by the property owner or authorized agent. When an authorized agent is involved, they shall provide proof they represent the legal interests of the property owner. The application shall contain each of the following:

(1)    The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and person(s) to be contacted;

(2)    The Kitsap County Assessor’s tax identification number;

(3)    The name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the property;

(4)    Address or location of the property to be subdivided;

(5)    Legal description of the property;

(6)    The name of the school district serving the development;

(7)    The existing zone classification;

(8)    The existing shoreline environmental designation if any land is within two hundred (200) feet of the shoreline;

(9)    Approximate project site lot area in acres;

(10)    The range of lot sizes in square feet.

(b)    Preliminary Plan. Seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat/short plat/binding site plan drawn to scale. The preliminary plan shall contain the following illustrations (multiple sheets may be used in order to provide clarity):

(1)    Location of the site by section, township, range;

(2)    North arrow, scale and the boundary of the lands being subdivided;

(3)    Approximate boundaries of all blocks, the designation of lots, lot lines, and dimensions;

(4)    The name of any adjacent subdivisions;

(5)    The approximate location, names and width of all existing and proposed streets, roads and access easements within the boundaries of the lands being subdivided and adjacent lots;

(6)    The location of existing and proposed improvements such as stormwater facilities, sidewalks, utilities, power poles, etc., within the boundaries of the lands being subdivided and adjacent lots;

(7)    The location of transit stops within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the lands being divided;

(8)    All existing and/or proposed easements or divisions proposed to be dedicated for any public purpose or for the common use of the property owners of the lands being subdivided;

(9)    A full and correct description of the lands being subdivided;

(10)    Approximate location of existing structures, septic tanks, drain fields, wells and other improvements located on the site and whether such structures are proposed to remain on the property;

(11)    Shorelines, streams, wetlands, wildlife habitats and geologically hazardous areas as defined in Chapter 20.14 BMC, Critical Areas, and the Shoreline Master Program; 

(12)    Topographical information showing general slope information when existing slopes are greater than ten (10) percent.

(c)    Reduced Preliminary Plan. An eleven (11) inch by seventeen (17) inch reproducible copy of the preliminary site plan containing the information prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 

(d)    Vicinity Map. A copy of the Kitsap County Assessor’s map showing the location of the existing parcel number of all abutting properties and the approximate location of the subject property clearly marked. 

(e)    Title Report. A title report issued within thirty (30) days of application, showing all persons having an ownership interest, a legal description describing exterior boundary of application site and listing all encumbrances affecting the site.

(f)    Notice. Public notice packet as required by the corresponding application.

(g)    SEPA. Environmental (SEPA) checklist if the division of land is not exempt under WAC 197-11-800.

(h)    Water and Sewer Availability. Information on the availability of sewer and water services from the City Public Works Department or Kitsap County Health District.

(i)    Other Information. Any related information and/or studies (including but not limited to stormwater report, traffic study, or geotechnical report) required by other provisions of the Bremerton Municipal Code, identified in the presubmittal conference meeting, or deemed necessary by the Director. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.120 APPROVAL CRITERIA - FINAL SUBDIVISION.

The following criteria shall be used to review and approve final subdivisions:

(a)    Conforms to all terms of the preliminary subdivision approval;

(b)    Meets all zoning and engineering requirements;

(c)    Meets all requirements of this chapter;

(d)    Meets all applicable local and State laws that were in effect at the time of vesting; and

(e)    Improvements have been constructed or bonded at one hundred fifty (150) percent of estimated construction value. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.130 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS - FINAL SUBDIVISION.

An applicant seeking final approval of a short subdivision, formal subdivision, or binding site plan must submit a complete application requesting approval. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide all of the necessary information before the application is processed. In conjunction with the appropriate fee a complete application for a final subdivision approval shall contain, but is not limited to, the following: 

(a)    Application Form. Application shall be made on the appropriate forms prescribed by the Department and shall be signed and dated by the property owner or authorized agent. When an authorized agent is involved, they shall provide proof they represent the legal interests of the property owner.

(b)    Final Plan. The final plan shall be an original that is legibly drawn in black ink and is suitable for producing legible prints through scanning, microfilming or other standard copying procedures. The map shall measure eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall include all of the following:

(1)    Drawn to scale at no less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet and the scale shall be shown on the drawing;

(2)    Include the date, title, name and location of the subject property, graphic scale and true north point;

(3)    Complete legal description of the lands being divided;

(4)    The location of all existing fences, structures, and other improvements;

(5)    The location of any lakes, ponds, wetlands, streams, creeks, and slopes (top and toe and percentage of slope) greater than forty (40) percent;

(6)    Show the location of utilities, streets and easements within or abutting the subject property;

(7)    Display the lines of all streets and roads, alley lines, lot lines, lot and blocks numbered in numerical order, reservations, easements, and any areas to be dedicated to public use, with notes stating their purpose and any limitations;

(8)    Contain data sufficient to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, easement line, lot line, boundary line and block line on site;

(9)    Include dimensions;

(10)    Include section subdivision information. Methods and data used for corner reestablishment or section subdivision shall be stated on plat;

(11)     When applicable, display all interior permanent control monuments located as determined by the City Engineer’s office. All monuments and property corners shall be installed prior to the release of any bond;

(12)     If the subdivision includes a dedication, the following statements shall be included:

(i)    The dedication of all streets and other areas to the public, and individual or individuals, religious society or societies, or to any corporation, public or private, as shown on the plat;

(ii)    A waiver of all claims for damages against any governmental authority which may be occasioned to the adjacent land by the established construction, drainage and maintenance of said road;

(13)     Said statements shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public by all parties having any interest in the lands subdivided;

(14)     Addressing of the individual lots;

(15)     Certificate for the approval signatures detailed in BMC 20.12.090;

(16)     Treasurer’s certificate to ensure payment of taxes; and

(17)     Other information requested during the preliminary approval.

(c)    Lot Numbering. Lots shall be consecutively numbered; tracts shall be lettered alphabetically and in consecutive order.

(d)    Plat Certificates. Three (3) plat certificates for the real property shall accompany the final plat.

(e)    Lot Closures. Perimeter lot closures for all lots, tracts, and the exterior boundary of the subdivision shall accompany the final plat.

(f)    Addressing. Addresses of the individual lots shall be obtained from the Public Works Department.

(g)    Dedications. Dedications of right-of-way are pursuant to Chapter 11.12 BMC, Transportation Development Code. (Ord. 5345 §4, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.140 MODIFICATIONS TO PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.

(a)    Minor Amendments. At any time after preliminary subdivision approval, and before final subdivision approval, the applicant may submit an application that proposes minor amendments to the approved preliminary subdivision. Minor amendments are allowed for short and formal subdivisions and are processed administratively by the Department. To obtain approval the Director must make a written determination finding that all of the following criteria have been met:

(1)    The revision(s) do not substantially change any conditions of approval established in the preliminary subdivision approval; and

(2)    The revision(s) will not cause the subdivision to violate any applicable City policy or regulation nor will they be inconsistent with the findings and conclusions of the preliminary subdivision decision; and

(3)    The revision(s) do not decrease the total number of lots within the subdivision by more than five (5) lots, nor does the reduction violate any density requirements. In no case shall an increase of units be permitted through the amendment process; and

(4)    The revision(s) do not alter the external boundaries of the project, such that the location and external perimeter of the subdivision remains unchanged; and

(5)    The revision(s) do not represent a change of more than ten (10) percent to any individual feature such as but not limited to: the location or amount of open space, design or location of stormwater systems, or roadways; and

(6)    The revision(s) do not result in the relocation of any roadway access point to an exterior street from the subdivision; and

(7)    The revision(s) do not propose phasing of subdivision development not previously approved; and

(8)    The revision(s) do not increase any adverse impacts or undesirable effects of the subdivision on the community or surrounding area.

(b)    Minor Amendment Application Process. An application for a minor subdivision amendment may be made at any time until the preliminary subdivision approval has expired pursuant to BMC 20.12.060. Amendment applications shall comply with the following:

(1)    An amended subdivision proposal shall be submitted on the appropriate application required by the Department and shall include all applicable information as identified for a preliminary subdivision as outlined in BMC 20.12.110.

(2)    The Director shall have the discretion to determine if a new SEPA checklist application, stormwater, transportation, geotechnical, or other studies need to be revised or updated.

(3)    An approval for a subdivision amendment shall expire at the same time as the original preliminary subdivision approval unless the expiration date is extended pursuant to BMC 20.12.060(k).

(c)    Major Amendments. Revisions that do not conform to all the criteria of a minor amendment (outlined above in subsection (a) of this section) constitute a major amendment and shall not be permitted through the minor amendment process set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Major amendments shall be processed as a new preliminary subdivision application and shall vest to the codes in effect at the time the new application is deemed complete. All application materials required for a preliminary subdivision outlined in BMC 20.12.110 shall be required and the Director shall have the discretion to determine if application materials, technical reports, and studies from the previous application may be used, or if new or updated reports will be required. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5261 §2 (part), 2014: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.150 RECORDING FINAL SUBDIVISIONS.

All final subdivisions shall be filed for record with the office of the Kitsap County Auditor. The applicant shall furnish one (1) copy of the recorded document to the Department and one (1) copy shall be filed with the office of the Kitsap County Assessor. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.160 EXPIRATION OF FINAL SUBDIVISION APPROVALS.

Approvals of final subdivisions shall automatically expire if the plans are not recorded within one (1) year of the written approval date. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.170 SUBDIVISION VESTING.

Subdivisions shall be governed by the statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of complete application for preliminary subdivision and will continue to be vested for a period of five (5) years after the final subdivision approval. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


20.12.180 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2).

(c)    This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning any land or building, constructing or modifying any subdivisions in the City for damages to anyone injured or damaged either in person or property by any defect therein; nor shall the City or any agent thereof be held as assuming such liability by reason of any preliminary or final approval or by issuance of any permits or certificates authorized herein. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4980 §1 (part), 2006)


Chapter 20.14 CRITICAL AREAS

Sections:

20.14.100    GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20.14.110    PURPOSE.

20.14.115    INTENT.

20.14.120    SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.

20.14.125    RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS.

20.14.130    ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES.

20.14.140    APPEALS.

20.14.145    EXEMPTIONS.

20.14.150    PUBLIC AGENCY EXCEPTION.

20.14.155    REASONABLE USE EXCEPTION.

20.14.160    NONCONFORMING USES/STRUCTURES.

20.14.165    BONDS.

20.14.170    ENFORCEMENT.

20.14.175    VIOLATION - PENALTY.

20.14.180    SEVERABILITY.

20.14.190    TREE REMOVAL.

20.14.200    DEFINITIONS.

20.14.300    WETLANDS.

20.14.310    DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

20.14.320    CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

20.14.330    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - WETLANDS.

20.14.340    MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS - WETLANDS.

20.14.350    PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - SUBDIVISIONS.

20.14.360    WETLAND REPORT.

20.14.400    CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS.

20.14.410    DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

20.14.420    CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

20.14.430    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.14.440    ALLOWED USES WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

20.14.450    HYDROGEOLOGIC ASSESSMENT.

20.14.500    FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS.

20.14.510    DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

20.14.520    CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

20.14.530    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.14.600    GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS.

20.14.610    PURPOSE.

20.14.620    CLASSIFICATION.

20.14.630    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.14.650    MITIGATION, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.

20.14.660    SPECIAL REPORTS.

20.14.700    FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS.

20.14.710    DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

20.14.720    CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS.

20.14.730    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.14.740    SPECIAL REPORTS.

20.14.750    MITIGATION STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.

20.14.760    MONITORING AND CONTINGENCY PLAN.


20.14.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

BMC 20.14.100 through 20.14.175 are general provisions pertaining to critical areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.110 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing provisions to classify, protect, and preserve Bremerton’s critical areas and their functions and values by providing standards for development in association with these areas. The identification and protection of critical areas is required by the Washington State Growth Management Act of 1990 (Chapter 17, Laws of 1990). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.115 INTENT.

Critical areas include wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, and fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. The intent of this chapter is to preserve the beneficial functions and values of critical areas, and to minimize potential dangers or public costs associated with the inappropriate use of such areas, and to manage development in or adjacent to critical areas. This chapter contains classification criteria and preservation standards for each type of critical area. Classification criteria identify physical characteristics by which critical areas are designated. Preservation standards protect critical areas from degradation caused by improper development. These criteria and standards will secure the public health, safety and welfare by: 

(a)    Reducing risk of damage due to erosion, flooding, and landslides;

(b)    Reducing the risks to the public from personal injury, loss of life, or property damage;

(c)    Maintaining surface water quality and protecting groundwater areas which help recharge (purify or resupply) rivers, streams, and aquifers;

(d)    Maintaining and protecting priority fish and wildlife habitats;

(e)    Maintaining and protecting the habitat of threatened and endangered wildlife species;

(f)    Avoiding public expenditures to correct damaged or degraded critical ecosystems;

(g)    Alerting appraisers, assessors, owners, potential buyers, or lessees to the potential presence of a critical ecosystem and possible development limitations;

(h)    Providing flexibility and attention to site-specific characteristics when administering code, allowing for reasonable use of private property and the provision of public facilities and services necessary to support existing development;

(i)    Applying the best available science, as determined according to WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925;

(j)    Implementing the goals, policies, guidelines, and requirements of Bremerton’s Comprehensive Plan and the Washington State Growth Management Act. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.120 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.

(a)    General. This chapter applies to any public or private activity or action which would alter the condition of any land, water or vegetation, or construct or alter any structure or improvement regulated by this title, on any land which meets the classification standards for any critical area defined herein. Such activities or actions include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Building, demolition, clearing, grubbing, grading, filling; 

(2)    Subdivisions and short plats;

(3)    Reclassifications, site plan approvals, shoreline substantial development permits, and special and conditional use permits;

(4)    Temporary use permits, variances, exceptions and waivers.

(b)    Where one (1) site is classified as containing two (2) or more critical areas, the project shall meet the minimum standards and requirements for each identified critical area as set forth in this chapter. 

(c)    Mapping. Critical areas may be located through the use of any and all information from the United States Department of Agriculture, Department of Fish and Wildlife, National Resources Conservation Service, the United States Geological Survey, the Washington Department of Ecology, the Coastal Zone Atlas, the National Wetlands Inventory maps, Bremerton topography maps, the Kitsap County Generalized Wetland and Critical Areas Inventory maps, Kitsap Public Utilities District maps, and Kitsap County Assessor’s maps, and other Geographical Information Systems (GIS) data provided by Kitsap County. The above-listed maps and data sources are only guidelines available for reference. The actual location of critical areas must be determined on a site-by-site basis according to the classification criteria found in this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.125 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS.

Applications for permits and approvals are subject to the provisions of this chapter as well as to other provisions of state and City law, including all other chapters of BMC Title 20, Land Use Code. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than existing regulations, easements, covenants or deed restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.130 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES.

The requirements and criteria of this chapter shall be applied at the time of application for any development proposal, land use project or nonproject action requiring permit approval subject to the BMC. The requirements and criteria of this chapter shall be applied in conjunction with review for permits required by other chapters of the BMC. Procedures specifically related to the application of this chapter are as follows:    

(a)    Project Permits. The procedures as set forth in Chapter 20.02 BMC, Project Permits, shall apply unless modified by this chapter.

(b)    Presubmittal Conference. Any applicant intending to construct, grade or conduct any activity subject to this chapter in a critical area or its buffer is encouraged to schedule a presubmittal conference during the earliest possible stages of project planning to discuss impact avoidance before large commitments have been made to a particular project design. Effort put into presubmittal conferences and planning will help applicants create projects which will be more quickly and easily processed.

(c)    Burden of Proof. Applications for any proposal subject to this chapter shall be reviewed by the Department of Community Development for completeness and consistency with this chapter. At every stage, the burden of proof demonstrating that any proposed development is consistent with this title is upon the applicant.

(d)    Special Reports. When a critical area is on site, or the Department of Community Development determines a likelihood that a critical area is on site, the Department may require submittal of additional special reports and studies prepared by qualified specialists to make an assessment or delineation of the critical area. Sections of this chapter include detailed procedures for preparation of special reports.

(e)    Site Plan. Applications for any proposal subject to this chapter shall include a site plan drawn to scale identifying locations of critical areas in addition to proposed structures and activities. Site plan submittal shall meet the standards of BMC 20.58.080, Site Plan Review.

(f)    Conditions. The Director may attach any conditions deemed necessary to minimize or avoid impacts to any critical area in order to meet the requirements and intent of this chapter. Development may be prohibited in a proposed site based on criteria set forth in this chapter. 

(g)    Notice to Title and Hold Harmless. The owner of any property upon which approval under BMC Title 20, or BMC Title 17, is sought, with a critical area or critical area buffer verified on site through an assessment delineation or permit application, shall record a "Notice to Title" of the presence of the critical area and/or buffer with the Kitsap County Auditor when required by the Department. The Department may require recording of a "Notice to Title and Hold Harmless" in cases where a site-specific critical area could pose potential threats to safety or property if altered through future acts. Said document shall also serve as a hold harmless and covenant holding the City harmless from claims due to soil disturbances or any development on the property in conjunction with issuance of development permits by the City. The notice shall be notarized and the applicant must submit proof that the notice has been legally recorded before the final approval for development is issued. 

(h)    Time Limit. The approvals granted under this chapter shall be valid for the same time period as the underlying permit (e.g., preliminary plat, building permit, etc.). If the underlying permit does not contain a specified expiration date, then approvals granted under this title shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of issue, unless a longer or shorter period is specified by the Department. 

(i)    Activities Not Requiring a Permit. If an activity is subject to this chapter per BMC 20.14.120 but is not subject to any established City permit, the proponent shall obtain written authorization from the Department prior to commencement to ensure compliance with the chapter. 

(j)    Modifications and Reductions. Modifications or reductions to critical areas buffers, setbacks, or other standards through a site-specific or special report shall be processed as a Type I (for applications where the underlying permit does not require SEPA) or Type II (for applications where the underlying permit requires SEPA) decision per BMC 20.02.040, Table 040. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.140 APPEALS.

An appeal of a decision regarding a critical area may be made in accordance with BMC 20.02.140. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.145 EXEMPTIONS.

An exemption means that an activity is fully exempt from critical areas review, and not subject to the provisions of this chapter. The proponent of the activity may submit a written request for exemption to the Director that describes the activity and states the exemption listed in this section that applies. The Director shall review the request to verify that it complies with this chapter and approve or deny the exemption as a Type I administrative determination. All exempted activities shall use best management practices to the greatest possible extent to avoid potential impacts to critical areas. The following developments, activities and associated uses shall be exempt:

(a)    Emergencies. Emergency activities are those activities necessary to prevent an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare, or that pose an immediate risk of damage to property and that require remedial or preventative action in a short time frame. The person or agency undertaking such action shall notify the Department, and the Director shall determine if the action taken is within the scope of the emergency action allowed in this section. After the emergency, the person or agency shall fully restore and/or mitigate any impacts to the critical areas and buffers resulting from the action in accordance with an approved critical area report and mitigation plan. 

(b)    Operation Maintenance or Repair. Operation maintenance or repair of existing structures not requiring permits, if the activity does not further alter or increase the impact to critical areas or their buffers. 

(c)    Passive Outdoor Activities. Recreation, education, and scientific research activities that do not degrade the critical area. 

(d)    Forest Practices. Forest practices regulated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 76.09 RCW and forest practices regulations, WAC Title 222.

(e)    Existing Infrastructure Maintenance and Repair. Maintenance and repair of legally existing roads, utilities, infrastructure and associated facilities. 

(f)    Activities Within the Improved Right-of-Way. Construction of new utility facilities, improvements or upgrades to existing utility facilities that take place within existing improved rights-of-way or existing impervious surfaces that do not increase the amount of impervious surface. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.150 PUBLIC AGENCY EXCEPTION.

An exception means that an activity may receive special consideration and relief from certain provisions of this chapter, but the activity is subject to the chapter, and must undergo full critical areas review. Public agencies may make an application for exception to the Department for construction of items such as new roads, utilities, infrastructure and associated facilities. The application shall include critical area identification; critical area report, including mitigation plan if necessary; and any other related project documents such as environmental documents pursuant to SEPA, Chapter 43.21C RCW. The decision whether to grant the public agency utility exception shall be processed as a Type III Hearing Examiner decision per Chapter 20.02 BMC pursuant to the following review criteria:

(a)    There is no other practical alternative to the proposed development with less impact on the critical areas; and

(b)    The application of this chapter would unreasonably restrict the ability to provide utility services to the public. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.155 REASONABLE USE EXCEPTION.

An exception means that an activity may receive special consideration and relief from certain provisions of this chapter, but the activity is subject to the chapter, and must undergo full critical areas review. An applicant may apply for a reasonable use exception if it can be demonstrated that application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the subject property. The application shall include critical areas identification; critical areas report including mitigation plan, if necessary; and any other related project documents such as environmental documents and special studies. The decision whether to grant the reasonable use exception shall be processed as a Type III Hearing Examiner decision per BMC 20.02.110 pursuant to the following review criteria:

(a)    The application of this chapter would deny all reasonable use of the property;

(b)    No other reasonable use of the property has less impact on the critical area;

(c)    Any alteration is the minimum necessary to allow for reasonable use of the property; and

(d)    The inability of the applicant to derive reasonable use of the property is not the result of actions by the applicant after the effective date of this title or its predecessor. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.160 NONCONFORMING USES/STRUCTURES.

An established use or existing structure that was lawfully permitted prior to the adoption of this chapter, but which is not in compliance with this chapter, may continue subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.54 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.165 BONDS.

All bonds and acceptable securities guaranteeing compliance with this chapter shall be set in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the average expected value of the project. The value of the bond shall be based on the average of three (3) contract bids that establish all costs of compensation, including costs relative to performance, monitoring, maintenance, and provision for contingency plans. 

(a)    Performance Bonds. Except for public agencies, applicants receiving a permit are required to post a cash performance bond or other acceptable security to guarantee compliance with this chapter prior to beginning any site work. The surety shall guarantee that work and materials used in construction are free from defects. All bonds shall be approved by the City Attorney. The surety or bonds cannot be terminated or canceled without written approval. The Director shall release the bond after documented proof that all structures and improvements have been shown to meet the requirements of this chapter and that a maintenance bond has been posted, if required. 

(b)    Maintenance Bonds. Except for public agencies, an applicant shall be required to post a cash maintenance bond or other acceptable security guaranteeing that structures and improvements required by this chapter will perform satisfactorily for a minimum of three (3) years after they have been constructed and approved. All bonds shall be on a form approved by the City Attorney. Without written release, the bond cannot be canceled or terminated. The Director shall release the bond after determination that the performance standards established for measuring the effectiveness and success of the project have been met. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.170 ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    No regulated activity, as defined in BMC 20.14.200, shall be conducted without a permit and without full compliance with this chapter. All activities not allowed or conditionally approved shall be prohibited.

(b)    The Director shall have authority to enforce this chapter, issue delineation verifications, permits, and violation notices, and process violations through the use of administrative orders and/or civil and criminal actions as provided for herein, and as listed in BMC 20.40.180.

(c)    In the event of violation, the City shall have the authority to order restoration, enhancement, or creation measures to compensate for the destroyed or degraded critical area. If work is not completed in a reasonable time following the order, the City may implement a process to restore or enhance the affected site. This includes creation of new wetlands or streams to offset loss as a result of violation of the provisions in this chapter. The violator shall be liable for all costs of such action, including administrative costs. 

(d)    Failure to comply with an administrative order of the Director under this section shall constitute a violation subject to enforcement pursuant to this section. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.175 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement and/or enforcement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to or as an alternative to any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). Each day, or a portion thereof, during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.180 SEVERABILITY.

If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such order or judgment shall be confined in its operation to the controversy in which it was rendered and shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any part thereof to any other person or circumstances, and to this end, the provisions of each clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.190 TREE REMOVAL.

Trees and other vegetation are important elements of the physical environment, especially those located within or near critical areas. This section addresses removing trees within critical areas or their associated buffers. Removal of trees within geological hazardous area shall also comply with BMC 20.14.630(e) and (f).

(a)    Elimination of Danger Trees. Removal of danger trees within the critical area or associated buffers may be allowed only if such activity is approved by the Department, provided a certified arborist in the State of Washington makes a written determination that the trees proposed for elimination present a legitimate safety hazard.

(b)    Tree Replacement. Trees removed from the critical area or associated buffers, including danger trees, must comply with the following provisions:

(1)    Removal of trees greater than six (6) inches in diameter at four (4) feet in height shall be replaced at a ratio of three to one (3:1) with native species and shall be reestablished within any required buffer on the project site.

(2)    Shoreline Jurisdiction. Properties located within the City’s shoreline jurisdiction are subject to additional tree removal and replacement standards if the tree(s) to be removed are located within the required shoreline buffer. See Shoreline Master Program Section 7.020 for additional standards. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.14.200 DEFINITIONS.

Words not defined in this title shall be as defined in the Bremerton Municipal Code, the Washington Administrative Code, or the Revised Code of Washington. Words not found in either code shall be as defined in Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, latest edition. 

"Active fault" means a fault that is considered likely to undergo renewed movement within a period of concern to humans. Faults are commonly considered to be active if the fault has moved one (1) or more times in the last ten thousand (10,000) years, but faults may also be considered active in some cases if movement has occurred in the last five hundred thousand (500,000) years.

"Adaptive management" relies on scientific methods to evaluate how well regulatory and nonregulatory actions protect the critical area. An adaptive management program is a formal and deliberate scientific approach to taking action and obtaining information in the face of uncertainty. 

"Adjacent," for the purposes of this chapter, means immediately adjoining (in contact with the boundary of the influence area) or within a distance that is less than that needed to separate activities from critical areas to ensure protection of the functions and values of the critical areas. "Adjacent" shall mean any activity or development located:

A.    On a site immediately adjoining a critical area;

B.    A distance equal to or less than the required critical area buffer width and building setback;

C.    A distance equal to or less than three hundred (300) feet upland from a stream, wetland, or water body; 

D.    Bordering or within the floodway, floodplain, or channel migration zone; or

E.    A distance equal to or less than two hundred (200) feet from a critical aquifer recharge area.

"Advance mitigation" means mitigation of an anticipated critical area impact or hazard completed according to an approved critical area report and prior to site development.

"Agricultural land" means land primarily devoted to the commercial production of horticultural, viticultural, floricultural, dairy, apiary, or animal products or of berries, grain, hay, straw, turf, seed, Christmas trees not subject to the excise tax imposed by RCW 84.33.100 through 84.33.140, or livestock, and/or that has been designated as long-term commercial significance for agricultural production.

"Alluvial fan flooding" means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.

"Alteration" means any human-induced change in an existing condition of a critical area or its buffer. Alterations include, but are not limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, filling, channelizing, dredging, clearing (vegetation), construction, compaction, excavation, or any other activity that changes the character of the critical area.

"Anadromous fish" means fish that spawn and rear in freshwater and mature in the marine environment. While Pacific salmon die after their first spawning, adult char (bull trout) can live for many years, moving in and out of saltwater and spawning each year. The life history of Pacific salmon and char contains critical periods of time when these fish are more susceptible to environmental and physical damage than at other times. The life history of salmon, for example, contains the following stages: upstream migration of adults, spawning, inter-gravel incubation, rearing, smoltification (the time period needed for juveniles to adjust their body functions to live in the marine environment), downstream migration, and ocean rearing to adults. 

"Applicant" means a person who files an application for permit under this title and who is either the owner of the land on which that proposed activity would be located, a contract purchaser, or the authorized agent of such a person.

"Aquifer" means a geological formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding a significant amount of water to a well or spring.

"Aquifer, confined" means an aquifer bounded above and below by beds of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and that contains groundwater under sufficient pressure for the water to rise above the top of the aquifer.

"Aquifer recharge areas" means areas that, due to the presence of certain soils, geology, and surface water, act to recharge groundwater by percolation.

"Aquifer, sole source" means an area designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, Section 1424(e). The aquifer(s) must supply fifty (50) percent or more of the drinking water for an area without a sufficient replacement available.

"Aquifer susceptibility" means the ease with which contaminants can move from the land surface to the aquifer based solely on the types of surface and subsurface materials in the area. Susceptibility usually defines the rate at which a contaminant will reach an aquifer unimpeded by chemical interactions with the vadose zone media.

"Aquifer, unconfined" means an aquifer not bounded above by a bed of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself and containing groundwater under pressure approximately equal to that of the atmosphere. This term is synonymous with the term "water table aquifer."

"Area of shallow flooding" means an area designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance map(s). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

"Associated wetlands" means those wetlands which are in proximity to and either influence or are influenced by tidal waters or a lake or stream subject to the Shoreline Management Act.

"Base flood" means a flood event having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood. Designations of base flood areas on flood insurance map(s) always include the letters A or V.

"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.

"Best available science" means current scientific information used in the process to designate, protect, or restore critical areas, which is derived from a valid scientific process as defined by WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925. Sources of the best available science are included in "Citations of Recommended Sources of Best Available Science for Designating and Protecting Critical Areas" published by the Washington State Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development.

"Best management practices (BMPs)" means conservation practices or systems of practices and management measures that: 

A.    Control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by high concentrations of nutrients, animal waste, toxics, and sediment;

B.    Minimize adverse impacts to surface water and groundwater flow and circulation patterns and to the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of wetlands;

C.    Protect trees and vegetation designated to be retained during and following site construction and use native plant species appropriate to the site for revegetation of disturbed areas; and

D.    Provide standards for proper use of chemical herbicides within critical areas.

The City shall monitor the application of best management practices to ensure that the standards and policies of this title are adhered to.

"Biodiversity" means the variety of animal and plant life and its ecological processes and interconnections represented by the richness of ecological systems and the life that depends on them, including human life and economies. 

"Breakaway wall" means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

"Buffer" or "buffer zone" means an area that is contiguous to and protects a critical area which is required for the continued maintenance, functioning, and/or structural stability of a critical area.

"Channel migration zone (CMZ)" means the lateral extent of likely movement along a stream or river during the next one hundred (100) years as determined by evidence of active stream channel movement over the past one hundred (100) years. Evidence of active movement over the one hundred (100) year time frame can be inferred from aerial photos or from specific channel and valley bottom characteristics. The time span typically represents the time it takes to grow mature trees that can provide functional large woody debris to streams. A CMZ is not typically present if the valley width is generally less than two (2) bankfull widths, if the stream or river is confined by terraces, no current or historical aerial photographic evidence exists of significant channel movement, and there is no field evidence of secondary channels with recent scour from stream flow or progressive bank erosion at meander bends. Areas separated from the active channel by legally existing artificial channel constraints that limit bank erosion and channel avulsion without hydraulic connections shall not be considered within the CMZ.

"Clearing" means the removal of noninvasive surface vegetation including, but not limited to, brush, shrubs, natural grasses, and trees. Removal of surface vegetation in quantities greater than the minimum necessary to maintain a well functioning natural habitat constitutes clearing. For the purposes of this chapter, activities described in BMC 20.14.630(f), Vegetation Thinning, constitute clearing.   

"Coastal high hazard area" means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources.   The area is designated on the flood insurance map(s) as Zone V1-30, VE, or V.

"Compensation project" means actions necessary to replace project-induced critical area and buffer losses, including land acquisition, planning, construction plans, monitoring, and contingency actions.

"Compensatory mitigation" means replacing project-induced losses or impacts to a critical area, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:

A. "Creation" means actions performed to intentionally establish a critical area such as a wetland at a site where it did not formerly exist.

B. "Enhancement" means actions performed to improve the condition of existing degraded critical areas such as a wetland so that the functions they provide are of a higher quality. 

C. "Preservation" means actions taken to ensure the permanent protection of existing, high-quality critical areas such as wetlands.

D. "Restoration" means actions performed to reestablish critical areas functional characteristics and processes that have been lost by alterations, activities, or catastrophic events within an area that no longer meets the definition of a wetland.

"Conservation easement" means a legal agreement that the property owner enters into to restrict uses of the land. Such restrictions can include, but are not limited to, passive recreation uses such as trails or scientific uses and fences or other barriers to protect habitat. The easement is recorded on a property deed, runs with the land, and is legally binding on all present and future owners of the property, therefore providing permanent or long-term protection. 

"Critical aquifer recharge area" means areas determined to have a critical recharging effect on aquifers used for potable water as classified per BMC 20.14.420.

"Critical areas" include any of the following areas or ecosystems: aquifer recharge areas, fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, frequently flooded areas, geologically hazardous areas, and wetlands, as defined in Chapter 36.70A RCW and this title.

"Critical area tract" means land held in private ownership and retained in an open condition in perpetuity for the protection of critical areas. Lands within this type of dedication may include, but are not limited to, portions and combinations of forest habitats, grasslands, shrub steppes, on-site watersheds, one hundred (100) year floodplains, shorelines or shorelines of statewide significance, riparian areas, and wetlands. 

"Critical facility" means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding, inundation, or impact from a hazard event might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations that produce, use, or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

"Critical species" means all animal and plant species listed by the state or federal government as threatened or endangered.

"Cumulative impacts or effects" means the combined, incremental effects of human activity on ecological or critical areas functions and values. Cumulative impacts result when the effects of an action are added to or interact with other effects in a particular place and within a particular time. It is the combination of these effects, and any resulting environmental degradation, that should be the focus of cumulative impact analysis and changes to policies and permitting decisions.

"Danger tree" means a tree that is dead, or is so affected by a significant structural defect or disease that falling or failure appears imminent, or a tree that impedes safe vision or traffic flow, or that otherwise currently poses a threat to life or property.

Department. Unless otherwise noted, "Department" is defined as the City of Bremerton Department of Community Development.

"Developable area" means a site or portion of a site that may be utilized as the location of development, in accordance with the rules of this title.

"Development" means any activity upon the land consisting of construction or alteration of structures, earth movement, dredging, dumping, grading, filling, mining, removal of any sand, gravel, or minerals, driving of piles, drilling operations, bulkheading, clearing of vegetation, or other land disturbance. Development includes the storage or use of equipment or materials inconsistent with the existing use. Development also includes approvals issued by the City that bind land to specific patterns of use including, but not limited to, subdivisions, short subdivisions, zone changes, conditional use permits, and binding site plans. Development activity does not include the following activities: 

A.    Interior building improvements.

B.    Exterior structure maintenance activities, including painting and roofing.

C.    Routine landscape maintenance of established, ornamental landscaping, such as lawn mowing, pruning, and weeding.

D.    Maintenance of the following existing facilities that does not expand the affected area: septic tanks (routine cleaning); wells; individual utility service connections; and individual cemetery plots in established and approved cemeteries. 

"Development permit" means any permit issued by the City, or other authorized agency, for construction, land use, or the alteration of land.

"Director" means the Director of the Bremerton Department of Community Development or other responsible official, or other City staff granted the authority to act on behalf of the Director.

"Elevated building" means a building that has no basement and its lowest elevated floor is raised aboveground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

"Emergent wetland" means a wetland with at least thirty (30) percent of the surface area covered by erect, rooted, herbaceous vegetation extending above the water surface as the uppermost vegetative strata.

"Erosion" means the process whereby wind, rain, water, and other natural agents mobilize and transport particles.

"Exotic" means any species of plants or animals which are foreign to the planning area. 

"Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas" means areas necessary for maintaining species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that the habitat available is sufficient to support viable populations over the long term, and isolated subpopulations are not created as designated by WAC 365-190-130. These areas include:

A.    Areas with which state or federally designated endangered, threatened, and sensitive species have a primary association;

B.    Priority habitat species and species of local importance including, but not limited to, areas designated as priority habitat by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife;

C.    Streams and watercourses used by juvenile salmonids, and habitat of species essential to the juvenile salmonid diet;

D.    Commercial and recreational shellfish areas;

E.    Kelp, eelgrass beds, herring, smelt, sandlance and other forage fish spawning habitat;

F.    Naturally occurring ponds under twenty (20) acres and their submerged aquatic beds that provide fish or wildlife habitat, including those artificial ponds intentionally created from dry areas in order to mitigate impacts to ponds;

G.    Waters of the state, including lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground waters, salt waters, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the State of Washington;

H.    Lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal entity; 

I.    State natural area preserves and natural resource conservation areas; and

J.    Land essential for preserving connections between habitat blocks and open spaces.

"Fish habitat" means habitat that is used by fish at any life stage at any time of the year, including potential habitat likely to be used by fish that could be recovered by restoration or management and includes off-channel habitat.

"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

"Flood insurance map" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and includes the risk premium zones applicable to the community. Also known as "flood insurance rate map" or "FIRM."

"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

"Floodplain" means the total land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, or lake subject to inundation by the base flood.

"Flood protection elevation" means the elevation that is one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.

"Flood-resistant material" means materials designed to be resistant to the impacts associated with flooding and defined and described in detail in the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Technical Bulletin No. 2-93, 1993, and FEMA publication FEMA-348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage.

"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the surface water elevation more than one (1) foot. Also known as the "zero rise floodway."

"Forested wetland" means a wetland with at least thirty (30) percent of the surface area covered by woody vegetation greater than twenty (20) feet in height that is at least partially rooted within the wetland.

"Formation" means an assemblage of earth materials grouped together into a unit that is convenient for description or mapping.

"Formation, confining" means the relatively impermeable formation immediately overlying a confined aquifer.

"Frequently flooded areas" means lands in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year and those lands that provide important flood storage, conveyance, and attenuation functions, as determined by the Director in accordance with WAC 365-190-080(3). Frequently flooded areas perform important hydrologic functions and may present a risk to persons and property. Classifications of frequently flooded areas include, at a minimum, the one hundred (100) year floodplain designations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the National Flood Insurance Program.

"Functions and values" means the beneficial roles served by critical areas including, but not limited to, water quality protection and enhancement; fish and wildlife habitat; food chain support; flood storage, conveyance and attenuation; groundwater recharge and discharge; erosion control; wave attenuation; protection from hazards; historical, archaeological, and aesthetic value protection; educational opportunities; and recreation. These beneficial roles are not listed in order of priority. Critical area functions can be used to help set targets (species composition, structure, etc.) for managed areas, including mitigation sites. 

"Geologically hazardous areas" means areas that may not be suited to development consistent with public health, safety, or environmental standards, because of their steep slopes, susceptibility to erosion, sliding, earthquakes, or other geological events. For the purposes of this code, "geologically hazardous areas" are those areas receiving high or moderate geologically hazardous classifications per BMC 20.14.600 through 20.14.660. 

"Groundwater" means water in a saturated zone or stratum beneath the surface of land or a surface water body.

"Groundwater management area" means a specific geographic area or subarea designated pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC for which a groundwater management program is required.

"Groundwater management program" means a comprehensive program designed to protect groundwater quality, to ensure groundwater quantity, and to provide for efficient management of water resources while recognizing existing groundwater rights and meeting future needs consistent with local and state objectives, policies, and authorities within a designated groundwater management area or subarea and developed pursuant to Chapter 173-100 WAC. 

"Groundwater, perched" means groundwater in a saturated zone, separated from the underlying main body of groundwater by an unsaturated rock zone.

"Grading" means excavating, filling or embanking of earth materials in quantities equal to or greater than fifty (50) cubic yards, as specified per the Bremerton Municipal Code grading permit requirement.

"Grubbing" means the removal of vegetative matter from underground, such as sod, stumps, roots, buried logs or other debris, and shall include the incidental removal of topsoil and earth in quantities lesser than fifty (50) cubic yards. 

"Habitat conservation areas" means areas designated as fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas.

"Habitat management plan (HMP)" means a report prepared by a professional wildlife biologist or fisheries biologist which discusses and evaluates critical fish and wildlife habitat functions and evaluates the measures necessary to maintain, enhance and improve habitat conservation on a proposed development site.

"Habitats of Local Importance." These areas include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a given species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long-term. These might include areas of high relative density or species richness, breeding habitat, winter range, and movement corridors. These might also include habitats that are of limited availability or high vulnerability to alterations such as cliffs, taluses, and wetlands. (WAC 365-190-030).

"Hazard areas" means areas designated as frequently flooded areas or geologically hazardous areas due to potential for erosion, landslide, seismic activity, mine collapse, or other geological condition.

"Hazardous substances" means any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the physical, chemical, or biological properties described in WAC 173-303-090 or 173-303-100. 

"High-intensity land use" means land uses which are associated with high levels of human disturbance or substantial habitat impacts including, but not limited to, medium- and high-density residential (more than one (1) home per five (5) acres), multifamily residential, some agricultural practices, and commercial and industrial land uses.

"High quality wetlands" means those wetlands that meet the following criteria: 

A.    No, or isolated, human alteration of the wetland topography; 

B.    No human-caused alteration of the hydrology or the wetland appears to have recovered from the alteration; 

C.    Low cover and frequency of exotic plant species;

D.    Relatively little human-related disturbance of the native vegetation, or recovery from past disturbance;

E.    If the wetland system is degraded, it still contains a viable and high quality example of a native wetland community; and

F.    No known major water quality problems.

"Historic condition" means a condition of the land, including flora, fauna, soil, topography, and hydrology that existed before the area and vicinity were developed or altered by human activity.

"Hydraulic project approval (HPA)" means a permit issued by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for modifications to waters of the state in accordance with Chapter 75.20 RCW.

"Hydric soil" means a soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part. The presence of hydric soil shall be determined following the methods described in the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements.

"Hydrologic soil groups" means soils grouped according to their runoff-producing characteristics under similar storm and cover conditions. Properties that influence runoff potential are depth to seasonally high water table, intake rate and permeability after prolonged wetting, and depth to a low permeable layer. Hydrologic soil groups are normally used in equations that estimate runoff from rainfall, but can be used to estimate a rate of water transmission in soil. There are four (4) hydrologic soil groups: 

A. Low runoff potential and a high rate of infiltration potential; 

B. Moderate infiltration potential and a moderate rate of runoff potential; 

C. Slow infiltration potential and a moderate-to-high rate of runoff potential; and 

D. High runoff potential and very slow infiltration and water transmission rates.

"Hydrophytic vegetation" means macrophytic plant life growing in water or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. The presence of hydrophytic vegetation shall be determined following the methods described in the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. 

"Hyporheic zone" means the saturated zone located beneath and adjacent to streams that contains some portion of surface waters, serves as a filter for nutrients, and maintains water quality. 

"Impervious surface" means any material which reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Permeable paving technologies shall not be classified as impervious surfaces. (See also "Paved surface" in BMC 20.42.040 for a discussion of impervious pavements.) 

"In-kind compensation" means to replace critical areas with substitute areas whose characteristics and functions closely approximate those destroyed or degraded by a regulated activity. It does not mean replacement "in category." 

"Infiltration" means the downward entry of water into the immediate surface of soil.

"Injection well(s)" means:

A.    Class I. A well used to inject industrial, commercial, or municipal waste fluids beneath the lowermost formation containing, within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the well bore, an underground source of drinking water.

B.    Class II. A well used to inject fluids:

1.    Brought to the surface in connection with conventional oil or natural gas exploration or production and may be commingled with wastewaters from gas plants that are an integral part of production operations, unless those waters are classified as dangerous wastes at the time of injection;

2.    For enhanced recovery of oil or natural gas; or

3.    For storage of hydrocarbons that are liquid at standard temperature and pressure.

C.    Class III. A well used for extraction of minerals, including but not limited to the injection of fluids for:

1.    In-situ production of uranium or other metals that have not been conventionally mined;

2.    Mining of sulfur by Frasch process; or

3.    Solution mining of salts or potash.

D.    Class IV. A well used to inject dangerous or radioactive waste fluids.

E.    Class V. All injection wells not included in Classes I, II, III, or IV. 

"Invasive" means a vegetative or animal species not native to a region, and marked by a tendency to spread, especially with proclivity to replace healthy native species. 

"Isolated wetlands" means those wetlands that are outside of and not contiguous to any one hundred (100) year floodplain of a lake, river, or stream and have no contiguous hydric soil or hydrophytic vegetation between the wetland and any surface water.

"Joint aquatic resource permits application" means a single application form that may be used to apply for hydraulic project approvals, shoreline management permits, approvals of exceedance of water quality standards, water quality certifications, Coast Guard bridge permits, Washington State Department of Natural Resources use authorization, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permits.

Land Use, High-Intensity. See "High-intensity land use."

Land Use, Low-Intensity. See "Low-intensity land use."

Land Use, Moderate-Intensity. See "Moderate-intensity land use."

"Low-impact development (LID)" is a stormwater management and development strategy applied at the parcel and subdivision scale that emphasizes conservation and use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely mimic predevelopment hydrologic functions. 

"Low-intensity land use" means land uses which are associated with low levels of human disturbance or low habitat impacts, including, but not limited to, passive recreation, open space, or forest management land uses.

"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, which is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable requirements of this title.

"Mine hazard areas" means areas that are underlain by, adjacent to, or affected by mine workings such as adits, gangways, tunnels, drifts, or airshafts, and those areas of probable sink holes, gas releases, or subsidence due to mine workings. Factors that should be considered include: proximity to development, depth from ground surface to the mine working, and geologic material.

"Mitigation" means avoiding, minimizing, or compensating for adverse critical areas impacts. "Mitigation," in the following sequential order of preference, is:

A.    Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;

B.    Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts;

C.    Rectifying the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment to the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project;

D.    Minimizing or eliminating the hazard by restoring or stabilizing the hazard area through engineered or other methods, provided the engineered method creates the minimum disturbance necessary to mitigate the action, and the method does not adversely impact categories of critical areas other than those being mitigated;

E.    Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action;

F.    Compensating for the impact to wetlands, critical aquifer recharge areas, and habitat conservation areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and

G.    Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation and taking remedial action when necessary.

Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures.

"Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "mobile home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."

"Mobile home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

"Moderate-intensity land use" means land uses which are associated with moderate levels of human disturbance or substantial habitat impacts including, but not limited to, low density residential (no more than one (1) home per five (5) acres), active recreation, and moderate agricultural land uses.

"Monitoring" means evaluating the impacts of development proposals on the biological, hydrological, and geological elements of such systems, and assessing the performance of required mitigation measures throughout the collection and analysis of data by various methods for the purpose of understanding and documenting changes in natural ecosystems and features, including gathering baseline data. 

"Native growth protection area (NGPA)" means an area where native vegetation is preserved for the purpose of preventing harm to property and the environment, including, but not limited to, controlling surface water runoff and erosion, maintaining slope stability, buffering, and protecting plants and animal habitat.

"Native vegetation" means plant species that are indigenous to the area in question.

"Natural waters" means waters, excluding water conveyance systems that are artificially constructed and actively maintained for irrigation.

Nonconformity. See BMC 20.54.040, Definitions, of the nonconforming provisions of this title. 

"Off-site compensation" means to replace critical areas away from the site on which a critical area has been impacted. 

"On-site compensation" means to replace critical areas at or adjacent to the site on which a critical area has been impacted.

"Ordinary high water mark (OHM)" means the mark on all lakes, streams, and tidal waters which will be found by examining the beds and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation, as that condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government or the Department; provided, that in any area where the ordinary high water mark cannot be found, the ordinary high water mark adjoining salt water shall be the line of mean higher high tide and the ordinary high water mark adjoining fresh water shall be the line of mean high water.

"Out-of-kind compensation" means to replace critical areas with substitute critical areas whose characteristics do not closely approximate those destroyed or degraded. It does not refer to replacement "out-of-category."

"Permeability" means the capacity of an aquifer or confining bed to transmit water. It is a property of the aquifer or confining bed and is independent of the force causing movement.

"Porous soil types" means soils, as identified by the National Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, that contain voids, pores, interstices, or other openings which allow the passing of water.

"Potable water" means water that is safe and palatable for human use.

"Practical alternative" means an alternative that is available and capable of being carried out after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes, and has less impacts to critical areas. 

"Primary association area" means the area used on a regular basis by, is in close association with, or is necessary for the proper functioning of the habitat of a critical species. "Regular basis" means that the habitat area is normally, or usually, known to contain a critical species, or based on known habitat requirements of the species, the area is likely to contain the critical species. "Regular basis" is species and population dependent. Species that exist in low numbers may be present infrequently yet rely on certain habitat types. 

"Priority habitat" means habitat type or elements with unique or significant value to one (1) or more species as classified by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife. A priority habitat may consist of a unique vegetation type or dominant plant species, a described successional stage, or a specific structural element.

"Project area" means all areas within fifty (50) feet of the area proposed to be disturbed, altered, or used by the proposed activity or the construction of any proposed structures. When the action binds the land, such as a subdivision, short subdivision, binding site plan, planned unit development, or rezone, the project area shall include the entire parcel, at a minimum.

"Qualified professional" means a person with experience and training in the pertinent scientific discipline, and who is a qualified scientific expert with expertise appropriate for the relevant critical area subject in accordance with WAC 365-195-905(4). A qualified professional must have obtained a B.S. or B.A. or equivalent degree in biology, engineering, environmental studies, fisheries, geomorphology, or related field, and five (5) years of related work experience. 

A.    A qualified professional for habitats or wetlands must have a degree in biology and professional experience related to the subject species, and meet the requirements set forth in BMC 20.14.360.

B.    A qualified professional for a geological hazard must be a professional civil or geotechnical engineer with experience in the field, or geologist, licensed in the State of Washington.

C.    A qualified professional for critical aquifer recharge areas means a hydrogeologist, geologist, engineer, or other scientist with experience in preparing hydrogeologic assessments, and meets the requirements set forth in BMC 20.14.450.

"Recharge" means the process involved in the absorption and addition of water to groundwater.

"Reclaimed water" means municipal wastewater effluent that has been adequately and reliably treated so that it is suitable for beneficial use. Following treatment, it is no longer considered wastewater (treatment levels and water quality requirements are given in the water reclamation and reuse standards adopted by the State Departments of Ecology and Health). 

Recreation Vehicle. See definition in Chapter 20.42 BMC. 

"Repair" or "maintenance" means an activity that restores the character, scope, size, and design of a serviceable area, structure, or land use to its previously authorized and undamaged condition. Activities that change the character, size, or scope of a project beyond the original design and drain, dredge, fill, flood, or otherwise alter critical areas are not included in this definition.

"Restoration" means measures taken to restore an altered or damaged natural feature including:

A.    Active steps taken to restore damaged wetlands, streams, protected habitat, or their buffers to the functioning condition that existed prior to an unauthorized alteration; and 

B.    Actions performed to reestablish structural and functional characteristics of the critical area that have been lost by alteration, past management activities, or catastrophic events.

"Riparian habitat" means areas adjacent to aquatic systems with flowing water that contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems that mutually influence each other. The width of these areas extends to that portion of the terrestrial landscape that directly influences the aquatic ecosystem by providing shade, fine or large woody material, nutrients, organic and inorganic debris, terrestrial insects, or habitat for riparian-associated wildlife. Widths shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark or from the top of bank if the ordinary high water mark cannot be identified or from the channel migration zone (CMZ). It includes the entire extent of the floodplain and the extent of vegetation adapted to wet conditions as well as adjacent upland plant communities that directly influence the stream system. Riparian habitat areas include those riparian areas severely altered or damaged due to human development activities.

"Scientific process" means a valid scientific process is one (1) that produces reliable information useful in understanding the consequences of a decision. The characteristics of a valid scientific process are as follows:    

A.    Peer Review. The information has been critically reviewed by other qualified scientific experts in that scientific discipline. 

B.    Methods. The methods that were used are standardized in the pertinent scientific discipline or the methods have been appropriately peer-reviewed to ensure their reliability and validity.

C.    Logical Conclusions and Reasonable Inferences. The conclusions presented are based on reasonable assumptions supported by other studies and are logically and reasonably derived from the assumptions and supported by the data presented. 

D.    Quantitative Analysis. The data have been analyzed using appropriate statistical or quantitative methods.

E.    Context. The assumptions, analytical techniques, data, and conclusions are appropriately framed with respect to the prevailing body of pertinent scientific knowledge.

F.    References. The assumptions, techniques, and conclusions are well referenced with citations to pertinent existing information.

"Scrub-shrub wetland" means a wetland with at least thirty (30) percent of its surface area covered by woody vegetation less than twenty (20) feet in height at the uppermost strata.

"Section 404 permit" means a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for the placement of dredge or fill material or clearing in waters of the United States, including wetlands, in accordance with 33 USC Section 1344. Section 404 permits may also be for endangered species consultation. They require a consultation under Section 7 of the Federal Endangered Species Act. 

"Seeps" means a spot where water oozes from the earth, often forming the source of a small stream.

"Seismic hazard areas" means areas that are subject to severe risk of damage as a result of earthquake-induced ground shaking, slope failure, settlement, or soil liquefaction.

"Shorelines" means all of the water areas of the state as defined in RCW 90.58.030, including reservoirs and their associated shorelands, together with the lands underlying them except:

A.    Shorelines of statewide significance; 

B.    Shorelines on segments of streams upstream of a point where the mean annual flow is twenty (20) cubic feet per second (20 cfps) or less and the wetlands associated with such upstream segments; and

C.    Shorelines on lakes less than twenty (20) acres in size and wetlands associated with such small lakes.

"Shorelines of the state" means the total of all "shorelines," as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(d), and "shorelines of statewide significance" within the state, as defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(c). 

"Shorelines of statewide significance" means those areas defined in RCW 90.58.030(2)(e). 

"Shorelands or shoreland areas" means those lands extending landward for two hundred (200) feet in all directions as measured on a horizontal plane from the ordinary high water mark; floodways and contiguous floodplain areas landward two hundred (200) feet from such floodways; and all wetlands and river deltas associated with the streams, lakes, and tidal waters which are subject to the provisions of Chapter 90.58 RCW. 

"Soil survey" means the most recent soil survey for the local area or county by the National Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

"Special flood hazard areas" means the land in the floodplain within an area subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designations of special flood hazard areas on flood insurance map(s) always include the letters A or V.

"Special protection areas" means aquifer recharge areas defined by WAC 173-200-090 that require special consideration or increased protection because of unique characteristics, including, but not limited to:

A.    Groundwaters that support an ecological system requiring more stringent criteria than drinking water standards;

B.    Groundwater recharge areas and wellhead protection areas that are vulnerable to pollution because of hydrogeologic characteristics; and

C.    Sole source aquifer status.

"Species" means any group of animals classified as a species or subspecies as commonly accepted by the scientific community.

"Species, endangered" means any fish or wildlife species that is threatened with extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range and is listed by the state or federal government as an endangered species.

"Species of local importance" means those species of local concern due to their population status or their sensitivity to habitat manipulation, or that are game species.

"Species, priority" means any fish or wildlife species requiring protective measures and/or management guidelines to ensure their persistence as genetically viable population levels as classified by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, including endangered, threatened, sensitive, candidate and monitor species, and those of recreational, commercial, or tribal importance. 

"Species, threatened" means any fish or wildlife species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout a significant portion of its range without cooperative management or removal of threats, and is listed by the state or federal government as a threatened species.

"Subdrainage basin" or "subbasin" means the drainage area of the highest order stream containing the subject property impact area. "Stream order" is the term used to define the position of a stream in the hierarchy of tributaries in the watershed. The smallest streams are the highest order (first order) tributaries. These are the upper watershed streams and have no tributaries of their own. When two (2) first order streams meet, they form a second order stream, and when two (2) second order streams meet they become a third order stream, and so on.

"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 

"Unavoidable" means adverse impacts that remain after all appropriate and practicable avoidance and minimization have been achieved.

"Vulnerability" means the combined effect of susceptibility to contamination and the presence of potential contaminants.

"Water-dependent" means a use or portion of a use that cannot exist in a location that is not adjacent to the water, but is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. A use that can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water. Examples of water-dependent uses include: ship cargo terminal loading areas; fishing; ferry and passenger terminals; barge loading, ship building, and dry docking facilities; marinas, moorage, and boat launching facilities; aquaculture; float plane operations; surface water intake; and sanitary sewer and storm drain outfalls.

"Water resource inventory area (WRIA)" means one (1) of sixty-two (62) watersheds in the State of Washington, each composed of the drainage areas of a stream or streams, as established in Chapter 173-500 WAC as it existed on January 1, 1997.

"Water table" means that surface in an unconfined aquifer at which the pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the aquifer just far enough to hold standing water.

"Water typing system" means waters are classified according to WAC 222-16-031. Waters are classified into four (4) types, S, F, Np, and Ns, based on whether the waters are shorelines of the state, their level of human and wildlife use, whether they are perennial streams, and other characteristics. Complete criteria for the water typing system are found in BMC 20.14.720. 

"Watercourse" means any portion of a channel, bed, bank, or bottom waterward of the ordinary high water line of waters of the state including areas in which fish may spawn, reside, or through which they may pass, and tributary waters with defined beds or banks, which influence the quality of fish habitat downstream. This definition includes watercourses that flow on an intermittent basis or which fluctuate in level during the year and applies to the entire bed of such watercourse whether or not the water is at peak level. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, stormwater runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses, except where they exist in a natural watercourse that has been altered by humans.

"Well" means a bored, drilled, or driven shaft, or a dug hole whose depth is greater than the largest surface dimension for the purpose of withdrawing or injecting water or other liquids.

"Wellhead protection area (WHPA)" means the portion of a zone of contribution for a well, wellfield, or spring, as defined using criteria established by the Washington State Department of Ecology.

"Wetland classes," "classes of wetlands," or "wetland types" means the descriptive classes of the wetlands taxonomic classification system of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cowardin, et al., 1979).

"Wetland edge" means the boundary of a wetland as delineated based on the definitions contained in this title.

"Wetlands" means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands do not include those artificial wetlands intentionally created from nonwetland sites, including, but not limited to irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales, canals, detention facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, farm ponds, and landscape amenities, or those wetlands created after July 1, 1990, that were unintentionally created as a result of the construction of a road, street, or highway. Wetlands include artificial wetlands created from nonwetland areas to mitigate the conversion of wetlands. Identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries pursuant to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the City meeting the wetland designation criteria in that procedure are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this program. Wetland delineations are valid for five (5) years; after such date, the City shall determine whether a revision or additional assessment is necessary.

"Wetlands mitigation bank" means a site where wetlands are restored, created, enhanced, or in exceptional circumstances, preserved expressly for the purpose of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts to similar resources.

"Zone of contribution" means the area surrounding a well or spring that encompasses all areas or features that supply groundwater recharge to the well or spring. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.300 WETLANDS.

BMC 20.14.310 through 20.14.360 pertain to wetlands. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.310 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

(a)    As identified currently in WAC 173-22-035 and as subsequently amended, identification of wetlands and delineation of their boundaries shall be done in accordance with the approved federal wetland delineation manual and applicable regional supplements. All areas within the City meeting the wetland designation criteria in the identification and delineation manual, regardless of any formal identification, are hereby designated critical areas and are subject to the provisions of this title.

(b)    Wetlands help to maintain water quality; store and convey stormwater and floodwater; recharge groundwater; provide important fish and wildlife habitat; and serve as areas for recreation, education, scientific study and aesthetic appreciation.

(c)    The City’s overall goal shall be to achieve no net loss of wetlands. This goal shall be implemented through retention of the function and value of wetlands within the City. Wetland buffers serve to moderate runoff volume and flow rates; reduce sediment, chemical nutrient and toxic pollutants; provide shading to maintain desirable water temperatures; provide habitat for wildlife; protect wetland resources from harmful intrusion; and generally preserve the ecological integrity of the wetland area.

(d)    The primary purpose of the wetland regulations is to avoid detrimental wetland impacts and achieve a goal of no net loss of wetland function and values, and where possible enhance and restore wetlands. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.320 CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

(a)    Wetland Ratings. Wetlands shall be rated according to the Washington State Department of Ecology wetland rating system found in the "Washington State Wetland Rating System for Western Washington" (Department of Ecology Publication No. 14-06-029) or as amended hereafter. These documents contain the definitions and methods for determining if the criteria below are met.

(1)    Wetland Rating Categories.

(i)    Category I. Category I wetlands are those that meet any of the following criteria:

a.    Represent a unique or rare wetland type; or 

b.    Are more sensitive to disturbance than most wetlands; or 

c.    Are relatively undisturbed and contain ecological attributes that are impossible to replace within a human lifetime; or

d.    Are providing a high level of functions, scoring twenty-three (23) points or more, out of twenty-seven (27) (DOE Wetlands Rating System, 2014); or

e.    Are characterized as wetlands of high conservation value per the Washington Natural Heritage Program (WNHP); or

f.    Are characterized as a bog; or

g.    Are over one (1) acre and characterized as a mature and old-growth forested wetland or are an estuarine wetland.

(ii)    Category II. Category II wetlands are those wetlands that are not Category I wetlands and that meet any of the following criteria:

a.    Provide high levels of some functions, being difficult, though not impossible to replace; or

b.    Perform most functions relatively well, scoring twenty (20) to twenty-two (22) points out of twenty-seven (27) (DOE Wetlands Rating System, 2014); or

c.    Estuarine wetlands smaller than one (1) acre or those that are distributed and larger than one (1) acre.

(iii)    Category III. Category III wetlands are those wetlands that are not Category I or II wetlands, and that meet the following criterion:

a.    Provide moderate levels of functions, scoring between sixteen (16) and nineteen (19) points out of twenty-seven (27) (DOE Wetland Rating System, 2014).

(iv)    Category IV. Category IV wetlands are those that meet the following criterion:

a.    Provide low levels of functions, scoring less than sixteen (16) points out of twenty-seven (27) (DOE Wetlands Rating System, 2014).

(2)    Date of Wetland Rating. Wetland rating categories shall be applied as the wetland exists on the date of adoption of the rating system by the local government as the wetland naturally changes thereafter, or as the wetland changes in accordance with permitted activities. Wetland rating categories shall not change due to illegal modifications. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.330 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - WETLANDS. 

(a)    Activities may only be permitted in a wetland or wetland buffer if the applicant can show that the proposed activity will not degrade the functions and functional performance of the wetland and other critical areas.

(b)    Activities and uses shall be prohibited in wetlands and wetland buffers, except as provided for in this title. The following activities are regulated if they occur in a regulated wetland or its buffer:

(1)    The removal, excavation, grading, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, minerals, organic matter, or material of any kind.

(2)    The dumping of, discharging of, or filling with any material.

(3)    The draining, flooding, or disturbing of the water level or water table.

(4)    Pile driving.

(5)    The placing of obstructions.

(6)    The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or expansion of any structure.

(7)    The destruction or alteration of wetland vegetation through clearing, harvesting, shading, intentional burning, or planting of vegetation that would alter the character of a regulated wetland.

(8)    Class IV general forest practices under the authority of the "1992 Washington State Forest Practices Act Rules and Regulations," WAC 222-12-030, or as thereafter amended.

(9)    Activities that result in:

(i)    A significant change of water temperature.

(ii)    A significant change of physical or chemical characteristics of the sources of water to the wetland.

(iii)    A significant change in the quantity, timing, or duration of the water entering the wetland.

(iv)    The introduction of pollutants.

(c)    Activities Allowed in Wetlands. The activities listed below are allowed in wetlands. These activities do not require submission of a critical area report, except where such activities result in a loss of the functions and values of a wetland or wetland buffer. Any ground disturbing activity or placement of fill within wetlands or in-water may also require state or federal approval and it is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that they obtain necessary authorization before beginning work. These activities include:

(1)    Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, shellfish, and/or other wildlife that does not entail changing the structure or functions of the existing wetland.

(2)    Drilling for utilities/utility corridors under a wetland, with entrance/exit portals located completely outside of the wetland buffer; provided, that the drilling does not interrupt the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column. Specific studies by a hydrologist are necessary to determine whether the ground water connection to the wetland or percolation of surface water down through the soil column will be disturbed.

(3)    Enhancement of a wetland through the removal of nonnative invasive plant species. Removal of invasive plant species shall be restricted to hand removal unless permits from the appropriate regulatory agencies have been obtained for approved biological or chemical treatments.

(4)    Educational and scientific research activities.

(d)    Category I Wetlands. Activities and uses shall be prohibited from Category I.

(e)    Category II and III Wetlands. With respect to activities proposed in Category II and III wetlands, the following standards shall apply: 

(1)    Water-dependent activities may be allowed where there are no feasible alternatives that would have a less adverse impact on the wetland, its buffers and other critical areas.

(2)    Where nonwater-dependent activities are proposed, it shall be presumed that alternative locations are available, and activities and uses shall be prohibited, unless the applicant demonstrates that: 

(i)    The basic project purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished and successfully avoid, or result in less adverse impact on, a wetland on another site or sites in the general region; and 

(ii)    All alternative designs of the project as proposed that would avoid or result in less of an adverse impact on a wetland or its buffer, such as a reduction in the size, scope, configuration, or density of the project, are not feasible.

(iii)    Full compensation for the acreage and loss functions will be provided under the terms established under BMC 20.14.340(f) and (g).

(f)    Category III and IV Wetlands. Isolated Category III and IV wetlands less than one thousand (1,000) square feet that meet all of the following criteria shall be exempt from the buffer provisions in subsection (h) of this section and the normal mitigation sequencing process in BMC 20.14.340(a). Any direct impacts to these wetlands shall be fully mitigated.

(1)    Is not associated with riparian areas or buffers;

(2)    Is not part of a wetland mosaic; and

(3)    Does not contain habitat identified by Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife as essential for local populations of priority species, as identified under BMC 20.14.720.

(g)    Category IV Wetlands. Activities and uses that result in unavoidable and necessary impacts may be permitted in Category IV wetlands and associated buffers in accordance with an approved wetland report and mitigation plan, and only if the proposed activity is the only reasonable alternative that will accomplish the applicant’s objectives. Full compensation for the acreage and loss functions will be provided under the terms established under BMC 20.14.340(f) and (g). 

(h)    Wetland Buffers.

(1)     Standard Buffer Widths. The standard buffer widths presume the existence of a relatively intact native vegetation community in the buffer zone adequate to protect the wetland functions and values at the time of the proposed activity. If the vegetation is inadequate, then the buffer width shall be increased or the buffer should be planted to maintain the standard width. Required standard wetland buffers, based on wetland category, are as outlined in the following table. In the table the wetland buffers vary according to the wetland type and/or habitat score (on a range of three (3) to nine (9), with nine (9) representing high habitat function).

	Wetland Category and Type	Buffer Width (in Feet) Based on Habitat Score

	3-4 (Low)	5 (Medium)	6-7 (Medium)	8-9 (High)

	I: Estuarine wetlands	200

	I: All others	100	140	220	300

	II: Estuarine wetlands	150

	II: All	100	140	220	300

	III: All	80	140	220	300

	IV: All	50

(2)    Measurement of Wetland Buffers. All buffers shall be measured horizontally from a perpendicular line established at the wetland edge as surveyed in the field. The width of the wetland buffer shall be determined according to the wetland category. The buffer for a wetland created, restored, or enhanced as compensation for approved wetland alterations shall be the same as the buffer required for the category of the created, restored, or enhanced wetland. Only fully vegetated buffers will be considered. Lawns, walkways, driveways, and other mowed or paved areas will not be considered buffers. 

(3)    Reducing Wetland Buffer Widths. For those projects that can mitigate the impacts and disturbances associated with surrounding land use, required wetland buffer widths may be reduced. The following table lists impact-minimization measures which, when implemented where applicable, may allow a project to reduce the standard wetland buffer widths by no more than twenty-five (25) percent:

	Disturbance	Required Measures to Minimize Impacts

	Lights	(1) Direct lights away from wetland as illustrated in a photometric plan.

	Noise	(2) Locate activity that generates noise away from wetland.

	(3) If warranted, enhance existing buffer with native vegetation plantings adjacent to noise source.

	(4) For activities that generate relatively continuous, potentially disruptive noise, such as certain heavy industry or mining, establish an additional ten (10) feet of heavily vegetated buffer strip immediately adjacent to the outer wetland buffer.

	Toxic runoff	(5) Route all new, untreated runoff away from wetland while ensuring wetland is not dewatered.

	(6) Establish covenants limiting use of pesticides within one hundred fifty (150) feet of wetland.

	Stormwater runoff	(7) Retrofit stormwater detention and treatment for roads and existing adjacent development.

	(8) Prevent channelized flow from lawns that directly enters the buffer.

	(9) Use low intensity development best management practices where appropriate.

	Change in water regime	(10) Infiltrate or treat, detain, and disperse into buffer new runoff from impervious surfaces and new lawns.

	Pets and human disturbance	(11) Use privacy fencing or plant dense vegetation to delineate buffer edge and to discourage disturbance using vegetation appropriate for the ecoregion.

	(12) Place wetland and its buffer in a separate tract or protect with a conservation easement.

	Dust	(13) Use best management practices to control dust.

	Disruption of corridors or connections	(14) Maintain connections to off-site areas that are undisturbed.

	(15) Restore on-site corridors or connections to off-site habitats by replanting.

(4)    Increased Wetland Buffer Widths. The Director shall require increased buffer widths in accordance with the recommendations of an experienced, qualified professional wetland scientist, and the best available science on a case-by-case basis when a larger buffer is necessary to protect wetland functions and values based on site-specific characteristics. This determination shall be based on one (1) or more of the following criteria:

(i)    A larger buffer is needed to protect other critical areas; 

(ii)    The buffer or adjacent uplands has a slope greater than fifteen (15) percent or is susceptible to erosion and standard erosion-control measures will not prevent adverse impacts to the wetland; or

(iii)    The buffer area has minimal vegetative cover. In lieu of increasing the buffer width where existing buffer vegetation is inadequate to protect the wetland functions and values, implementation of a buffer planting plan may substitute. Where a buffer planting plan is proposed, it shall include densities that are not less than three (3) feet on center for shrubs and eight (8) feet on center for trees and require monitoring and maintenance to ensure success. Existing buffer vegetation is considered "inadequate" and will need to be enhanced through additional native plantings and (if appropriate) removal of nonnative plants when: (1) nonnative or invasive plant species provide the dominant cover, (2) vegetation is lacking due to disturbance and wetland resources could be adversely affected, or (3) enhancement plantings in the buffer could significantly improve buffer functions. 

(5)    Wetland Buffer Width Averaging. The Director may allow modification of the standard wetland buffer width in accordance with an approved wetland report and the best available science on a case-by-case basis by averaging buffer widths. Averaging of buffer widths may only be allowed where the applicant and a qualified professional wetland scientist demonstrate that: 

(i)    No feasible site design exists without buffer averaging;

(ii)    It will not reduce wetland functions or functional performance;

(iii)    The wetland contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics or the character of the buffer varies in slope, soils, or vegetation, and the wetland would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places; 

(iv)    The total area contained in the buffer area after averaging is no less than that which would be contained within the standard buffer; and

(v)    The buffer width is not reduced to less than seventy-five (75) percent of the standard width or thirty-five (35) feet. 

(6)    Buffer Consistency. All mitigation sites shall have buffers consistent with the buffer requirements of this chapter. 

(7)    Buffer Maintenance. Except as otherwise specified or allowed in accordance with this title, wetland buffers shall be retained in an undisturbed or enhanced condition. Removal of invasive nonnative weeds is required for the duration of the mitigation bond.

(8)    Buffer Uses. The following uses may be permitted within a wetland buffer in accordance with the review procedures of this title, provided they are not prohibited by any other applicable law and they are conducted in a manner so as to minimize impacts to the buffer and adjacent wetland:

(i)    Conservation and Restoration Activities. Conservation or restoration activities aimed at protecting the soil, water, vegetation, or wildlife.

(ii)    Passive Recreation. Low-impact uses and activities which are consistent with the purpose and function of the wetland buffer and do not detract from its integrity may be permitted within the buffer depending on the sensitivity of the wetland. Uses may include:

a.    Walkways and trails; provided, that those pathways that are generally parallel to the perimeter of the wetland may be located in the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer area and located to avoid removal of significant trees; provided, that:

i.    They are no wider than six (6) feet, and generally constructed with a surface that does not interfere with substrate permeability. Raised boardwalks utilizing nontreated pilings may be acceptable; and

ii.    They shall be limited to pedestrian use; and

iii.    They shall not be allowed to fully enclose a habitat area or buffer; and

iv.    They are subject to closure (at the Director’s discretion) during critical spawning, migration or breeding time periods of the species present;

b.    Wildlife viewing structures; and

c.    Fishing access areas down to the water’s edge that shall be no larger than six (6) feet.

(iii)    Stormwater Management Facilities. Stormwater management facilities, limited to stormwater dispersion outfalls and bioswales, may be allowed within the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer of Category III or IV wetlands only; provided, that:

a.    No other location is feasible; and

b.    The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the wetland. 

(iv)    Low-Impact Development (LID) Facilities. LID facilities may be allowed within the buffer of Category III or IV wetlands only; provided, that:

a.    No other location is feasible; and

b.    The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the wetland. 

(i)    Signs and Fencing of Wetlands.

(1)    Temporary Markers. The outer perimeter of the wetland or buffer and the limits of those areas to be disturbed pursuant to an approved permit or authorization shall be marked in the field in such a way as to ensure that no unauthorized intrusion will occur and is subject to inspection prior to the commencement of permitted activities. This temporary marking shall be maintained throughout construction and shall not be removed until permanent signs, if required, are in place.

(2)    Permanent Signs. As a condition of any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter, the Director may require the applicant to install permanent signs along the boundary of a wetland or buffer.

(i)    Permanent signs shall be made of an enamel-coated metal face and attached to a metal post, or another nontreated material of equal durability. Signs must be posted at an interval of one (1) per lot or every fifty (50) feet, whichever is less, and must be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. The sign shall be worded as follows or with alternative language approved by the Director:

Protected Wetland Area

Do Not Disturb

Contact City of Bremerton

Department of Community Development

Regarding Uses and Restriction

(3)    Fencing.

(i)    The Director shall determine if fencing is necessary to protect the functions and values of the critical area. If found to be necessary, any permit or authorization issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned to require the applicant to install a permanent fence at the edge of the wetland buffer when fencing will prevent future impacts to the wetland. 

(ii)    Fencing installed as part of a proposed activity or as required in this subsection shall be designed so as to not interfere with species migration, including fish runs, and shall be constructed in a manner that minimizes impacts to the wetland and associated habitat. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.340 MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS - WETLANDS.

Compensatory mitigation for alterations to wetlands shall achieve equivalent or greater biologic functions. Compensatory mitigation plans shall be consistent with the State Department of Ecology publication "Guidance on Wetland Mitigation in Washington State," 2006 (Publication Nos. 06-06-011a and 06-06-011b), or as revised.

(a)    Mitigation shall be required in the following order of preference:

(1)    Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action.

(2)    Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps to avoid or reduce impacts.

(3)    Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment.

(4)    Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations.

(5)    Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments.

(b)    Mitigation for Lost or Affected Functions. Compensatory mitigation actions shall address functions affected by the alteration to achieve functional equivalency or improvement and shall provide similar wetland functions as those lost, except when:

(1)    The lost wetland provides minimal functions as determined by a site-specific function assessment, and the proposed compensatory mitigation action(s) will provide equal or greater functions or will provide functions shown to be limiting within a watershed through a formal Washington State watershed assessment plan or protocol; or 

(2)    Out-of-kind replacement will best meet formally identified watershed goals, such as replacement of historically diminished wetland types. 

(c)    Preference of Mitigation Actions. Mitigation actions that require compensation by replacing, enhancing, or substitution shall occur in the following order of preference:

(1)    Restoring wetlands on upland sites that were formerly wetlands.

(2)    Creating wetlands on disturbed upland sites such as those with vegetative cover consisting primarily of nonnative introduced species. This should only be attempted when there is a consistent source of hydrology and it can be shown that the surface and subsurface hydrologic regime is conducive for the wetland community that is being designed.

(3)    Enhancing significantly degraded wetlands in combination with restoration or creation. Such enhancement should be part of a mitigation package that includes replacing the impacted area meeting appropriate ratio requirements.

(d)    Type and Location of Mitigation. Unless it is demonstrated that a higher level of ecological functioning would result from an alternate approach, compensatory mitigation for ecological functions shall be either in kind and on site, or in kind and within the same stream reach, subbasin, or drift cell. Mitigation actions shall be conducted within the same subdrainage basin and on the site as the alteration except when all of the following apply:

(1)    There are no reasonable on-site or in-subdrainage basin opportunities or on-site and in-subdrainage basin opportunities do not have a high likelihood of success, after a determination of the natural capacity of the site to mitigate for the impacts. Consideration should include: anticipated wetland mitigation replacement ratios, buffer conditions and proposed widths, hydrogeomorphic classes of on-site wetlands when restored, proposed flood storage capacity, potential to mitigate riparian fish and wildlife impacts (such as connectivity);

(2)    Off-site mitigation has a greater likelihood of providing equal or improved wetland functions than the impacted wetland; and

(3)    Off-site locations shall be in the same subdrainage basin unless:

(i)    Established watershed goals for water quality, flood or conveyance, habitat, or other wetland functions have been established and strongly justify location of mitigation at another site; or

(ii)    Credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank or state-approved in-lieu fee (ILF) site are used as mitigation and the use of credits is consistent with the terms of the bank’s certification or ILF approval.

(e)    Mitigation Timing. Mitigation projects shall be completed with an approved monitoring plan prior to activities that will disturb wetlands. In all other cases, mitigation shall be completed immediately following disturbance and prior to use or occupancy of the activity or development. Construction of mitigation projects shall be timed to reduce impacts to existing fisheries, wildlife, and flora.

(1)    The Director may authorize a one (1) time temporary delay, up to one hundred twenty (120) days, in completing minor construction and landscaping when environmental conditions could produce a high probability of failure or significant construction difficulties. The delay shall not create or perpetuate hazardous conditions or environmental damage or degradation, and the delay shall not be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. The request for the temporary delay must include a written justification that documents the environmental constraints that preclude implementation of the mitigation plan. The justification must be verified and approved by the City and include a financial guarantee.

(f)    Mitigation Ratios.

(1)    Acreage Replacement Ratios. The following ratios shall apply to creation or restoration that is in kind, is on site, is the same category, is timed prior to or concurrent with alteration, and has a high probability of success. These ratios do not apply to remedial actions resulting from unauthorized alterations; greater ratios shall apply in those cases. These ratios do not apply to the use of credits from a state-certified wetland mitigation bank or approved ILF site. When credits from a certified bank or approved ILF site are used, replacement ratios should be consistent with the requirements of the bank’s certification or site’s approved instrument. The first number specifies the acreage of replacement wetlands and the second specifies the acreage of wetlands altered.

	Wetland Category	Wetland Mitigation Type and Replacement Ratio

	Creation	Reestablishment	Rehabilitation	Enhancement Only

	Category I	6:1	6:1	12:1	Not allowed

	Category II	3:1	3:1	6:1	12:1

	Category III	2:1	2:1	4:1	8:1

	Category IV	1.5:1	1.5:1	3:1	6:1

(2)    Increased Replacement Ratio. The Director may increase the ratios under the following circumstances:

(i)    Uncertainty exists as to the probable success of the proposed restoration or creation; 

(ii)    A significant period of time will elapse between impact and replication of wetland functions; 

(iii)    Proposed mitigation will result in a lower category wetland or reduced functions relative to the wetland being impacted; or

(iv)    The impact was an unauthorized impact. 

(g)    Wetlands Enhancement as Mitigation.

(1)    Impacts to wetland functions may be mitigated by enhancement of existing significantly degraded wetlands, but where feasible should be used in conjunction with restoration and/or creation. Applicants proposing to enhance wetlands must produce a wetland report that identifies how enhancement will increase the functions of the degraded wetland and how this increase will adequately mitigate for the loss of wetland area and function at the impact site. An enhancement proposal must also show whether existing wetland functions will be reduced by the enhancement actions. 

(2)    Ratios for rehabilitation and enhancement may be reduced when combined with one to one (1:1) replacement through creation or reestablishment. See Table 1a, Wetland Mitigation in Washington State - Part 1: Agency Policies and Guidance - Version 1 (Ecology Publication No. 06-06-011a, Olympia, WA, March 2006 or as revised).

(h)    Mitigation of Wetland Buffer Impacts. Compensation for wetland buffer impacts shall occur at a minimum one to one (1:1) ratio. Compensatory mitigation for buffer impacts shall include enhancement of degraded buffers by planting native species and removing structures and impervious surfaces within buffers.

(i)    Wetland Mitigation Banks.

(1)    Credits from a wetland mitigation bank may be approved for use as compensation for unavoidable impacts to wetlands when:

(i)    The bank is certified under Chapter 173-700 WAC; and

(ii)    The Director determines that the wetland mitigation bank provides appropriate compensation for the authorized impacts; and

(iii)    The proposed use of credits is consistent with the terms and conditions of the bank’s certification.

(2)    Replacement ratios for projects using bank credits shall be consistent with replacement ratios specified in the bank’s certification.

(3)    Credits from a certified wetland mitigation bank may be used to compensate for impacts located within the service area specified in the bank’s certification. In some cases, bank service areas may include portions of more than one (1) adjacent drainage basin for specific wetland functions.

(j)    Wetland Mitigation Monitoring. The mitigation plan shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project and for assessing a completed project. A protocol shall be included outlining the schedule for site monitoring, and how the monitoring data will be evaluated. A monitoring report shall be submitted as needed to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. The compensation project shall be monitored for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met, but not for a period less than five (5) years. The Director shall have the authority to modify or extend the monitoring period and require additional monitoring reports for up to ten (10) years when any of the following conditions apply:

(1)    The project does not meet the performance standards identified in the mitigation plan;

(2)    The project does not provide adequate replacement for the functions and values of the impacted critical area;

(3)    The project involves establishment of forested plant communities, which require longer time for establishment. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.350 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - SUBDIVISIONS.

The subdivision and short subdivision of land in wetlands and associated buffers is subject to the following:

(a)    Land that is located wholly within a wetland or its buffer may not be subdivided. 

(b)    Land that is located partially within a wetland or its buffer may be subdivided; provided, that an accessible and contiguous portion of each new lot is located outside of the wetland and its buffer.

(c)    Access roads and utilities serving the proposed subdivision may be permitted within the wetland and associated buffers only if the City determines that no other feasible alternative exists and when consistent with this title and all other required state and federal approvals. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.360 WETLAND REPORT. 

Critical area reports for wetlands must meet the requirements of this section. 

(a)    Preparation by a Qualified Professional. A critical area report for wetlands shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a certified professional wetland scientist or a noncertified professional wetland scientist with a minimum of five (5) years experience in the field of wetland science and with experience preparing wetland reports.   

(b)    Area Addressed in Wetland Report. The following areas shall be addressed in a critical area report for wetlands:

(1)    The project area of the proposed activity; 

(2)    All wetlands and recommended buffers within three hundred (300) feet of the project area; and

(3)    All shoreline areas, water features, floodplains, and other critical areas, and related buffers within three hundred (300) feet of the project area.

(c)    Wetland Analysis. A critical area report for wetlands shall contain an analysis of the wetlands including the following site- and proposal-related information at a minimum:

(1)    A written assessment and accompanying maps of the wetlands and buffers within three hundred (300) feet of the project area, including the following information at a minimum:

(i)    Wetland delineation and required buffers; 

(ii)    Existing wetland acreage; 

(iii)    Wetland category; 

(iv)    Vegetative, faunal, and hydrologic characteristics; 

(v)    Soil and substrate conditions;

(vi)    Topographic elevations, at two (2) foot contours; and

(vii)    A discussion of the water sources supplying the wetland and documentation of hydrologic regime (locations of inlet and outlet features, water depths throughout the wetland, evidence of recharge or discharge, evidence of water depths throughout the year: drift lines, algal layers, moss lines, and sediment deposits).

(2)    A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing wetlands and restore any wetlands that were degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity.

(3)    A habitat and native vegetation conservation strategy that addresses methods to protect and enhance on-site habitat and wetland functions.

(4)    Functional evaluation for the wetland and adjacent buffer using a local or state agency staff-recognized method and including the reference of the method and all data sheets. 

(5)    Proposed mitigation, if needed, including a written assessment and accompanying maps of the mitigation area, including the following information at a minimum: 

(i)    Existing and proposed wetland acreage; 

(ii)    Vegetative and faunal conditions;

(iii)    Surface and subsurface hydrologic conditions including an analysis of existing and future hydrologic regime and proposed hydrologic regime for enhanced, created, or restored mitigation areas;

(iv)    Relationship within watershed and to existing waterbodies;

(v)    Soil and substrate conditions, and topographic elevations; 

(vi)    Existing and proposed adjacent site conditions;

(vii)    Required wetland buffers (including any buffer reduction and mitigation proposed to increase the plant densities, remove weedy vegetation, and replant the buffers); 

(viii)    Property ownership; and

(ix)    Associated wetlands and related wetlands that may be greater than three hundred (300) feet from the subject project.

(6)    A scale map of the development proposal site and adjacent area. A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect wetlands after the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring and maintenance programs.

(7)    A bond estimate for the installation (including site preparation, plant materials and installation, fertilizers, mulch, stakes) and the proposed monitoring and maintenance work for the required number of years.

(8)    Title Notification. All activity in critical area protection areas shall be accompanied by a title.

(d)    Additional Information. When appropriate, the Director may also require the wetland report to include an evaluation by the State Department of Ecology or an independent qualified expert regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, and to include any recommendations as appropriate.

(1)    If the development proposal site contains or is within a wetland area, the applicant shall submit an affidavit which declares whether the applicant has knowledge of any illegal alteration to any or all wetlands on the proposed site and whether the applicant previously has been found in violation of this chapter. If the applicant has been found previously in violation, the applicant shall declare whether such violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the jurisdiction.

(2)    The Director shall determine if the mitigation and monitoring plans and bonding measures proposed by the applicant are sufficient to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, consistent with the goals, purposes, objectives and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.400 CRITICAL AQUIFER RECHARGE AREAS.

BMC 20.14.410 through 20.14.450 pertain to critical aquifer recharge areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.410 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

Groundwater from aquifers provides a source of potable water and contributes to stream discharge/flow. Critical aquifer recharge areas contribute to the recharge of aquifers, springs and/or wells and are susceptible to contamination of water supplies through infiltration of pollutants through the soil. City residents rely on an essential life-sustaining safe drinking water supply. A significant portion of the City’s drinking water comes from groundwater supplies in aquifers. The primary goals of groundwater protection regulations are to protect groundwater quality by maintaining the quantity of recharge; avoiding or limiting land use activities that pose potential risk of aquifer contamination; and to minimize or avoid adverse impacts to groundwater protection areas through the application of performance standards, and to comply with the requirements of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, Washington Administrative Code, and the requirements of the Wellhead Protection Program. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.420 CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

Critical aquifer recharge areas are those land areas that contain hydrogeologic conditions that facilitate aquifer recharge and/or transmission of contaminants to an underlying aquifer. Critical aquifer recharge areas under this section may be established based on general criteria, specifically designated due to special circumstances, or based on scientific studies and mapping efforts. Factors considered in the identification of critical aquifer recharge areas include depth to water table, presence of highly permeable soils (specifically Group A hydrologic soils), presence of flat terrain, and the presence of more permeable surficial geology. Critical aquifer recharge areas may be placed in one (1) of the following categories:

(a)    Category I Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas. Category I critical aquifer recharge areas are those areas where potential for certain land use activities to adversely affect groundwater is high. Category I critical aquifer recharge areas include:

(1)    Areas inside the five (5) year time-of-travel zone for Group A water system wells, calculated in accordance with the Washington State Source Water Assessment Program.

(2)    Ten (10) year time-of-travel zones in wellhead protection areas are included as critical aquifer recharge when a well draws its water from an aquifer that is at or above sea level and is without an overlying protective impermeable layer.

(3)    Areas identified as regionally significant aquifer recharge areas and identified as such by the City are:

(i)    Gorst Basin Aquifer recharge area, and

(ii)    Other areas that may be identified in the future.

(b)    Category II Critical Aquifer Recharge Areas. Category II critical aquifer recharge areas are areas that provide recharge to aquifers that are current or potentially will become potable water supplies and are vulnerable to contamination based on the type of land use activity. These include the following:

(1)    Highly Permeable Soils (Group A Hydrologic Soils). The general location and characteristics of Group A hydrologic soils in the City is given in the Soils Survey of Kitsap County by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). The soil survey information is available at the Department of Community Development.

(2)    Areas Above Shallow/Vashon Principal Aquifers. Surface areas above shallow, principal aquifer(s) which are not separated from the underlying aquifers by an impermeable layer that provides adequate protections to preclude the proposed land use from contaminating the shallow aquifer(s) below, are considered aquifer recharge areas of concern. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.430 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

(a)    Allowed Activities. The following activities are allowed in critical aquifer recharge areas and do not require submission of a hydrogeological assessment: 

(1)    Construction of structures and improvements, including additions, resulting in less than five (5) percent or two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet (whichever is greater) total site impervious surface area that does not result in a change of use or increase the use of a hazardous substance. 

(2)    Development and improvement of parks, recreation facilities, open space, or conservation areas resulting in less than five (5) percent total site impervious surface area that do not increase the use of a hazardous substance. 

Standards for development shall be in accordance with the provisions below and the requirements of other underlying city regulations.

(3)    On-site domestic septic systems releasing less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) gallons of effluent per day and that are limited to a maximum density of one (1) system per one (1) acre.

(4)    Residential Use of Pesticides and Nutrients. Application of household pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers that do not exceed times and rates specified on the packaging.

(5)    Residential storage or use of petroleum and petroleum products.

(6)    Activities which have a potential contamination source below threshold amounts as set forth in applicable statutes of the Revised Code of Washington or local regulations. The purpose of this clause is to allow for small-scale and residential activities thought to have no significant impacts to critical aquifer recharge areas.

(b)    Prohibited Activities. The following activities and uses are prohibited in Category I critical aquifer recharge areas:

(1)    Landfills, including hazardous or dangerous waste, municipal solid waste, special waste, and wood waste; 

(2)    Underground Injection Wells. Wells which meet the requirements of Chapters 173-218 and 173-200 WAC with the exception of 5B22, 5D2, 5G30, 5W12, 5W32, 5R21, and 5S23; 

(3)    Commercial mining and washing of metals, hard rock, sand and gravel; 

(4)    Chemical wood preservation and/or treatment facilities; 

(5)    Storage, processing, or disposal of radioactive substances;

(6)    Commercial activities that are not connected to an available sanitary sewer system;

(7)    Use or storage of pesticides listed as "State restricted use pesticides" by Chapter 16-228 WAC;

(8)    Within one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet of Twin Lakes, any use of pesticides, and use of fertilizers above agronomic rates;

(9)    Oil and gas drilling as defined in WAC 332-12-450 and Chapter 173-218 WAC;

(10)    Underground storage of hazardous substances as regulated by Chapter 173-360 WAC;

(11)    Use, storage, treatment, or production of perchlorethylene (PCE), other than in closed-loop systems that do not involve any discharge of PCE;

(12)    Petroleum refining, reprocessing, storage and petroleum-product pipelines;

(13)    Electroplating/metal finishing;

(14)    Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers currently or potentially used as a potable water source; and

(15)    Activities that would significantly reduce the recharge to aquifers that are a source of significant base flow to a regulated stream. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.440 ALLOWED USES WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

(a)    General Requirements. Any activity not specifically exempted through BMC 20.14.430 as allowed or prohibited may be permitted in a critical aquifer recharge area if all of the following criteria are met (a list of specific uses with a potential threat to groundwater can be found in subsection (b) of this section):

(1)    Hydrogeological Assessment.

(i)    For Category I aquifer recharge areas the applicant must show through a hydrogeological assessment that the proposed activity will not cause significant impact to aquifer quality or recharge. The hydrogeological assessment will be evaluated and treated as a special use review and be reviewed by the Department, the health district, affected tribes, and affected water purveyors. An incompatible activity can be denied by the Director;

(ii)    For Category II aquifer recharge areas a hydrogeological assessment may be required. The scope of the report shall be based on site-specific conditions. The hydrogeological assessment will be evaluated and treated as a special use review and be reviewed by the Department, the health district, affected tribes, and affected water purveyors. An incompatible activity can be denied by the Director. The need for additional information will be determined by the Department, the health district, and the affected water purveyor. Based on the report, controls, mitigation, and/or other requirements will be established as a prerequisite for the development proposal being approved.

(2)    The proposed activity must comply with the source water protection requirements and recommendations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington State Department of Health, Washington Department of Ecology, and the Kitsap County Health District.

(3)    The proposed activity shall be designed and constructed in accordance with BMC Title 15, Municipal Utilities.

(4)    The applicant must explore low-impact development site design alternatives and implement them. Low-impact development techniques can include, but are not limited to:

(i)    Rainwater harvesting;

(ii)    Reverse slope sidewalks;

(iii)    Vegetated roofs;

(iv)    Bioretention areas (rain gardens); and

(v)    Pervious pavement.

(b)    Potential Threats to Groundwater. Specific uses with potential threats to groundwater can include, but are not limited to the following. Uses meeting the listed performance standards may be allowed if the criteria of this section are met.

(1)    Anything that is not exempt per BMC 20.14.430.

(2)    All storage tanks proposed to be located in a critical aquifer recharge area must comply with local building code requirements and must conform to the following requirements: 

(i)    All new above-ground storage facilities proposed for use in the storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes shall be designed and constructed so as to: 

a.    Not allow the release of a hazardous substance to the ground, groundwaters, or surface waters; 

b.    Have a primary containment area enclosing or underlying the tank or part thereof; and 

c.    A secondary containment system either built into the tank structure or a dike system built outside the tank for all tanks. 

(3)    Vehicle Repair and Servicing.

(i)    Vehicle repair and servicing must be conducted over impermeable pads and within a covered structure capable of withstanding normally expected weather conditions. Chemicals used in the process of vehicle repair and servicing must be stored in a manner that protects them from weather and provides containment should leaks occur. 

(ii)    No dry wells shall be allowed in critical aquifer recharge areas on sites used for vehicle repair and servicing. Dry wells existing on the site prior to facility establishment must be abandoned using techniques approved by the State Department of Ecology prior to commencement of the proposed activity. 

(4)    Water reuse projects for reclaimed water must be in accordance with the adopted water or sewer comprehensive plans that have been approved by the State Departments of Ecology and Health. 

(i)    Use of reclaimed water for surface percolation must meet the groundwater recharge criteria given in RCW 90.46.010(10) and 90.46.080(1). The State Department of Ecology may establish additional discharge limits in accordance with RCW 90.46.080(2). 

(ii)    Direct injection must be in accordance with the standards developed by authority of RCW 90.46.042. 

(5)    Automobile washers as defined in Chapter 173-216 WAC.

(6)    Chemical treatment storage and disposal facilities as defined in WAC 173-303-182.

(7)    Hazardous waste generators, including, but not limited to: boat repair shops, biological research facilities, dry cleaners, furniture stripping, motor vehicle service garages, photographic processing, printing and publishing shops, medical and dental facilities, etc., as defined in Chapter 173-303 WAC.

(8)    Junk yards and salvage yards as defined in Chapter 173-304 WAC, Best Management Practices to Prevent Stormwater Pollution at Vehicle Recycler Facilities (WDOE publication number 94-146).

(9)    On-site sewage systems (large scale) as defined in Chapter 173-240 WAC.

(10)    On-site sewage systems (less than fourteen thousand five hundred (14,500) gal./day) as defined in Chapter 246-272 WAC.

(11)    Pesticide storage and use as defined in Chapters 15.54 and 17.21 RCW.

(12)    Sawmills as defined in Chapters 173-303 and 173-304 WAC, WDOE publication number 95-53, Best Management Practices to Prevent Stormwater Pollution at Log Yards.

(13)    Solid waste handling and recycling facilities as defined in Chapter 173-304 WAC.

(14)    Wastewater application to land surface as defined in Chapters 173-216 and 173-200 WAC, and WDOE Land Application Guidelines, Best Management Practices for Irrigated Agriculture.

(15)    New impervious surface area exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 

(16)    Beneficial use of biosolids as defined in Chapter 173-308 WAC.

(17)    Golf courses, provided:

(i)    Fertilizer use is not above agronomic rates;

(ii)    Pesticides are managed and applied by properly licensed personnel, and use of all pesticides is approved by the affected water utility;

(iii)    The golf course allows for periodic monitoring by the Department or an affected water utility.

(18)    Noncommercial gravel and sand mining, provided the extraction of materials remains no less than ten (10) feet above the level of the aquifer. 

(c)    Affected Agency Review. The City will notify Kitsap County Health District and affected water utilities and will request them to comment during the preliminary phases of the City’s review process on all proposed projects defined in subsection (b) of this section or other uses not explicitly allowed or prohibited in BMC 20.14.430. The City in conjunction with these agencies may approve, deny, or condition proposals.

(d)    Inspection. City personnel may inspect at reasonable times, upon presentation of credentials, as part of its wellhead protection program any activity that is known to manage or potentially manage hazardous materials. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.450 HYDROGEOLOGIC ASSESSMENT.

The assessment shall address the impact the proposed land use will have on both the quality and quantity of the water transmitted to the aquifer.

(a)    The assessment shall be submitted to the Department and shall address, at a minimum, the following criteria:

(1)    Surficial soil type and geologic setting;

(2)    Location and identification of wells within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site;

(3)    Location and identification of surface water bodies and springs within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site with recharge potential;

(4)    Description of underlying aquifers and aquitards, including water level, gradients and flow direction;

(5)    Available surface water and groundwater quality data;

(6)    Effects of the proposed development on water quality;

(7)    Sampling schedules required to assure water quality;

(8)    Discussion of the effects of the proposed development on the groundwater resource;

(9)    Recommendations on appropriate BMPs (best management practices) or mitigation to assure no significant degradation of groundwater quality; and

(10)    Other information as required by the Kitsap County Health District.

(11)    The assessment shall also address the types of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers that can safely be used for the care of landscaping proposed by the applicant.

(b)    The hydrogeologic assessment shall be prepared by a professional geologist/hydrologist or by a soil scientist with a strong background in geology (see definition of "Qualified professional" in BMC 20.14.200).

(c)    Applications for development or operations with underground storage of petroleum products will be processed using the appropriate procedure as specified in existing Kitsap County ordinances.

(d)    Analysis for a specific parcel(s), using the criteria outlined below, will be employed to confirm if the soils present require a recharge area designation. Data collection will include, at a minimum, six (6) soil logs to a depth of ten (10) feet (or to a depth four (4) feet below the lowest proposed excavation point whichever is greater) for each acre in the parcel(s) being evaluated. At least one (1) well, two hundred (200) feet or greater in depth with an adequate drilling report, must be available within one (1) mile. The associated data shall be analyzed and included in the hydrogeologic assessment to determine the presence of highly permeable soils with the recharge area designation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.500 FREQUENTLY FLOODED AREAS.

BMC 20.14.500 through 20.14.530 pertain to frequently flooded areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.510 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas caused by flooding, while protecting the functions and values of the floodplains. In addition, this section will give special consideration to anadromous fish habitat in combination with BMC 20.14.700, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.520 CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION.

Frequently flooded areas are those areas established as areas of special flood hazard under Chapter 17.60 BMC, Floodplain Management. Under Chapter 17.60 BMC, this includes those areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Kitsap County and Incorporated Areas" dated November 4, 2010, and any revisions thereto, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and any revisions thereto. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in BMC 17.60.140(b) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued that incorporates data utilized under BMC 17.60.140(b). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.530 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 

(a)    All development proposals shall comply with Chapter 17.60 BMC for general and specific flood hazard protection. Development shall not reduce the base flood water storage ability. Construction, grading or other regulated activities that would reduce the flood water storage ability must be mitigated by creating compensatory storage on or off site.

(b)    Base flood data and flood hazard notes shall be shown on the face of any recorded plat or site plan including, but not limited to, base flood elevations, flood protection elevation, boundary of floodplain, and zero rise floodway.

(c)    Unless exempted in subsection (d) of this section, when development occurs within the floodplain, a habitat assessment is required, that is prepared in accordance with Regional Guidance for Floodplain Habitat Assessment and Mitigation (FEMA Region X, 2010), or as hereafter amended. The assessment shall determine if the project would adversely affect:

(1)    The primary constituent elements identified when a species is listed as threatened or endangered;

(2)    Essential fish habitat designated by the National Marine Fisheries Service;

(3)    Fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

(4)    Vegetation communities and habitat structures;

(5)    Water quality;

(6)    Water quantity, including flood and low flow depths, volumes and velocities;

(7)    The channel’s natural planform pattern and migration processes;

(8)    Spawning substrate, if applicable; and/or

(9)    Floodplain refugia, if applicable.

(d)    The following activities do not require completion of a floodplain habitat assessment:

(1)    Repair of existing building in its existing footprint, including damages by fire or other casualties;

(2) Removal of noxious weeds;

(3)    Replacement of nonnative vegetation with native vegetation;

(4)    Ongoing activities such as lawn and garden maintenance;

(5)    Removal of hazard trees;

(6)    Normal maintenance of public utilities and facilities;

(7)    Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian areas and streams that meets federal and state standards. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.600 GEOLOGICALLY HAZARDOUS AREAS.

BMC 20.14.600 through 20.14.660 pertain to geologically hazardous areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.610 PURPOSE. 

The purpose of BMC 20.14.600 through 20.14.660 is to protect human life and property from potential risks related to development on or near geologically hazardous areas. Geologically hazardous areas include areas susceptible to erosion, sliding, geologic events, landslides, and moderate and steep slope areas. BMC 20.14.600 through 20.14.660 classify geologically hazardous areas and set development standards for development and clearing in or near geologically hazardous areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.620 CLASSIFICATION.

The following categories shall be used in classifying geologically hazardous areas: 

(a)    Areas of high geologic hazard are areas meeting either of the following two (2) criteria:

(1)    Areas with slopes greater than forty (40) percent with vertical relief of ten (10) or more feet; or

(2)    Areas with slopes greater than thirty (30) percent with vertical relief of ten (10) or more feet, and any of the following characteristics:

(i)    Unstable soil or shoreline classified as "unstable" (U), "unstable old slides" (UOS), "unstable recent slides" (URS), or "intermediate" (I) by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Geologic Survey, the Washington Department of Ecology Coastal Zone Atlas, or qualified geologist or geotechnical engineer;

(ii)    Groundwater seepage or springs present on the slope, areas underlain by impermeable silts or clays, or mappable emergent water;

(iii)    Erosion hazard as indicated by potential for stream or wave incision or as classified as "highly erodible" or "potentially erodible" by the Natural Resources Conservation Service;

(iv)    Seismic areas subject to liquefaction from earthquakes such as hydric soils as identified by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, and areas that have been filled to make a site more suitable. 

(b)    Areas of moderate geologic hazard are any areas with slopes of thirty (30) percent or greater and vertical relief of ten (10) or more feet, and any areas with slopes of fifteen (15) percent to thirty (30) percent with vertical relief of ten (10) or more feet and any of the characteristics per subsections (a)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section. Seismic hazard areas subject to liquefaction from earthquakes, areas with hydric soils, and areas of loose fill shall be classified as moderate geologic hazard areas regardless of percent slope.

(c)    Site-Specific Determination. Site-specific geological reports may be used to determine the classification of a potentially geologically hazardous area in either of the following cases: 

(1)    When an applicant questions the information the Department must rely on to determine whether a location is classified as a geologically hazardous area, the applicant may submit an appropriate site-specific geological report. If supportable by the geological report, the Department may make a nongeologically hazardous determination.

(2)    The Department is authorized but not mandated to require submittal of a geological report for any proposal on a site with slopes of fifteen (15) percent or greater and vertical relief of ten (10) or more feet, or potential seismic hazard areas. Requests by the Department for submittal of a geological report may be made when slope percentages are poorly documented, or when it is deemed through site visit, close proximity to mapped areas of unstable soils, previously prepared geological reports in the vicinity, or other pertinent information that a probable likelihood of soil instability per subsection (a)(2)(i) through (iv) of this section exists on the site. The Department shall not make requests for geological reports in cases where slope percentages are well documented and there is a probable likelihood of stable soil characteristics on the site. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.630 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

The following standards shall apply to any land or vegetation modification or construction within a geologically hazardous area as classified per BMC 20.14.620 and its buffer as described herein. The Department will approve, approve with conditions or deny the development proposal based on its ability to meet the development standards. The Department will also consider any proposed mitigation measures or buffer reductions included in a geotechnical report per subsection (c) of this section.

(a)    Areas of high geologic hazard as classified per BMC 20.14.620(a) shall be subject to the following standards:

(1)    Building and Impervious Surface Buffer. No construction of any structure or impervious surface is allowed within fifty (50) feet of the top and toe of the slope, unless reductions supportable by a geotechnical report are approved.

(2)    Native Vegetation Buffer. Native vegetation shall be in place from the toe of the slope to twenty-five (25) feet beyond the top of the slope, unless modifications supportable by a geotechnical report are approved. Native vegetation shall meet the standards of subsection (g) of this section.

(b)    Areas of moderate geologic hazard as classified per BMC 20.14.620(b) shall be subject to the following standards:

(1)    Building and Impervious Surface Buffer. No construction of any structure or impervious surface is allowed within twenty-five (25) feet of the top and toe of the slope, unless reductions supportable by a geotechnical report are approved.

(2)    Native Vegetation Buffer. Native vegetation shall be in place from the toe of the slope to twenty-five (25) feet beyond the top of the slope, unless modifications supportable by a geotechnical report are approved. Native vegetation shall meet the standards of subsection (g) of this section.

(c)    Reductions with Geological or Geotechnical Report. Modifications and/or reductions to the buffers prescribed per subsections (a)(1) and (2) and (b)(1) and (2) of this section may be granted if a geotechnical or geological report demonstrates that modified or reduced buffers, through design and engineering solutions, will provide protection to the proposed development and adjacent properties equal to that of the standard buffer. Such reports are subject to third-party review per BMC 20.14.660(h). Reductions shall utilize the mitigation and performance standards listed per BMC 20.14.650 to the greatest possible extent. Requirements for geotechnical and geological reports are outlined in BMC 20.14.660.

(d)    Buffer Increase. Should the Department determine based on a geological or geotechnical report that greater buffers than required per subsections (a)(1) and (2) and (b)(1) and (2) of this section are necessary to protect the proposed development and adjacent properties, greater buffers may be required. The Department may require an applicant to submit a geotechnical report with any proposal for land alteration that is located within two hundred (200) feet of an area of high or moderate geologic hazard if it determines through site visit, review of available documents, or history of prior events in the area, that the proposal could potentially require increased buffers to ensure safety.

(e)    Elimination of Danger Trees. Within high or moderate geologic hazard areas, removal of danger trees may be allowed only if such activity is approved by the Department, provided a certified arborist in the State of Washington makes a written determination that the trees proposed for elimination present a legitimate safety hazard.

(f)    Vegetation Thinning. Within high or moderate geologic hazard areas, minor pruning of vegetation or trees for view enhancement may be allowed only if such activity is approved by the Department. The following are allowable methods and techniques for vegetation thinning, except that mature or old-growth trees shall only be treated per method in subsection (f)(5) of this section:

(1)    Tree Thinning. The selective removal of branches in the inner crown of the tree, provided no more than twenty-five (25) percent of a tree’s leaf-bearing crown is removed. An even distribution of interior small branches and foliage on remaining limbs shall be maintained to avoid over-thinning.

(2)    Tree Raising. The removal of the lower branches of a tree in order to provide clearance for passage or vistas. After raising, the height of the pruned portion shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the total tree height; provided, that removal of branches from the lower portion shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tree’s leaf-bearing crown.

(3)    Tree Reduction. Reducing the height or spread of a tree for clearance or vistas by selectively removing leaders and terminals of branches. Cuts should be made to lateral branches at unions, whereby the cut branch is at least one-third (1/3) the diameter of the stem at the union. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of a tree’s crown mass shall be removed, unless it can be demonstrated that further reduction is necessary for functions such as utility clearance.

(4)    Tree Topping. Topping shall be used as a last resort when it can be demonstrated that methods in subsections (f)(1) through (3) of this section are not feasible, or when it can be demonstrated by a certified arborist that topping is less harmful to the particular species of tree than other listed methods. Topping is the indiscriminate cutting of branches and laterals to stubs at a specific tree height or spread, often exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of a tree’s crown mass. Topping is harmful to a tree and creates unsightly regrowth that requires future trimming at frequent intervals. When tree topping is used in a geologically hazardous area, the root system shall remain in place.

(5)    Pruning Mature Trees. Mature and old-growth trees are more susceptible to permanent damage or death from pruning. Pruning of mature trees should only be done as a corrective or preventative measure, such as the removal of decayed, rubbing, or crowded branches.

(6)    Brush Removal. Clearing of noninvasive brush, shrubs, natural grasses and other such vegetation shall be the minimum necessary to maintain vistas, passage and other necessary functions.

(g)    Native Vegetation. Native vegetation shall be of appropriate plant selection and species to perform slope stabilization and erosion prevention functions. The Department may require vegetation enhancement with appropriate species, and may call for an analysis of the relationship between vegetation and slope stability per BMC 20.14.660(e)(1). Valid scientific resources such as Washington State Department of Ecology documents "Vegetation Management: A Guide For Puget Sound Bluff Property Owners" and "Erosion Control Using Vegetation" should be consulted when vegetation is proposed for slope stabilization and erosion control purposes.

(h)    Erosion Control. Clearing or grading of any area within a high or moderate geologic hazard area or within two hundred (200) feet of the high or moderate geologic hazard area shall be limited to the period between May 1st to October 1st, unless the applicant provides an erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared by a qualified professional licensed in the State of Washington that specifically and realistically identifies methods of erosion control for wet weather conditions. All land modification proposals shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in BMC 15.04.090, Stormwater Systems/Engineering Design and Construction Standards General. The faces of all cut and fill slopes shall be protected to prevent erosion as required by the engineered erosion and sedimentation control plan.

(i)    Stormwater Runoff. At no time shall concentrated stormwater runoff be allowed to surface flow directly over a moderate or high geologically hazardous area or its buffer on a subject site or on neighboring properties. To reduce potentially harmful stormwater runoff discharge from impervious surfaces, the Department may approve reductions to required parking standards, provided it can be demonstrated that such reductions would not significantly impact neighboring properties. Stormwater discharge shall meet all standards set forth in BMC 15.04.090, Stormwater Systems/Engineering Design and Construction Standards General.

(j)    Significant Development Risk. In cases where a geotechnical report indicates a significant risk to public health, safety and welfare, the Department shall deny or require revision of the site development proposal.

(k)    Utilities, Trails, and Roads. The following activities are allowable within geologically hazardous areas and buffers, provided it can be demonstrated through a geotechnical report that construction will not significantly increase landslide or erosion risk:

(1)    Public or private trails approved by the Department per the provisions of this chapter;

(2)    Public or private utilities;

(3)    Public roads and related infrastructure.

(l)    On-Site Sewage Disposal. On-site sewage disposal should be avoided in areas of high geologic hazard and their buffers. In cases where such areas cannot be avoided, review by a geologist or a geotechnical engineer licensed in the State of Washington will be required in coordination with the Kitsap County Health District.

(m)    Construction for Earthquake Loads. All construction must meet the requirements of the City Building Code as set forth in Chapter 17.04 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5209 §4, 2013: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.650 MITIGATION, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    The following project design and location techniques are preferred in areas of moderate or high geologic hazard and their buffers. The Department may condition or modify development proposals to require incorporation of such design techniques in cases where their application would increase public safety and welfare without substantially altering the allowable scope and scale of the proposal: 

(1)    Minimize soil disturbance and vegetation removal;

(2)    Cluster structures to maintain natural topography;

(3)    Minimize building footprints and impervious surface areas;

(4)    Construct roads, walkways and parking areas to parallel natural contours;

(5)    Provide access in areas of the site with less sensitivity;

(6)    Avoid toe armoring at the base of banks, bluffs and near shorelines. Toe armoring is only an acceptable engineering solution when it meets the provisions of BMC 20.14.660(b), and all requirements of the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program and other sections of this chapter;

(7)    The following performance and mitigation standards shall apply to seismically hazardous areas;

(i)    Avoid construction of structures using unreinforced masonry materials in areas of hydric soils, fill, or other soils prone to liquefaction from earthquakes; 

(ii)    When redevelopment is proposed on a site containing hydric soils, fill, or other soils prone to liquefaction from earthquakes encourage replacement or removal of existing unreinforced masonry structures;

(iii)    Use appropriate building footing techniques such as pilings on sites containing hydric soils, fill, or other soils prone to liquefaction from earthquakes;

(iv)    Avoid construction of essential public facilities, other potential emergency response facilities, and large-scale public gathering places on sites underlain by known surface fault lines. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.660 SPECIAL REPORTS.

Whenever development is proposed in a geologically hazardous area as defined in BMC 20.14.620, or when the Department determines that additional soils and slope analysis is appropriate on a particular site per BMC 20.14.620(c), the applicant is required to submit a geotechnical or geological report that evaluates the surface and subsurface soil conditions on the site.

(a)    Qualifications. Geotechnical reports shall be prepared by a qualified professional (defined in BMC 20.14.200 under "qualified professional").

(b)    General Provisions. Report recommendations for earthwork, clearing or siting structures in geologically hazardous areas shall be based on existing site conditions rather than measures that have not yet been successfully approved or constructed (e.g., slope recontouring, retaining walls, bulkheads, etc.). Shoreline bulkheads and retaining walls may only be utilized as an engineering solution where it can be demonstrated that:

(1)    An existing structure or existing public facility such as roads cannot be safely maintained without such measures;

(2)    Other nonstructural methods of beach stabilization have been considered and determined infeasible; and

(3)    The resulting stabilization structure is the minimum necessary to provide stability for the existing structure and appurtenances. 

(c)    Minor Repairs. Minor repair activities on existing permitted structures (i.e., those that do not involve design modifications, changes in structure location, and/or demolition or abandonment of failed structure and replacement with new structures) are not subject to the following project submittal requirements.

(d)    Geological Reports. A geological report is required for site development proposals that involve development activities within a geological hazardous area or its buffer per BMC 20.14.630(c), but do not require an engineered solution. The following minimum information is required:

(1)    Description of surface and subsurface conditions, including ground materials, vegetation, surface drainage, groundwater, and a preliminary geologic hazard assessment which includes the location of structures and the identification of the slope and/or coastal processes occurring at the site and factors that contribute to them;

(2)    Review of available information, literature, and mapping;

(3)    Detailed description of slope and other topographic features; and 

(4)    Conceptual siting of structure and general recommendation which include methods and practices that avoid and/or reduce slope and shore impacts. Minimum recommendations should include upland and slope drainage control, groundwater control, site vegetation management, and erosion control. 

(e)    Geotechnical Reports. A geotechnical report is required when the Department or geological report determines that a site development proposal requires additional site information such as engineering design recommendation, slope stability analysis, subsurface exploration and testing, coastal process analyses, or construction recommendations. Depending on the level of activity proposed, the report will either be a more limited geotechnical slope evaluation report, or a full geotechnical design investigation report as described below:

(1)    Geotechnical Slope Evaluation Report. A geotechnical slope evaluation report is required when slope stability analyses are confined to existing surface and/or drainage conditions, including the relationship of natural and constructed slope features to proposed changes in environmental conditions such as drainage, vegetation removal and slope geometry. The following minimum information is required:

(i)    All information under subsection (d) of this section;

(ii)    Subsurface data, exploration logs, and testing data, when required by the geotechnical engineers;

(iii)    Estimated (or surveyed) contour map and site plan, and the Department may require ground surface profiles and typical cross-sections;

(iv)    Relative location of ordinary high water (OHW) on the surface profile and cross-sections which include mean higher high water (MHHW) for the site location, where applicable;

(v)    Soil strength parameters;

(vi)    Stability analysis of existing site;

(vii)    Analysis of the relationship of vegetation and slope stability; and

(viii)    Conceptual site development plans and cross-sections.

(2)    Geotechnical Design Investigation Report. A geotechnical design investigation report is required for site development activities that propose design and construction measures at the slope crest, face and/or toe. If a designed structure does not impact slope stability or coastal processes, the report will not be required to perform all items listed under this section, as long as each item is addressed and the report details why a particular item does not apply. The following information is required:

(i)    All the information required under subsection (e)(1) of this section;

(ii)    Geotechnical requirements and measures to reduce risks;

(iii)    Geotechnical criteria used for any designs including all critical dimension, lateral earth pressures, soil-bearing pressures, location and limits of structure on or near the slope, maximum constructed slope angles, minimum soil reinforcement embedment, soil compaction requirements, and structure heights;

(iv)    Temporary construction slope stability recommendation and analyses of proposed final site stability measures;

(v)    Required construction specification and construction monitoring procedures;

(vi)    Revegetation and surface and groundwater management requirements;

(vii)    Evaluation of erosion potential and recommendations for erosion avoidance and any proposed mitigation measures; and

(viii)    Detailed tabulation of all basic geotechnical engineering test results pertinent to design and construction, and when required for clarification, detailed examples of tests conducted for the project. 

(f)    Revisions to Geotechnical Reports. Further recommendations shall be provided by the geotechnical engineer should there be additions or exceptions to the original recommendation based on the plans, site condition, or other supporting data. If the geotechnical engineer who revises the plans and specification is not the same engineer who prepared the geotechnical report, the new engineer shall, in a letter to the Department, express his or her agreement or disagreement with the recommendations in the geotechnical report and state whether the plans and specification conform to his or her recommendations.

(g)    Plan and Specification Review. When the engineered solutions are proposed, the geotechnical engineer shall submit a statement that in his or her judgment, the plans and specifications (if prepared by others) conform to the recommendations in the geotechnical report and that all portions of the site which are disturbed or impacted by the proposed development have appropriate measures or specification that permit construction to occur while addressing slope stability so that the work does not create additional risk. The statement shall also indicate whether or not a relative gain in slope stability will be achieved after construction is complete.

(h)    Monitoring and Third-Party Review.

(1)    To protect public health, safety and welfare, the Department may call for a third-party review of any geotechnical report in cases where it determines there may be substantial damage to life, property or the environment should a proposed engineered solution fail. When a third-party review is required, costs incurred for a qualified third-party geotechnical engineer to perform the review shall be borne by the applicant. 

(2)    Where revegetation or plantings are proposed as a method to ensure slope stability, a monitoring program shall be included as a part of the approved geotechnical report. To ensure that the performance standards of the approved geotechnical report are met, the vegetation shall be monitored for a minimum of five (5) years. A longer monitoring period may be required by the City based on either the initial report, or a review of subsequent monitoring reports. The monitoring reports shall be submitted on August 1st of each year during the monitoring period.    

(i)    Construction Inspection. A final inspection report shall be provided by the geotechnical engineer stating that construction has or has not implemented the design recommendations of the geotechnical report, and evaluation of any deviation from the design recommendations. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.700 FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS.

BMC 20.14.700 through 20.14.760 pertain to fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.710 DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE.

The intent of these regulations is to avoid impacts to streams, riparian habitat, anadromous fish, and wildlife conservation areas where such avoidance is feasible and reasonable. This section of the City Code contains standards, guidelines, criteria and requirements intended to identify, evaluate and mitigate potential impacts to habitat conservation areas within the City and to enhance degraded habitat and streams in appropriate cases. In appropriate circumstances, impacts resulting from regulated activities may be minimized, rectified, reduced and/or compensated for, consistent with this chapter. The regulations are to manage land so as to maintain fish and wildlife species in suitable habitats within their natural geographic distribution so that isolated subpopulations are not created and achieve no net loss in fish or wildlife habitat or stream functions. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.720 CLASSIFICATION AND DESIGNATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION AREAS.

Classification and designation of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas is an ongoing process; while not all of the following critical habitat conservation areas are known to exist in the City, their designation here allows for future categorization for protection. The following categories shall be used for relevant development standards of BMC 20.14.730.

(a)    Streams and River Shorelines. All streams and river shorelines which meet the criteria for Type S, F, Np or Ns waters as set forth in WAC 222-16-030 of the Department of Natural Resources Water Typing System.

(1)    Type S water means all waters, within their bankfull width, as inventoried as "shorelines of the state" under Chapter 90.58 RCW and the rules promulgated pursuant to Chapter 90.58 RCW including periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands.

(2)    Type F water means segments of natural waters other than Type S waters, which are within the bankfull widths of defined channels and periodically inundated areas of their associated wetlands, or within lakes, ponds, or impoundments having a surface area of one-half (1/2) acre or greater at seasonal low water and which in any case contain fish habitat or are described by one (1) of the following four (4) categories:

(i)    Waters, which are diverted for domestic use by more than ten (10) residential or camping units or by a public accommodation facility licensed to serve more than ten (10) persons, where such diversion is determined by the Department to be a valid appropriation of water and the only practical water source for such users. Such waters shall be considered to be Type F water upstream from the point of such diversion for one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet or until the drainage area is reduced by fifty (50) percent, whichever is less;

(ii)    Waters, which are diverted for use by federal, state, tribal or private fish hatcheries. Such waters shall be considered Type F water upstream from the point of diversion for one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, including tributaries if highly significant for protection of downstream water quality. The Department may allow additional harvest beyond the requirements of Type F water designation, provided the Department determines after a landowner-requested on-site assessment by the Department of Fish and Wildlife, Department of Ecology, the affected tribes and interested parties that:

a.    The management practices proposed by the landowner will adequately protect water quality for the fish hatchery; and

b.    Such additional harvest meets the requirements of the water type designation that would apply in the absence of the hatchery;    

(iii)    Waters, which are within a federal, state, local, or private campground having more than ten (10) camping units; provided, that the water shall not be considered to enter a campground until it reaches the boundary of the park lands available for public use and comes within one hundred (100) feet of a camping unit, trail or other park improvement;

(iv)    Riverine ponds, wall-based channels, and other channel features that are used by fish for off-channel habitat. These areas are critical to the maintenance of optimum survival of fish. This habitat shall be identified based on the following criteria:

a.    The site must be connected to a fish habitat stream and accessible during some period of the year; and

b.    The off-channel water must be accessible to fish.

(3)    Type Np water means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of defined channels that are perennial nonfish habitat streams. Perennial streams are waters that do not go dry any time of a year of normal rainfall. However, for the purpose of water typing, Type Np waters include the intermittent dry portions of the perennial channel below the uppermost point of perennial flow. If the uppermost point of perennial flow cannot be identified with simple, nontechnical observations (see board manual, section 23), then Type Np waters begin at a point along the channel where the contributing basin area is:

(i)    At least thirteen (13) acres in the Western Washington coastal zone (which corresponds to the Sitka spruce zone defined in Franklin and Dyrness, 1973);

(ii)    At least fifty-two (52) acres in other locations in Western Washington; or

(iii)    At least three hundred (300) acres in Eastern Washington.

(4)    Type Ns water means all segments of natural waters within the bankfull width of the defined channels that are not Type S, F, or Np waters. These are seasonal, nonfish habitat streams in which surface flow is not present for at least some portion of a year of normal rainfall and are not located downstream from any stream reach that is a Type Np water. Type Ns waters must be physically connected by an above-ground channel system to Type S, F, or Np waters.

(b)    Saltwater Shorelines and Lakes Twenty (20) Acres and Greater in Surface Area. Those saltwater shorelines and lakes defined as shorelines of the state in the Shoreline Management Act of 1971 and the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program as amended. Shorelines include: Type S waters as set forth in WAC 222-16-030 (DNR Water Typing System) as amended; commercial and recreational shellfish areas; kelp and eelgrass beds; and forage fish spawning areas (i.e., herring, smelt, and sand lance).

(c)    Lakes Less than Twenty (20) Acres in Surface Area. Those lakes which meet the criteria for Type F, Np, and Ns waters as set forth in WAC 222-16-030 as amended. This includes lakes and ponds less than twenty (20) acres in surface area and their submerged aquatic beds, lakes, and ponds planted with game fish by a governmental or tribal authority.

(d)    Class I Fish and Wildlife Conservation Areas.

(1)    Habitats and species recognized by federal or state agencies for federal and/or state-listed endangered, threatened and sensitive species that have primary association documented in maps or databases available to the City and that, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.

(2)    Areas that contain habitats and species of local importance. These areas are identified by the City, including but not limited to those habitats and species that, due to their population status or sensitivity to habitat manipulation, warrant protection. Habitats may include a seasonal range or habitat element with which a species has a primary association, and which, if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term. Habitats of local importance can include attributes such as comparatively high wildlife density, high wildlife species richness, significant wildlife breeding habitat, seasonal ranges or movement corridors of limited availability and/or high vulnerability. These habitats may include cliffs, meadows, old-growth/mature forests, snag-rich areas, and urban natural open spaces. 

(e)    Class II Fish and Wildlife Conservation Areas.

(1)    Habitats for state-listed candidate and monitored species documented in maps or databases available to the City, which if altered, may reduce the likelihood that the species will maintain and reproduce over the long term.

(2)    Habitats that have been identified through maps, databases, reports, or studies that include attributes such as comparatively high wildlife density, high wildlife species richness, significant wildlife breeding habitat, seasonal ranges or movement corridors of limited availability and/or high vulnerability. These habitats may include caves, cliffs, meadows, old-growth/mature forests, snag-rich areas, talus slopes, and urban natural open space.

(f)    Habitats and Species of Local Importance. The City should accept and consider nominations for habitat areas and species to be designated as locally important.

(1)    Habitats and species to be designated shall exhibit the following characteristics:

(i)    Local populations of native species are in danger of extirpation based on existing trends;

(ii)    Local populations of native species that are likely to become endangered; or

(iii)    Local populations of native species that are vulnerable or declining.

(2)    The species or habitat has recreation, commercial, game, tribal, or other special value.

(3)    Long-term persistence of a species locally is dependent on the protection, maintenance, and/or restoration of the nominated habitat.

(4)    Protection by other county, state, or federal policies, laws, regulations, or nonregulatory tools is not adequate to prevent degradation of the species or habitat in the City.

(5)    Without protection, there is likelihood that the species or habitat will be diminished locally over the long term.

(6)    Areas nominated to protect a particular habitat or species must represent either high-quality native habitat or habitat that has a high potential to recover to a suitable condition and which is of limited availability, highly vulnerable to alteration, or provides landscape connectivity which contributes to the integrity of the surrounding landscape.

(7)    Habitats and species may be nominated for designation by any person.

(8)    The nomination should indicate whether specific habitat features are to be protected (for example, nest sites, breeding areas, and nurseries), or whether the habitat or ecosystem is being nominated in its entirety.

(9)    The nomination may include management strategies for the species or habitats. Management strategies must be supported by the best available science, and where restoration of habitat is proposed, a specific plan for restoration must be provided prior to nomination.

(10)    The Director shall determine whether the nomination proposal is complete and, if complete, shall evaluate it according to the characteristics enumerated in subsection (f)(1) of this section and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission based on those findings.

(11)    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for proposals found to be complete and make a recommendation to the City Council based on the characteristics enumerated in subsection (f)(1) of this section.

(12)    Following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall decide whether to designate a habitat or species of local importance by resolution.

(13)    Establishment of Specific Rules for Protection. Within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date of an ordinance designating a species or habitat of local importance, the Director shall develop an administrative rule addressing protection in compliance with this section.

(14)    Development Standards. Regulated uses in designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and/or buffers shall comply with the performance standards outlined in this section. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.730 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

For the purposes of this title, a designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation area with its buffer is a critical area. Those regulated uses identified below within designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall comply with the performance standards outlined in this chapter. A habitat management plan (HMP) is a site investigation to evaluate the potential presence or absence of a regulated fish or wildlife species or habitat affecting a subject property and proposed development.

(a)    Endangered, Threatened, and Sensitive Species.

(1)    No development shall be allowed within a habitat conservation area or buffer with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, except that which is provided for by a habitat management plan (HMP). 

(2)    Whenever activities are proposed adjacent to a habitat conservation area with which state or federally endangered, threatened, or sensitive species have a primary association, such area shall be protected through the application of protection measures in accordance with an HMP prepared by a qualified professional and approved by the City. Approval for alteration of land adjacent to the habitat conservation area or its buffer shall not occur prior to consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for animal species, the Washington State Department of Natural Resources for plant species, and other appropriate federal or state agencies. 

(b)    Anadromous Fish.

(1)    All activities, uses, and alterations proposed to be located in water bodies used by anadromous fish or in areas that affect such water bodies shall give special consideration to the preservation and enhancement of anadromous fish habitat, including, but not limited to, adhering to the following standards: 

(i)    Activities shall be timed to occur only during the allowable work window as designated by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife for the applicable species; 

(ii)    If alternative alignment or location for the activity is not feasible, then activities shall be designed so that it will not degrade the functions or values of the fish habitat or other critical areas; 

(iii)    Shoreline erosion control measures shall be designed to use bioengineering methods or soft armoring techniques, according to an approved critical area report; and 

(iv)    Any impacts to the functions or values of the habitat conservation area are mitigated in accordance with an approved habitat management plan. 

(2)    Structures that prevent the migration of salmonids shall not be allowed in the portion of water bodies currently or historically used by anadromous fish. Fish bypass facilities shall be provided that allow the upstream migration of adult fish and shall prevent fry and juveniles migrating downstream from being trapped or harmed. 

(3)    Fills, when authorized by the Shoreline Master Program, shall not adversely impact anadromous fish or their habitat or shall mitigate any unavoidable impacts and shall only be allowed for a water-dependent use. 

(c)    Wetland Habitats. All proposed activities within or adjacent to habitat conservation areas containing wetlands shall conform to the wetland development performance standards set forth in BMC 20.14.300. If nonwetlands habitat and wetlands are present at the same location, the provisions of this chapter or the wetlands chapter, whichever provides greater protection to the habitat, apply. 

(d)    Buffers and Associated Building Setback Areas. The distance shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark (OHM) or from the top of the bank where the OHM cannot be identified. Buffers shall remain undisturbed natural beach or vegetation areas except where the buffer can be enhanced to improve its functional attributes, as approved by the Department. Buffers shall be maintained along the perimeter of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, as listed below in Table 1 of this section. Refuse shall not be placed in buffers. Alteration of buffer areas and building setbacks may be allowed for water-dependent and water-related activities and for other development authorized by an HMP, reasonable use exceptions, general exemptions, standards for existing (nonconforming) development, and variances in general exemptions, BMC 20.14.145.

	20.14.730 Table 1: Water Type Buffer Standards

	Water Types	Attributes	Minimum Building Setback	Buffer Width Standard

	S

Saltwater and Freshwater	See Shoreline Master Program for buffer and minimum building setback per Ordinance 5229, or as hereinafter amended

	F	Fish habitat waters	15 feet beyond buffer	150 feet

	Np	Year-round, nonfish habitat	15 feet beyond buffer	50 feet

	Ns	Seasonal, nonfish habitat	15 feet beyond buffer	35 feet

(1)    Buffers. Where existing buffer area plantings provide minimal vegetative cover and cannot provide the City’s water quality standards or habitat functions (per the requirements of the Department of Ecology and Fish and Wildlife), buffer enhancement shall be required. Where buffer enhancement is required, a plan shall be prepared that includes plant densities that are not less than three (3) feet on center for shrubs and eight (8) feet on center for trees. Monitoring and maintenance of plants shall be required in accordance with BMC 20.14.760, Monitoring and Contingency Plan. Existing buffer vegetation is considered "inadequate" and will require enhancement through additional native plantings and removal of nonnative plants when: 

(i)    Nonnative or invasive plant species provide the dominant cover;

(ii)    Vegetation is lacking due to disturbance and marine, stream, or habitat resources could be adversely affected; or 

(iii)    Enhancement plantings in the buffer could significantly improve buffer functions.

(2)    "Minimum building setback" is the required horizontal distance between the finished exterior wall of a structure and the edge of the buffer of the lot on which the structure is located. All portions of a structure must be located away from the buffer a distance equal to or greater than the minimum setback. Uses not requiring a permit defined in the City Building Code as set forth in Chapter 17.04 BMC may be permitted in the setback if the Department determines that such intrusions will not adversely impact the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area.

(3)    Stream Buffer Measurement. Streams shall be classified according to the stream type system as provided in WAC 222-16-031, Interim water typing system. Stream buffer areas are defined by these classifications, as shown in Table 1 of this section. Buffers shall be measured from the ordinary high water mark (OHM) or from the top of the bank where the OHM cannot be identified. The buffer width shall be increased to include streamside wetlands which provide overflow storage for stormwaters, feed water back to the stream during low flows or provide shelter and food for fish. In braided channels, the OHM or top of bank shall be defined so as to include the entire stream feature.

(4)    Buffer Averaging. For buffering averaging for areas within the areas of shoreline jurisdiction, please refer to Shoreline Master Program Section 7.010(c)(5). For all other areas, buffer widths may be modified by averaging buffer widths as long as the total area contained within the buffer after averaging is no less than the required buffer prior to averaging, and as set forth below. A buffer enhancement plan shall be required for any request for buffer averaging. The enhancement plan shall be similar to a mitigation plan, and include provisions for mitigation monitoring and contingency plans. Buffer width averaging shall be allowed only where the applicant demonstrates through a report prepared by a qualified biologist or habitat specialist with five (5) years’ experience that:

(i)    Buffer averaging is necessary to avoid a hardship caused by circumstances to the property;

(ii)    The habitat contains variations in sensitivity due to existing physical characteristics, or the buffer varies in characteristics and it would benefit from a wider buffer in places and would not be adversely impacted by a narrower buffer in other places;

(iii)    Lower intensity land uses would be located adjacent to areas where the buffer width is reduced;

(iv)    The widest portion of the buffer shall be the area where the habitat is most sensitive;

(v)    Buffer width averaging will not adversely impact fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas;

(vi)    The buffer width may be reduced by thirty-five (35) percent of the standard buffer, but not less than thirty-five (35) feet unless provided for by a habitat management plan.

(5)    Buffer Reduction. Buffers and associated building setbacks may be reduced where the applicant demonstrates through an approved HMP relying on best available science and prepared by a qualified specialist with five (5) years’ experience that through buffer enhancement the smaller buffer would provide equal or better protection than the larger buffer, but shall not be reduced by more than thirty-five (35) percent. Enhancement techniques can include, but are not limited to:

(i)    Planting of native trees or shrubs, increasing the diversity of plant cover types, replacing exotic species with native species, or reestablishing fish areas adjacent to a marine shoreline or stream where one (1) currently does not exist will result in improved function of the fish habitat;

(ii)    Fish barrier removal to restore accessibility to resident or anadromous fish;

(iii)    Fish habitat enhancement using log structures incorporated as part of a fish habitat enhancement plan;

(iv)    Stream and/or retention/detention pond improvements:

a.    Removal or modification of existing stream culverts (such as at road crossings) to improve fish passage and flow capabilities, or

b.    Upgrade of retention/detention facilities or other drainage facilities beyond required levels to provide a more naturalized habitat;

(v)    Removal of existing bulkheads to improve fish spawning and habitat areas;

(vi)    Daylighting a stream that was previously culverted or piped, or daylighting box culverts or trestles.

(6)    Stormwater Management Facilities. Stormwater management facilities, limited to stormwater dispersion outfalls and bioswales, may be allowed within the outer twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer; provided, that:

(i)    No other location is feasible; and

(ii)    The buffer is over one hundred (100) feet in width; and

(iii)    The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the stream and/or habitat area shown through an approved HMP. 

(7)    Low-Impact Development (LID) Facilities. LID facilities, may be allowed within stream buffers; provided, that:

(i)    No other location is feasible; and

(ii)    The buffer is over one hundred (100) feet in width; and

(iii)    The location of such facilities will not degrade the functions or values of the stream and/or habitat area shown through an approved HMP. 

(8)    Habitat Conservation Area Buffers. For Type F, Type Np, and Type Ns waters only, habitat conservation area buffers shall be shown on the development site plans or final plat maps along with the notation requirements identified in BMC 20.58.080. 

(i)    If an existing property has a previously delineated and approved fish and wildlife habitat conservation area and associated buffer by the City, the approved conservation area and buffer may remain in effect. Redevelopment, and/or additions outside of the existing footprint shall be subject to the previously approved buffer; however, a buffer enhancement plan may be required in accordance if the habitat buffer area has become degraded or is currently not functioning or if the habitat area and/or buffer may be negatively affected by proposed new development. If, according to the buffer enhancement plan, additional buffer mitigation is not sufficient to protect the habitat, the City may require larger buffers where it is necessary to protect habitat functions based on site-specific characteristics.    

(e)    Class I Fish and Wildlife Conservation Areas. All development as described within this chapter or within two hundred (200) feet of designated Class I wildlife conservation areas shall adhere to the following standards:

(1)    All sites with known locations of Class I fish and wildlife conservation areas or sites within two hundred (200) feet, or the applicable distance identified by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife management recommendations, whichever is greater, to known locations of Class I fish and wildlife conservation areas will require, for all development permits, the submittal and approval of a habitat management plan (HMP) as specified in BMC 20.14.750. The requirement for an HMP shall be determined during the SEPA/critical areas review on the project.

(2)    All new development within two hundred (200) feet of habitat elements with which Class I fish and wildlife have a critical habitat, or the applicable distance identified by Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife management recommendations, whichever is greater, may require the submittal of an HMP as specified in BMC 20.14.750. The requirement for an HMP shall be determined during the SEPA/critical areas review on the project.

 

	20.14.730 Table 2: Wildlife Habitat Conservation Areas

	Class I	All developments within 200 ft. or applicable distance by WDFW management recommendations of a designated Class I wildlife habitat conservation area shall have buffer widths determined by a mandatory habitat management plan.

	Class II	All development within a Class II wildlife habitat conservation area shall have the buffer widths be determined by the SEPA/critical area review on the project and may require a habitat management plan.

(f)     Class II Fish and Wildlife Conservation Area. All new development within Class II fish and wildlife conservation areas may require the submittal of an HMP. An HMP shall consider measures to retain and protect the wildlife habitat and shall consider effects of land use intensity, buffers, setbacks, impervious surfaces, erosion control and retention of native vegetation. The requirement for an HMP shall be determined during the SEPA/critical areas review on the project.

(g)    Stream Crossings. Any private or public road expansion or new construction which is allowed and must cross streams classified within this chapter shall comply with the following minimum development standards:

(1)    Bridges or bottomless culverts shall be required for all fish-bearing streams. Other alternatives may be allowed upon submittal of a habitat management plan which demonstrates that other alternatives would not result in significant impacts to the fish and wildlife conservation area, as determined appropriate through the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, hydraulics project approval process. The plan must demonstrate that salmon habitat will be replaced on a 1:1 ratio;

(2)    Crossings shall not occur in salmonid spawning areas unless no other feasible crossing site exists. For new development proposals, if existing crossings are determined to adversely impact salmon spawning or passage areas, new or upgraded crossings shall be located as determined necessary through coordination with the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife;

(3)    Bridge piers or abutments shall not be placed in either the floodway or between the ordinary, high water marks unless no other feasible alternative placement exists; 

(4)    Crossings shall not diminish flood carrying capacity;

(5)    Crossings shall serve multiple properties whenever possible; and

(6)    Where there is no reasonable alternative to providing a conventional culvert, the culvert shall be the minimum length necessary to accommodate the permitted activity (guidance for these projects can be found in the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife "Fish Passage Design at Road Culverts" design manual 1999, and the National Marine Fisheries Service "Guidelines for Salmonid Passage at Stream Crossings" 2000).

(h)    Stream Relocations. Stream relocations for the purpose of flood protection and/or fisheries restoration shall only be permitted when adhering to the following minimum performance standards and when consistent with Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife hydraulic project approval:

(1)    The channel, bank and buffer areas should be replanted with native vegetation in undisturbed riparian condition; 

(2)    For those shorelands and waters designated as frequently flooded areas, a professional engineer licensed in the State of Washington shall provide information demonstrating that the equivalent base flood storage volume and function will be maintained; and

(3)    Relocated stream channels shall be designed to meet or exceed the functions and values of the stream to be relocated. 

(i)    Pesticides, Fertilizers and Herbicides. No pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers may be used in fish and wildlife conservation areas or their buffers, except those approved by the EPA and approved under a DOE water quality modification permit for use in fish and wildlife habitat conservation area environments. Where approved, herbicides must be applied by a licensed applicator in accordance with the safe application practices on the label.

(j)    Land Divisions and Land User Permits. All proposed divisions of land and land uses (subdivisions, short subdivisions, residential cluster developments, conditional use permits, site plan reviews, and binding site plans) which include fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas shall comply with the following procedures and development standards:

(1)    The open water area of lakes, streams, and tidal lands shall not be permitted for use in calculating minimum lot area;

(2)    Land division approvals shall be conditioned so that all required buffers are dedicated as open space tracts or an easement or covenant encumbering the buffer. Such dedication, easement or covenant shall be recorded together with the land division and represented on the final plat, short plat or binding site plan;

(3)    In order to avoid the creation of nonconforming lots, each new lot shall contain at least one (1) building site that meets the requirements of this chapter, including buffer requirements for habitat conservation areas. This site must also have access and a sewage disposal system location that are suitable for development and does not adversely impact the fish and wildlife conservation area;

(4)    After preliminary approval and prior to final land division approval, the Department may require the common boundary between a required buffer and the adjacent lands be identified using permanent signs. In lieu of signs, alternative methods of buffer identification may be approved when such methods are determined by the Department to provide adequate protection to the aquatic buffer.

(k)    Trails and Trail-Related Facilities. Construction of public and private trails and trail-related facilities, such as benches, interpretive centers, and viewing platforms, may be allowed in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas or their buffers pursuant to the following standards:

(1)    Trails and related facilities shall, to the extent feasible, be placed on existing road grades, utility corridors, or other such previously disturbed areas;

(2)    Trails and related facilities shall be planned to minimize removal of trees, shrubs, snags and important wildlife habitat;

(3)    Viewing platforms, interpretive centers, benches and access to them shall be designed and located to minimize disturbance of wildlife habitat and/or critical characteristics of the affected conservation area;

(4)    Trails, in general, shall be set back from streams so that there will be no or minimal impact to the stream from trail use or maintenance. Trails shall be constructed with pervious surfaces when feasible;

(5)    Trails shall be generally limited to pedestrian use unless other more intensive uses, such as bike or horse trails, have been specifically allowed and mitigation has been provided. Trail width shall not exceed five (5) feet unless there is demonstrated need, subject to review and approval by the Department. Trails shall be constructed with pervious materials unless otherwise approved by the Department;

(6)    Trails shall not be allowed to fully enclose a habitat area or buffer; and

(7)    The Department may require closure of trails during critical spawning, migration or breeding time periods of the species present.

(l)    Utilities. Placement of utilities within designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas may be allowed pursuant to the following standards and that the applicant obtains all other required state and federal approvals for any work in-water or in wetlands:

(1)    Utilities maintenance activities involving no material change in size or function shall be allowed within designated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas, subject to best management practices;

(2)    Construction of utilities may be permitted in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas or their buffers, only when no feasible or reasonable alternative location is available and the utility corridor meets the requirements for installation, replacement of vegetation and maintenance outlined below, and as required in the filing and approval of an HMP which may be required by this chapter;

(3)    Construction of sewer lines or on-site sewage systems may be permitted in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas or their buffers when the applicant demonstrates it is necessary to meet state and/or local health code requirements, there are no other feasible alternatives available, and construction meets the requirements of this section. Joint use of the sewer utility corridor by other utilities may be allowed;

(4)    New utility corridors shall not be allowed in fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas with known locations of federal or state-listed endangered, threatened or sensitive species, heron rookeries or nesting sites of raptors which are listed as state candidate except in those circumstances where an approved HMP indicates that the utility corridor will not significantly impact the conservation area;

(5)    New utility corridor construction and maintenance shall protect the environment of fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas and their buffers by the following:

(i)    New utility facilities, improvements, or upgrades to existing utility facilities should take place within existing improved rights-of-way or existing impervious surfaces so that they do not increase the amount of impervious surfaces within the habitat area;

(ii)    New utility corridors shall be aligned when possible to avoid cutting or root damage to trees greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter at breast height (four and one-half (4-1/2) feet) measured on the uphill side;

(iii)    New utility corridors shall be revegetated with appropriate native or equivalent vegetation at not less than preconstruction vegetation densities or greater, immediately upon completion of construction or as soon thereafter as possible due to seasonal growing constraints. The utility shall ensure that such vegetation survives;

(iv)    Any additional corridor access for maintenance shall be provided wherever possible at specific points rather than by parallel roads. If parallel roads are necessary, they shall be of a minimum width but no greater than fifteen (15) feet and shall be contiguous to the location of the utility corridor on the side away from the conservation area;

(6)    Utility corridor maintenance shall include the following measures to protect the environment of regulated fish and wildlife habitat conservation areas:

(i)    Utility towers should be painted with brush, pad or roller and should not be sandblasted or spray-painted, nor should lead-based paints be used;

(ii)    Pesticides, Fertilizers and Herbicides. No pesticides or fertilizers may be used in fish and wildlife conservation areas or their buffers, except those herbicides approved by a licensed applicator in accordance with the safe application practices on the label.

(m)    Bank Stabilization. A stream channel and bank may be stabilized when naturally occurring earth movement threatens existing structures (defined as requiring a building permit pursuant to the applicable building code), public improvements, unique natural resources, public health, safety or welfare, or the only feasible access to property, and, in the case of streams and marine shorelines, when such stabilization results in maintenance of fish and wildlife habitat, flood control and improved water quality. Where bank stabilization is determined to be necessary, bioengineering or other nonstructural methods should be the first option for protection. Bulkheads and retaining walls may only be utilized as an engineering solution where it can be demonstrated that an existing residential structure cannot be safely maintained or set back without such measures, and that the resulting retaining wall is the minimum length necessary to provide a stable building area for the structure. A variance pursuant to BMC 20.58.030 must be obtained in all other cases. The Department may require that bank stabilization be designed by a professional engineer and geologist licensed in the State of Washington with demonstrated expertise in hydraulic actions of shorelines. Bank stabilization projects may also require a City grading permit and hydraulic project approval from the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. Nonstructural marine shoreline and stream bank protective techniques are preferred to bulkheads or other types of marine shoreline and stream bank armoring. Nonstructural techniques include but are not limited to vegetation plantings and bioengineering. Guidance for these projects can be found in the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife’s "Integrated Streambank Protection Guidelines Manual" for determining when, why, where, and what projects need to be completed to protect an eroding bank.

(n)    Fencing and Signs. Prior to approval or issuance of permits for land divisions and new development, the Department may require the common boundary between a required buffer and the adjacent lands be identified using fencing or permanent signs. In lieu of fencing or signs, alternative methods of buffer identification may be approved when such methods are determined by the Department to provide adequate protection to the buffer.

(o)    Road/Street Repair and Construction. Any private or public road or street expansion or construction which is allowed in a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area or its buffer shall comply with the following minimum development standards:

(1)     No other reasonable or feasible alternative exists and the road or street crossing serves multiple properties whenever possible;

(2)     Expansion or construction of any private or public road shall only be allowed when adverse impacts cannot be avoided;

(3)     Public and private roads should provide for other purposes, such as utility crossings, pedestrian or bicycle easements, viewing points, etc.; 

(4)     The road or street construction is the minimum necessary, as required by the Department of Public Works, and shall comply with the Department of Public Works and Utilities’ standards; and

(5)     Construction time limits shall be determined in consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife in order to ensure habitat protection.

(p)    Other Allowed Uses in Fish and Wildlife Conservation Areas. Other activities may be allowed using the standard for a Category II wetland buffer as identified by BMC 20.14.330(e). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.740 SPECIAL REPORTS.

Habitat Management Plan Requirements.

(a)     General. If the City determines that impacts to habitats may occur as a result of a development project, a habitat management plan (HMP) shall be required. The applicant may choose to complete an HMP for a site-specific analysis to better determine the impact to habitat and to determine the appropriate buffer width and associated building setbacks for their project based on the site-specific analysis. The preparation and submission of this report is the responsibility of the applicant. The report shall rely on best available science as defined in WAC 365-195-900 through 365-195-925 and shall be prepared by a qualified professional who is a biologist with five (5) years of experience preparing reports for the relevant type of habitat. The City may retain a qualified consultant at the applicant’s expense to review and confirm the applicant’s reports, studies and plans. The HMP shall clearly demonstrate that greater protection of the functions and values of critical areas can be achieved through the HMP than could be achieved through providing the prescribed habitat buffers and building setbacks. An applicant may propose to implement an HMP as a means to protect habitat buffers associated with streams and/or fish and wildlife conservation areas. Approval for an HMP shall not occur prior to the consultation with the appropriate federal or state agencies. 

(b)    Intent. HMPs are primarily intended as a means to restore or improve buffers that have been degraded by past activity, and should preserve, and not reduce, existing high-quality habitat buffers. While not primarily intended as a means to reduce buffers, the HMP may propose a reduction of the habitat buffer width where it is shown that the HMP will comply with the other requirements of this section. 

(c)    Effect of Buffers. An HMP shall provide habitat functions and values that are greater than would be provided by the prescribed habitat buffers. When habitat buffers are a component of an HMP, they shall be at least the minimum size necessary to accomplish the objectives of the HMP. The HMP may propose, but the City shall not require, a habitat buffer containing a greater area than is required by the prescribed habitat buffer.

(d)     Impact Mitigation. The HMP shall encompass an area large enough to provide mitigation for buffer reduction below the standard required buffers, and shall identify how the development impacts resulting from the proposed project will be mitigated as defined in BMC 20.14.750. The developer of the plan shall use the best available science in all facets of the analyses.

(e)     The assessment of habitats for the site and project shall at a minimum include the following information:

(1)    A map prepared at an easily readable scale, showing:

(i)    The location of the proposed development site;

(ii)     Property boundaries;

(iii)    The relationship of the site to surrounding topographic, water, and cultural features;

(iv)    Proposed building locations and arrangements;

(v)     A legend which includes a complete legal description, acreage of the parcel, scale, north arrow, and date of map revision;

(2)    Detailed description of vegetation on and adjacent to the project area and its associated buffer;

(3)    Identification of any species of local importance, priority species, or endangered, threatened, sensitive, or candidate species that have a primary association with habitat on or adjacent to the project area, and assessment of potential project impacts to the use of the site by the species;

(4)    A discussion of any federal, state, or local special management recommendations, including Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife habitat management recommendations, that have been developed for species or habitats located on or adjacent to the project area;

(5)    A detailed discussion of the direct and indirect potential impacts on habitat by the project, including potential impacts to water quality;

(6)    Enhancement of existing degraded buffer area and replanting of the disturbed buffer area with native vegetation;

(7)    The use of alternative on-site wastewater systems in order to minimize site clearing;

(8)    Retention of existing native vegetation on other portions of the site in order to offset habitat loss from buffer reduction;

(9)    The need for fencing and signage along the buffer edge;

(10)    A discussion of measures, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation, proposed to preserve existing habitats and restore any habitat that was degraded prior to the current proposed land use activity and to be conducted in accordance with the mitigation sequencing required by this chapter; and

(11)    A discussion of ongoing management practices that will protect habitat after the project site has been developed, including proposed monitoring, maintenance, and enforcement programs.

(f)    When appropriate due to the type of habitat or species present or the project conditions, the Director may also require the habitat management plan to include:

(1)    An evaluation by an independent qualified professional regarding the applicant’s analysis and the effectiveness of any proposed mitigating measures or programs, to include any recommendations as appropriate;

(2)    A request for consultation with the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife or the local Native American Indian tribe or other appropriate agency; and

(3)    Detailed surface and subsurface hydrologic features both on and adjacent to the site, including a field determination of the ordinary high water mark or any surface waters and supporting documentation.

(g)    Mitigation Measures. Possible mitigation measures to be included in the report, or required by the Director, could include, but are not limited to:

(1)    Establishment of buffer zones;

(2)    Preservation of critically important plants and trees;

(3)    Limitation of access to habitat areas;

(4)    Seasonal restriction of construction activities;

(5)    Establishing phased development requirements; and

(6)    Monitoring plan for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met. Generally this will be for a period of seven (7) to ten (10) years.

(h)    HMP Adequacy. The HMP shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the habitat functions and values are improved by implementation of the HMP. If there is a disagreement between the City and the applicant as to the adequacy of the HMP, the issue of plan adequacy shall be resolved by consulting with the appropriate federal or state agency. If the federal or state agencies are not available in a timely manner, the applicant may choose to have the City refer the HMPs to a third-party consultant at the expense of the applicant. After consultation with such state departments or third-party consultant, the Director shall make a final decision on the adequacy of the HMP. 

(i)    Timing. An HMP must be developed and approved either prior to preliminary plat approval or issuance of the building permit, as applicable, and must be implemented before the City grants either final plat approval or an occupancy permit, as applicable. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.750 MITIGATION STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.

(a)    The applicant shall avoid all impacts that degrade the functions and values of a critical area or areas. Unless otherwise provided in this title, if alteration to the critical area is unavoidable, all adverse impacts to or from critical areas and buffers resulting from a development proposal or alteration shall be mitigated using the best available science in accordance with an approved habitat management plan and SEPA documents, so as to result in no net loss of critical area functions and values. 

(b)    Mitigation shall be in kind and on site, when possible, and sufficient to maintain the functions and values of the critical area, and to prevent risk from a hazard posed by a critical area. 

(c)    Mitigation shall not be implemented until after the City’s approval of an HMP that includes a mitigation plan, and mitigation shall be in accordance with the provisions of the approved HMP.

(d)    Mitigation Sequencing. Applicants shall demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been examined with the intent to avoid and minimize impacts to critical areas. When an alteration to a critical area is proposed, such alteration shall be avoided, minimized, or compensated for in the following sequential order of preference: 

(1)    Avoiding the impact altogether by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; 

(2)    Minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation by using appropriate technology, or by taking affirmative steps, such as project redesign, relocation, or timing, to avoid or reduce impacts; 

(3)    Rectifying the impact to habitat conservation areas by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected environment to the historical conditions or the conditions existing at the time of the initiation of the project; 

(4)    Reducing or eliminating the impact or hazard over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action; 

(5)    Compensating for the impact to habitat conservation areas by replacing, enhancing, or providing substitute resources or environments; and 

(6)    Monitoring the hazard or other required mitigation and taking remedial action when necessary. 

Mitigation for individual actions may include a combination of the above measures. 

(e)    Mitigation Plan Requirements. When mitigation is required, the applicant shall submit for approval by the City a mitigation plan as part of the HMP. The mitigation plan shall include: 

(1)    Environmental Goals and Objectives. The mitigation plan shall include a written report identifying environmental goals and objectives of the compensation proposed and including: 

(i)    A description of the anticipated impacts to the critical areas and the mitigating actions proposed and the purposes of the compensation measures, including the site selection criteria, identification of compensation goals, identification of resource functions, and dates for beginning and completion of site compensation construction activities. The goals and objectives shall be related to the functions and values of the impacted critical area; 

(ii)    A review of the best available science supporting the proposed mitigation and a description of the report author’s experience to date in restoring or creating the type of critical area proposed; and 

(iii)    An analysis of the likelihood of success of the compensation project. 

(2)    Performance Standards. The mitigation plan shall include measurable specific criteria for evaluating whether or not the goals and objectives of the mitigation project have been successfully attained and whether or not the requirements of this title have been met. 

(3)    Detailed Construction Plans. The mitigation plan shall include written specifications and descriptions of the mitigation proposed, such as: 

(i)    The proposed construction sequence, timing, and duration;

(ii)    Grading and excavation details; 

(iii)    Erosion and sediment control features; 

(iv)    A planting plan specifying plant species, quantities, locations, size, spacing, and density; and 

(v)    Measures to protect and maintain plants until established. 

These written specifications shall be accompanied by detailed site diagrams, scaled cross-sectional drawings, topographic maps showing slope percentage and final grade elevations, and any other drawings appropriate to show construction techniques or anticipated final outcome. 

(4)    Monitoring Program. The mitigation plan shall include a program for monitoring construction of the compensation project and for assessing a completed project (BMC 20.14.760, Monitoring and Contingency Plan). A protocol shall be included outlining the schedule for site monitoring (for example, monitoring shall occur in years one (1), three (3), five (5), and seven (7) after site construction), and how the monitoring data will be evaluated to determine if the performance standards are being met. A monitoring report shall be submitted as needed to document milestones, successes, problems, and contingency actions of the compensation project. The compensation project shall be monitored for a period necessary to establish that performance standards have been met, but not for a period less than five (5) years. 

(5)    Contingency Plan. The mitigation plan shall include identification of potential courses of action, and any corrective measures to be taken if monitoring or evaluation indicates project performance standards are not being met (BMC 20.14.760). 

(6)    Financial Guarantees. The mitigation plan shall include financial guarantees, if necessary, to ensure that the mitigation plan is fully implemented. Financial guarantees ensuring fulfillment of the compensation project, monitoring program, and any contingency measures shall be posted in accordance with bonds to ensure mitigation, maintenance, and monitoring (BMC 20.14.760). 

(f)    Innovative Mitigation.

(1)    The city may encourage, facilitate, and approve innovative mitigation projects that are based on the best available science. Advance mitigation or mitigation banking are examples of alternative mitigation projects allowed under the provisions of this section wherein one (1) or more applicants, or an organization with demonstrated capability, may undertake a mitigation project together if it is demonstrated that all of the following circumstances exist: 

(i)    Creation or enhancement of a larger system of critical areas and open space is preferable to the preservation of many individual habitat areas; 

(ii)    The group demonstrates the organizational and fiscal capability to act cooperatively; 

(iii)    The group demonstrates that long-term management of the habitat area will be provided; and 

(iv)    There is a clear potential for success of the proposed mitigation at the identified mitigation site. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


20.14.760 MONITORING AND CONTINGENCY PLAN. 

(a)    A monitoring program shall be included as a part of the approved mitigation plan for a fish and wildlife habitat conservation area. To ensure that the performance standards of the approved mitigation plan have been met, the mitigation and/or buffer enhancement site(s) shall be monitored for a minimum of five (5) years. A longer monitoring period may be required by the City based on either the initial mitigation plan or a review of subsequent monitoring reports. The monitoring reports shall be submitted on August 1st of each year during the monitoring period. 

An acceptable surety device is required to ensure the applicant’s compliance with the terms of the mitigation agreement. 

(1)    Performance Surety. All mitigation and buffer enhancement shall be completed prior to final plat approval and/or building occupancy depending on the type of application. However, when improvements cannot be completed prior to final acceptance due to weather conditions which may negatively affect the success of the project, a performance surety may be used.   The performance surety shall equal one hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the mitigation project, and the required improvements shall be installed in a satisfactory manner within six (6) months or less.

(2)    Maintenance Surety. A maintenance surety shall be required on all mitigation projects to ensure that the improvement successfully survives the monitoring periods set above. 

(i)    Mitigation Projects. The amount of the maintenance surety shall be equal to fifteen (15) percent of the cost of the mitigation project and the term of the surety shall reflect the term of the monitoring program.

(ii)    Buffer Enhancement Projects. The amount of the maintenance surety shall be equal to fifteen (15) percent of the costs of the enhancement project and the term of the surety shall reflect the term of the monitoring program.

(3)    Monitoring Deposit. A cash deposit shall be submitted with all sureties prior to final acceptance of the project to cover the estimated City costs to review the yearly monitoring reports and conduct a site inspection to ensure the performance standards are being met.

(b)    Long-Term Maintenance. To ensure the long-term success of the fish and wildlife habitat conservation area, the applicant or their heirs or successors shall be responsible for the long-term maintenance of the habitat area and its associated buffer. The habitat and buffer shall be kept clear of weeds, invasive plant material, lawn clippings, junk, debris, intrusions or the like. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4965 §7 (part), 2006)


Chapter 20.16 SHORELINE DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

20.16.010    SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM.


20.16.010 SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM.

For all applicable requirements within the shoreline jurisdiction, see the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program which is on file with the City Clerk and may be posted or linked on the City of Bremerton’s website. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5230 §1, 2013)


Chapter 20.18 TEXT AMENDMENTS

Sections:

20.18.010    APPLICABILITY.

20.18.020    GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20.18.030    TEXT AMENDMENTS.

20.18.040    PROCEDURAL TEXT AMENDMENTS.

20.18.050    MINOR CORRECTIONS.

20.18.060    AMENDMENTS TO THE SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM.


20.18.010 APPLICABILITY.

From time to time a change in circumstance or conditions may warrant a change in the development regulations of this title, which are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. Text amendments revise the text of this title and change specific standards, procedures, meanings or other provisions of the code. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.18.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(a)    Applicant. Any interested party may initiate a text amendment to any provision of BMC Title 20.

(b)    Fee. An application fee, pursuant to the adopted fee schedules in Chapter 3.01 BMC, shall accompany an application for a text amendment. Amendments initiated by the City shall be exempt from the application fee.

(c)    Notice. Published notice shall be given prior to public hearing dates in the official newspaper in accordance with the following schedule:

(1)    Ten (10) calendar days for the first Planning Commission public hearing;

(2)    Five (5) calendar days for the first City Council public hearing;

(3)    Subsequent hearing dates on the same proposal do not require additional publication of notice; and

(4)    Consideration shall be given to WAC 365-195-600 (Public Participation) in determining if additional notice requirements are necessary.

(d)    Approval Criteria. A text amendment may be approved if it is found that:

(1)    It is consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan; and

(2)    It does not conflict with other City, state and federal codes, regulations and ordinances.

(e)    Comprehensive Plan Consistency. If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required in order to satisfy subsection (d)(1) of this section, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval on the text amendment. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.18.030 TEXT AMENDMENTS.

(a)    Applicability. This section applies to amendments involving substantive changes such as those standards prescribed in BMC Title 20, Division III, Zoning, Chapter 20.14 BMC, Critical Areas, or Chapter 20.12 BMC, Land Division. (Note: A change to these chapters does not automatically constitute a substantive change.)

(b)    Procedures. Specific procedural requirements are prescribed in Chapter 36.70A RCW. The Planning Commission conducts public hearings and makes a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council, following its own public hearing(s), may approve, approve with modifications, deny or remand the Planning Commission’s recommendation for additional study. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.18.040 PROCEDURAL TEXT AMENDMENTS.

(a)    Applicability. This section applies to amendments involving changes to procedural requirements such as those prescribed in Chapter 20.02 BMC, Project Permits, or Chapter 20.04 BMC, State Environmental Policy Act. (Note: A change to these chapters does not automatically constitute a procedural change.)

(b)    Procedures. The Department shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council, following its own public hearing, may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the Department’s recommendation.

(c)    State Environmental Policy Act. Procedural amendments are exempt from environmental review (SEPA) pursuant to WAC 197-11-800(20). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.18.050 MINOR CORRECTIONS.

(a)    Exempt. An amendment that does not result in any substantive change to the content or meaning of a regulation such as a correction to the punctuation or numbering sequence shall be exempt from notice and hearing requirements of this chapter.

(b)    Procedures. The Department makes a recommendation to the City Council, who may approve, modify and approve, or deny the amendment. Amendments to make minor corrections are processed in accordance with the ordinance requirements set forth in the City Charter, Article III, Legislation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.18.060 AMENDMENTS TO THE SHORELINE MASTER PROGRAM.

(a)    Applicability. This section applies to amendments to Chapter 20.16 BMC, Shoreline Development.

(b)    Procedures. Review procedures are prescribed in Chapter 173-26 WAC and the Shoreline Master Program. A minimum of one public hearing shall be held prior to the City Council’s decision on the amendment. The City Council may approve, approve with modifications, or deny an amendment.

(c)    Approval of Ecology. A City Council decision approving an amendment shall be transmitted to the Washington State Department of Ecology, who approves, recommends specific changes necessary to make the proposal consistent with Chapter 90.58 RCW policy and its applicable guidelines, or denies the amendment. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.40 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

20.40.010    TITLE.

20.40.020    AUTHORITY.

20.40.030    INTENT AND PURPOSE.

20.40.040    ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.

20.40.050    DEFINING "SHALL" AND "MAY."

20.40.060    MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.

20.40.070    CONFLICTS.

20.40.080    INTERPRETATIONS.

20.40.090    ZONING DESIGNATIONS.

20.40.100    ZONING MAP INTERPRETATIONS.

20.40.110    COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.

20.40.120    CITY LIABILITY.

20.40.130    PROPERTY OWNER/ APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY.

20.40.140    SCOPE OF UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY.

20.40.150    SIMILAR USE DETERMINATION.

20.40.160    PROHIBITED USES.

20.40.170    COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING CONSISTENCY.

20.40.180    ENFORCEMENT.

20.40.190    PROHIBITION OF FURTHER PERMITS OR APPROVALS.

20.40.200    VIOLATION - PENALTY.


20.40.010 TITLE.

This title shall be known as the "City of Bremerton zoning code." This code shall consist of this text and the map entitled "City of Bremerton official zoning map." (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 10, 2005)


20.40.020 AUTHORITY.

This title is adopted pursuant to Chapters 35.63 and 36.70A RCW. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.030 INTENT AND PURPOSE.

The intent of this title is to regulate the physical development of all lands within the City of Bremerton’s jurisdiction, except federally owned properties, in order to provide for orderly development within the City. The purpose is:

(a)    To implement the City’s Comprehensive Plan;

(b)    To protect the community’s social and economic stability, as well as the positive qualities and unique characteristics of all areas throughout the community;

(c)    To address both natural and manmade environmental considerations as part of the land use and development permitting processes;

(d)    To ensure the orderly and beneficial development and use of all lands by:

(1)    Reserving an adequate supply of developable land area for each major category of land use and in the most appropriate locations;

(2)    Preventing the encroachment of incompatible uses; and

(3)    Providing clear, concise regulations and development guidelines that are consistent with City goals and visions; and

(e)    To protect the public’s health, safety and welfare as a whole and not to create a duty of protecting any person or class of persons. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.040 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.

The Director shall have the authority to make and issue orders, rules, requirements, permits, interpretations, decisions, or determinations as necessary in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title, except when provided for otherwise. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.050 DEFINING "SHALL" AND "MAY."

The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" denotes a use of discretion in making a decision. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.060 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.

The provisions set forth in this title shall constitute the minimum requirements necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.070 CONFLICTS.

The provisions of this title shall govern when this code imposes a greater restriction than is required by other ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or other agreements. In the case of internal conflicts within this code, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.080 INTERPRETATIONS.

The Director shall have the authority to make written interpretations when necessary for clarification or to resolve conflicts within these regulations. The Director’s interpretations are processed as a Type I Director’s decision as prescribed in Chapter 20.02 BMC. Any person may submit a written request for a code interpretation to the Director, or the Director may issue a code interpretation on the Director’s own initiative. A request for a code interpretation shall include the following:

(a)    The provision of this title for which an interpretation is requested;

(b)    Why an interpretation of the provision is necessary;

(c)    Any reason or material in support of a proposed interpretation; and

(d)    Any fees adopted pursuant to Chapter 3.01 BMC by the City Council. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.090 ZONING DESIGNATIONS.

Zoning is the primary implementing tool of the Comprehensive Plan. The Plan’s land use designations provide the basis for the official zoning map, which breaks each of those designations into more specific zones. Each zone includes the land use standards and development requirements for development in each zone. Figure 20.40(a) lists the zones and the general category of each zone, which are included herein. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.100 ZONING MAP INTERPRETATIONS.

The Director shall use the following criteria to interpret the official zoning map:

(a)    Where a zone boundary is indicated as approximately following a property line, the property line is the zone boundary.

(b)    Where a zone boundary is indicated as following a street or other right-of-way, the centerline of the street or right-of-way is the zone boundary.

(c)    Where a zone abuts or extends into a lake or into Puget Sound, the zone boundary extends into that body of water to the full limit and territorial extent of the jurisdiction and control of the City.

(d)    Where a zone boundary is not indicated to follow a property line, street, or other right-of-way, the boundary line is as drawn, based on the scale shown on the zoning map. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.110 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.

Nothing in this title shall be construed to excuse compliance with other applicable federal, state, or local laws or regulations. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.120 CITY LIABILITY.

Nothing in this title shall be construed to impose any duty upon the City or any of its officers or employees so as to subject them to liability for damages not otherwise imposed by law to protect individuals from personal injuries or property damage. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.130 PROPERTY OWNER/APPLICANT RESPONSIBILITY.

(a)    It is the intent of this title to place the obligation of complying with the requirements of this title and all applicable laws and regulations upon the owner, and jointly and severally upon the occupant of the land and buildings within its scope.

(b)    The applicant is responsible to provide accurate and complete information and plans to comply with the requirements of this title and all applicable laws and regulations. The City is not responsible for the accuracy of information or plans provided to the City for review or approval. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.140 SCOPE OF UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, remove, convert, demolish, use, occupy, or maintain any structure or use of land, or any portion, in violation of the provisions of this title. The violation shall exist until the unlawful act and/or unlawful use has been remedied or abated. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.150 SIMILAR USE DETERMINATION.

Whenever a proposal is not listed as a permitted, conditional or accessory use in the zone, it may be permitted in that zone if the Director determines it is a use similar to a listed use for that zone.

(a)    The applicant shall make in writing requests for a similar use determination. The determination shall be processed as a Type I Director’s decision as set forth in the procedures for a Type I decision in Chapter 20.02 BMC.

(b)    The Director shall issue a decision in writing and shall consider the scale, visual impacts, traffic generation, relationship to surroundings, and other factors which influence and/or define the nature of the proposal.

(c)    If the proposal is found to be similar to a listed use, the proposal shall be subject to all standards, requirements and permitting processes to which the listed use is subject. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.160 PROHIBITED USES.

(a)    No use that is illegal under local, state, or federal law shall be allowed in any zone within the City.

(b)    Any use not listed as a permitted, conditional or accessory use by the zone; or any use not determined to be a similar use pursuant to BMC 20.40.150; or any use not found to be an allowable accessory use to the principal use shall be prohibited within that zone unless allowed otherwise by law.

(c)    A collective garden, as defined in BMC 20.42.040, is prohibited in all zoning districts of the City.

(1)    Any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and shall be abated by the City Attorney under applicable provisions of this code or state law, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 1.04 BMC;

(2)    Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any City, state, or federal law or statute. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5205 §3, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.170 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING CONSISTENCY.

Regulations used to implement the Comprehensive Plan must be consistent with the Plan. Figure 20.40(a) identifies the relationships between a Comprehensive Plan designation and establishes the zoning districts that may be approved within each Comprehensive Plan designation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.180 ENFORCEMENT.

(a)    It is the duty of the Director to enforce the provisions of this title. Enforcement actions may include one or more of the following:

(1)    Withhold or revoke land use permits or approvals;

(2)    Withhold or revoke building permits for construction or alteration of a structure, abatement of structures;

(3)    Revocation of use permits and variances;

(4)    Enforcement through Chapter 1.04 BMC;

(5)    Filing a court action in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(b)    Land Use/Permit Revocation. A permit or land use approval may be revoked if:

(1)    The work is not authorized by a valid permit or approval;

(2)    Inaccurate or incorrect information was used to obtain the permit or approval or the permit or approval was issued in error;

(3)    The permittee is not complying with the terms of the permit or approved plans;

(4)    The permittee is in violation of the requirements of this chapter or of any land use ordinance, statute, or regulation; or

(5)    The work is, in the Director’s judgment, a hazard to property or public safety, is adversely affecting or about to adversely affect adjacent property or rights-of-way, a drainage way, watercourse, sensitive areas or stormwater facility, or is otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare.

(c)    Revocation of a permit or land use approval shall be made by:

(1)    The Director for Type I and Type II permits subject to the right of appeal as set forth in BMC 20.02.140.

(2)    The Administrative Hearing Examiner for a Type III permit subject to the right of appeal as set forth in BMC 20.02.140 and Chapter 36.70C RCW.

(3)    The Council for a Type IV permit as set forth in BMC 20.02.140 and Chapter 36.70C RCW provided by law. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.190 PROHIBITION OF FURTHER PERMITS OR APPROVALS.

The City shall not accept, process, or approve any application for a subdivision or any other land use permit or approval, or issue a certificate of occupancy for property on which a violation of this title has occurred until the violation is cured by restoration or other means accepted by the Director and by payment of any penalty imposed for the violation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.40.200 VIOLATION - PENALTY.

(a)    Any violation of any provision of this title constitutes a civil violation under Chapter 1.04 BMC for which a monetary penalty may be assessed and abatement may be required as provided therein.

(b)    In addition to, or as an alternative to, any other penalty provided in this chapter or by law, any person who violates any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.12.020(2). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)

Figure 20.40(a)

The following figure lists the Bremerton Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map designations with corresponding BMC Title 20, Land Use, implementing zoning districts:

Figure 20.40(a) COMPREHENSIVE PLAN/ZONING CONSISTENCY  

	COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DESIGNATION	IMPLEMENTING ZONING DISTRICTS

	Low Density Residential (LDR)	Low Density Residential (R-10)

	Medium Density Residential (MDR)	Low Density Residential (R-10)

Medium Density Residential (R-18)

	Multifamily Residential (MR)	Low Density Residential (R-10)

Medium Density Residential (R-18)

High Density Residential (R-40)

	District Centers (DC)	District Center Core (DCC)

	Employment Center (EC)	Employment Center (EC)

	Downtown Regional Center (DRC)	Business Core (BC)

Downtown Core (DC)

Downtown Waterfront (DW)

Neighborhood Business (NB)

	Manufacturing and Industrial Center (MIC)	Puget Sound Industrial Center-Bremerton (PSIC-B)

Industrial (I)

	General Commercial (GC)	General Commercial (GC)

	Freeway Corridor (FC)	Freeway Corridor (FC)

	Neighborhood Business (NB)	Neighborhood Business (NB)

	Industrial (I)	Industrial (I)

City Utility Lands (CUL)

	Higher Education (HE)	Institutional (INST)

	City Utility Lands (CUL)	City Utility Lands (CUL)

Watershed (WS)

	Watershed Lands (WS)	Watershed (WS)

	Naval Base-Kitsap	Naval Base Kitsap-Bremerton

(Ord. 5390 § 2, 2019; Ord. 5364 §4, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5111 §2, 2010: Ord. 5091 §3, 2009: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.42 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

20.42.010    INTRODUCTION TO DEFINITIONS.

20.42.040    DEFINITIONS.


20.42.010 INTRODUCTION TO DEFINITIONS.

Terms not defined herein shall take their meaning from definitions in the Comprehensive Plan, Shoreline Master Program and other ordinances incorporated by reference. If a specific term is not defined or referenced, it shall take its normal and customary meaning within the context of how it is used. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. The following terms are defined in this chapter and shall be applied to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.42.040 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall be applied within this title:

(a)    Definitions "A":

"Abandoned sign" means any sign, including its structure and other components, which is located on vacant property or an unoccupied building for a period of one (1) year or more and which, during that time, is not used for legal sign purposes; or which relates to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies; and/or which has been allowed to deteriorate to become a public hazard or eyesore.

"Abandonment" or "abandoned" means to cease operation for a period of ninety (90) or more consecutive days unless documentation is provided to the City that negotiations are underway potentially leading to the sale, lease, or resumption of operations, in which case a wireless communications facility may not be considered abandoned for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days.

"Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)" means a second dwelling unit on a lot with an existing principal unit added to or created for use as a complete, independent or semi-independent living unit with provisions for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping, and which complies with the development and design standards contained in this code for ADUs (BMC 20.46.010).

"Accessory use, activity or structure" means a use, activity, structure or part of a structure which is subordinate and incidental to the permitted principal use or building, located on the same lot or parcel with such principal use or building, and erected or established only after or in conjunction with the establishment of the principal use or building.

"Acre, gross" means a measurement of land equal to forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet with no deductions or subtractions for elements such as public or private streets or nondevelopable areas. (See also "Acre, net.")

"Acre, net" means a measurement of land after subtracting public and private streets, rights-of-way, and other unusable or nondevelopable areas of land from a gross acre of land (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet). (See also "Acre, gross.")

"Adjoining" or "adjacent" means property that touches or is directly across a public or private right-of-way. This does not include property across from limited access highways or arterials with four (4) lanes of traffic or more.

"Administrative Hearing Examiner" means a person appointed with the powers set forth in Chapter 2.13 BMC. The term "Administrative Hearing Examiner" shall likewise include the Examiner Pro Tem. As used in this chapter, "Administrative Hearing Examiner" shall not mean the Municipal Court Hearing Examiner established pursuant to Chapter 2.62 BMC.

"Adult entertainment business." See BMC 20.46.110.

"Adult family home" means a residential home in which a person or persons provide personal care, special care, room, and board to more than one (1) but not more than six (6) adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the person or persons providing the services; provided, however, any limitation on the number of residents resulting from this definition shall not be applied if it prohibits the City from making reasonable accommodations to disabled persons in order to afford such persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling as required by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(b).

"Alley" means any public right-of-way or thoroughfare having a typical width of at least ten (10) feet, but generally not more than thirty (30) feet, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which affords only secondary means of access to abutting properties, primarily for service purposes.

"Alteration" means any change in the size, shape, method of illumination, position, location, construction or the supporting structure of a sign.

"Alteration, structural" means any changes or repairs to the supporting members of a structure, or to the configurations of the roof or exterior walls, that would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure. This does not include minor actions such as adding a doorway or window, or attaching architectural features, appurtenances, or adornments.

"Antenna tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including but not limited to self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers.

(1)    "Type I tower" means a tower up to, but not exceeding, sixty (60) feet in height.

(2)    "Type II tower" means a tower greater than sixty (60) feet in height.

"Antenna, wireless" means any exterior equipment attached or mounted to a building or tower in the form of one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.

(1)    An "omnidirectional antenna" transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a three hundred sixty (360) degree radial pattern. For the purpose of the provisions set forth in BMC 20.46.140, an omnidirectional antenna is up to fifteen (15) feet in height and up to seven (7) inches in diameter. If otherwise meeting the definition, a whip antenna is considered an omnidirectional antenna.

(2)    A "directional antenna" transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than three hundred sixty (360) degrees.

(3)    A "parabolic antenna" is a device of generally parabolic shape for the reception and transmission of radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern. Also referred to as a satellite dish.

"Applicant" means a person who applies for any permit or approval to do anything governed by this title and who has legal standing to apply for a permit or approval on the specific property.

"Appurtenance" or "appendage" means a supplemental component, architectural feature, or decoration that has been added to or extends outward from the exterior of a building wall and is not a primary component of the structure itself. This includes bay windows, low decks, open porches, awnings, chimneys, and other similar features.

"Area of a sign" means the total space within the frame or outer dimensions of a sign and including any logos or other artistic or architectural features that are directly related to or an integral part of the sign. (See also BMC 20.52.060, Sign measurements.)

"Art gallery" means a room or series of rooms where art such as paintings, sculptures or other works are exhibited.

"Art studio" means a loft, room, group of rooms or building in which an artist works. This includes facilities for the production of photographic works (still or motion), painting, sculpture, dance, music or similar activities. A studio is often found in combination with a gallery or may be an accessory use to a retail business or other use. This does not include incidental artist work areas within a residence, which produce no odors or noise that negatively impact adjacent properties.

"Assisted living facility" means a residential facility for elderly persons (age fifty-five (55) or older) who require moderate to extensive assistance with daily tasks such as cooking, eating, bathing, housekeeping, dispensing of medicines, shopping, appointments and other tasks.

"Automobile sales" means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of personal or commercial vehicles such as cars, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles, etc. See "Retail, general" for clarification of automobile sales that are wholly indoors.

"Automobile service and repair" means an establishment primarily engaged in repairing, maintaining, or servicing automobiles, including battery exchange station. Servicing and repairing of automobiles on a residential lot for automobiles that are not registered to the property owners or tenants on the site shall be considered automobile service and repair.

"Awning/canopy" means a temporary or movable shelter (awning), or a fixed rigid shelter (canopy) supported entirely by the exterior wall of the building and generally extending over a pedestrian walkway. When used in conjunction with signs, only that portion of the awning or canopy that is actually used as a sign shall be included in sign area calculations. Lighting of the awning or canopy, whether directly, indirectly, or by backlighting, shall have no effect on the sign requirements, unless lighted signs are specifically prohibited in that area or zone.

(b)    Definitions "B":

"Battery charging station" means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

"Battery exchange station" means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

"Bay window" means a window projecting outward from an exterior wall of a structure. The protrusion has a maximum depth of thirty (30) inches, and a maximum horizontal width of twelve (12) feet. The base of the projecting window is at least twenty-four (24) inches above grade directly below the center of the window.

"Bed and breakfast" means an owner-managed and owner-occupied residential single-unit dwelling in which rooms or other overnight accommodations are rented on a nightly basis. Meals may be included that are included as part of the basic compensation. This does not include group residential homes, boarding and rooming houses.

"Buffering" means a structural, earthy, or vegetative form used to minimize the impacts of one land use upon another. A buffer may include any one or a combination of fences, walls, berms, high shrubs, trees, or other landscaping. Distance separation is also a form of buffering.

"Building code" means the International Building Code and related codes as amended and adopted by the City of Bremerton.

"Building coverage" means that portion of a lot covered by the roof areas of all structures. This shall not include open decks up to thirty (30) inches above ground, except if it provides a roof over occupancy underneath.

"Building envelope, allowable" means the three (3) dimensional space within which a structure is permitted to occupy. Height, floor area ratio, setbacks, lot coverage and similar restrictions establish the building envelope.

"Building line" means a line on a lot, generally parallel to property lines and located a sufficient distance from the property lines, to provide the minimum yard areas required by this code. Building lines establish the area within which buildings are permitted and do not necessarily correspond with the location of any existing structures or other improvements.

"Bulletin board/kiosk" means a permanent sign structure intended to accommodate changeable copy such as private or public notices, special event information, and other short-term messages, and generally at a scale suitable for pedestrians and not intended to be read by passing motorists.

(c)    Definitions "C":

"Car wash" means a business engaged in washing, waxing, polishing, and general cleaning of automobiles, small trucks, light utility vehicles and small recreational vehicles, but that is not designed to handle larger commercial trucks and buses. It includes self-service, full-service, and automated car washes and auto detailing services.

"Caretaker" means a person who maintains or watches over someone else’s land or property on a part-time or full-time schedule. The caretaker may live on the property or elsewhere.

"Caretaker’s residence" means an accessory dwelling unit provided by the owner of a property to be used exclusively as living quarters for the caretaker(s) of that property.

"Carport" means an attached or detached partially enclosed accessory structure intended primarily for the storage of private vehicles such as automobiles, light trucks, or recreational vehicles which is open to the weather on at least two (2) sides.

"Change of use" means a change in the utilization or occupancy of a property or building from one use to another.

"Changeable copy/readerboard sign" means a sign structure that may be internally or externally illuminated and intended to accommodate changeable lettering, numbering, graphic displays, or other short-term messages. Generally used for commercial advertising or for public service announcements of current or coming events. (Also see "Public information/identification sign.")

"City" means the City of Bremerton, Washington.

"Collective garden" means gardens established and/or maintained for the growing, production, transportation, and delivery of cannabis, by qualifying patients, for medical use, as defined in RCW 69.51A.085, as currently enacted and hereinafter amended.

"Community facility" means a facility operated by a public agency or nonprofit organization for social gatherings, meetings, learning, recreation, programs to promote economic independence, or similar functions.

"Construction sign" means a sign that relates directly to a construction project taking place on the premises and may include such information as the name of the project and contractors, phone numbers, completion dates, and similar information about the project.

(d)    Definitions "D":

"Day care facility" means a facility licensed by the state of Washington and approved by the City to provide regular care for adults or children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours.

"Deck" means an open platform wider than eighteen (18) inches. A deck may be freestanding, cantilevered from a building, or connected to the ground with steps or ramps. A deck that is higher than thirty (30) inches above finish grade may be referred to as a raised deck, a rooftop deck, a balcony, or other suitable term.

"Density" means a measure of residential concentration, usually expressed as the number of dwellings per acre of land. For the purposes of calculating allowable densities within this code, density shall be measured on a "net" basis, whereby unusable areas such as rights-of-way and lands in public or shared ownership shall be deducted from the overall area in the calculation. For example, a one hundred and twenty (120) acre area containing twenty (20) acres of rights-of-way and public lands and three hundred (300) dwellings has a (net) density of three (3) dwellings per acre (three hundred (300) dwellings/one hundred (100) usable acres). (See also "Acre, net" and "Acre, gross.")

"Density, maximum" means the maximum number of dwellings allowed per the net buildable acreage as stated for each zone. Where not specified in a zone chapter, no maximum density shall apply.

"Density, minimum" means the minimum number of required dwellings per net buildable acre as stated for each zone. Where not specified in a zone chapter, the associated Comprehensive Plan land use density applies.

"Detached" means any residential structures on the same lot that are not connected and have a fire separation of no less than six (6) feet as defined in Section R302 of the IRC. For commercial structures see the International Building Code.

"Detoxification center" means a facility providing for the care and treatment of an intoxicated person during the period in which the person recovers from the transitory effects of acute intoxication.

"Development coverage" means that portion of a lot covered by the impervious surface areas of all structures, and impervious paved areas, such as driveways and walkways.

"Directional sign" means a permanent sign which is designed solely for the purpose of directing motor vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, or other traffic, or individuals toward a specific destination or route.

"Director" means Bremerton’s Director of Community Development and his/her designee.

"Drinking place" means an establishment selling intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises.

"Drive-through facility" means an automobile-oriented component of a permitted use that includes both service window(s) and a stacking lane designed primarily for drive-through trade, and which provides service and caters to patrons while in their motor vehicles. (See BMC 20.44.120.)

"Driveway" means a private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure.

"Duplex" means a structure containing two (2) dwelling units on a single lot.

"Dwelling, conventional" means any building or structure that is built or assembled (in the case of a modular structure) on the site and in conformance with the provisions of the International Building Code (IBC).

"Dwelling, duplex" means a building designed and arranged exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units.

"Dwelling, modular or factory-built" means buildings or structures that are constructed primarily in a factory and transported to the site for assembly or installation. All temporary wheels, axles, and other appliances used in the transport are removed at the destination and the structure is permanently placed, unless approved as a temporary placement by the City. Such structures are constructed to the standards of either the International Building Code (IBC) or the HUD Code. (See also "Manufactured home.")

"Dwelling, multi-unit structure" means a structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units. (Also referred to as a "multifamily structure.") Multi-unit structures also include:

(1)    "Dormitories" means a structure intended principally for sleeping accommodations, where no individual kitchen facilities are provided, and which is related to an educational institution or maintained by a nonprofit welfare organization.

"Dwelling, single-unit attached" means two (2) single-unit dwellings (houses) that are attached at a common side lot line with each dwelling located entirely on its own lot. This does not include row houses or other housing types having more than two (2) attached units. (See also "Zero lot line.")

"Dwelling, single-unit structure" means a structure containing one (1) dwelling unit. (Also referred to as a "single-family dwelling," or a "house.")

"Dwelling, townhouse," for purposes of this code, means a single-unit structure in a row of at least three (3) or more such units in which each unit has its own access to the outside, no unit is located over another, and each is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more common fire-resistant walls.

"Dwelling unit" means a living space or combination of rooms designed to provide independent year-round living facilities for one (1) family or household, constructed to the minimum standards of the IBC or HUD Code, and with provisions for sleeping, eating and sanitation.

(e)    Definitions "E":

"Education" and "school" means an institution primarily engaged in teaching and learning, operated by a public school district, nonprofit organization, or a private organization. Business and trade schools and Montessori schools are included, as are satellite buildings of higher education colleges.

"Education, higher and college" means a higher education college or university primarily engaged in teaching and research, and comprised of multiple educational buildings within a campus setting.

"Electric vehicle charging station" means a public or private parking space that is served by battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy (by conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. An electric vehicle charging station equipped with Level 1 (one hundred twenty (120) volts) or Level 2 (two hundred forty (240) volts) charging equipment is permitted outright as an accessory use to any principal use.

"Electric vehicle infrastructure" means structures, machinery, and equipment necessary and integral to support an electric vehicle, including battery charging stations, rapid charging stations, and battery exchange stations.

"Entertainment use" means an establishment with a primary function as a venue for entertainment activities in an indoor facility, excluding motion picture theaters and adult entertainment. Entertainment uses include video arcades, bowling alleys, billiard halls, performing arts centers, dance halls/night clubs and similar uses.

"Equipment structure" means a structure, shelter, cabinet, or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communication signals. Associated electronic equipment may include air conditioning, backup power supplies and emergency generators.

(f)    Definitions "F":

"Fence" means a structure built to prevent escape or intrusion, or to provide privacy, screening, or buffering from noise or other undesirable impacts or activities beyond the property line. Also includes freestanding walls.

"Finance," "insurance" and "real estate" means an establishment primarily involved in finance, such as depository and nondepository institutions, holding companies, investment companies, and brokers; insurance, such as carriers of all types, agents and brokers; and real estate, such as leasers, buyers, sellers, agents and developers.

"Foster home" means a dwelling unit in which a full-time resident provides temporary care and supervision on a full-time basis to not more than six (6) foster children, three (3) expectant mothers, or three (3) other adults requiring full-time care.

"Franchise business" means a business granted authorization by a manufacturer or parent company to sell or distribute goods or services at a certain location.

"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is designed solely for the purpose of directing motor vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, or other traffic, or individuals, toward a specific destination or route, which is not affixed to a building.

"Frontage" means the actual length of the front property line abutting a street or alley (if no street frontage), or length of the property line of a flag lot that most closely parallels the street it most directly relates to.

(g)    Definitions "G":

"Garage" means an attached or detached enclosed accessory structure intended primarily for the storage of private vehicles such as automobiles, light trucks or recreational vehicles.

"Gas station" means a land use involving the retail sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel or oil, including electric vehicle rapid charging stations. Gas stations include self-service and full-service operations.

"Grade" means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line. When the property line is more than five (5) feet from the building, grade is the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface between the building and a line five (5) feet from the building. For structures built over water, "grade" shall mean the elevation of the ordinary high water mark. For the purposes of signs, "grade" is the level of the ground surface immediately below a sign or proposed sign location, and where slope is involved is the average of the levels at each supporting member of the sign’s structure.

"Grade plane" and "grade, average final" means a horizontal reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building.

"Grade, existing" means the grade or topography existing prior to any excavation, clearing, grading or filling.

"Gross floor area (g.f.a.)" means the sum of all horizontal areas of floors of a structure when measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, including glazed or screened porches.

"Group residential" means a place of residence for persons with physical, developmental or mental disabilities, homeless or otherwise dependent persons (not including dormitories), typically with shared living quarters without separate kitchen facilities for each room or unit. Group homes are intended to provide residential facilities in a home-like environment. Such homes range from licensed establishments operated with twenty-four (24) hour supervision to nonlicensed facilities offering only shelter. This classification includes group care residence for those whose permanent residence is the group residential facility. It does not include transient lodging. This definition shall not be construed to include crisis care facilities or detoxification centers. Group residential facilities are categorized as follows:

(1)    "Group residential home" means a residential home in which a person or persons provide personal care, special care, room, and board to more than one (1) but not more than six (6) children and/or adults who are not related by blood or marriage to the person or persons providing the services; provided, however, any limitation on the number of residents resulting from this definition shall not be applied if it prohibits the City from making reasonable accommodations to disabled persons in order to afford such persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling as required by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. 3604(f)(3)(B).

(2)    "Group residential facility - Class I (assisted living)" means a group care residence for seven (7) or more children and/or adults who for various reasons cannot reside in their natural homes; and/or for persons who have severe chronic disabilities or physical handicaps that cause substantial functional limitations. This facility may provide physical therapy and training in social skills. It does not include facilities to which persons are assigned as a result of criminal conviction or those where residents, individually or by their legal guardians, are not free to terminate their residency at will.

(3)    "Group residential facility - Class II" means a group care residence for juvenile delinquents, persons serving a sentence in lieu of confinement, persons needing correctional or mental rehabilitation, or persons needing rehabilitation and treatment for social and/or family problems, drug or alcohol addiction, or abuse. This definition includes programs providing alternatives to imprisonment; transition back into the community including prerelease, work-release, probationary programs that are under the supervision of a court, state, or local agency and for housing of sexually violent predators as defined in RCW 71.09.020(18). Teaching of work or social skills may be provided in this class facility but it does not include drug or alcohol detoxification centers.

(h)    Definitions "H":

"Heavy industrial/manufacturing" means a land use involving assembly, construction, research and testing, processing or extraction of goods or materials, with the potential to create noise, smoke, dust, vibration, odor or other environmental impacts or pollution. Storage of equipment or products having similar environmental impacts are also included. Heavy industrial/manufacturing uses include extraction or refinement of raw materials, mass production of large durable goods, production of industrial chemicals, rolling or drawing of metals, and any process that involves extensive use of hazardous or volatile materials or chemicals. Production processes that produce continuous high levels of noise, produce obnoxious odors detectable off site, or produce off-site light or glare impacts constitute heavy industrial/manufacturing. (See also "Light industrial/manufacturing.")

Height. Related to existing or proposed buildings, height is determined pursuant to BMC 20.44.070, except that the highest point of a building with a pitched or hipped roof shall be considered, for purposes of this definition, to be the highest point of the roof.

"Home occupation" means any nonresidential use carried out for monetary gain which is secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes, and which is operated in accordance with the home occupation standards of this code.

"Homeowners’ association" means an association of homeowners that has responsibility for commonly owned property within its residential development and which enforces covenants and restrictions on commonly owned areas or private property.

"Hospital" means a licensed institution providing primary health care services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from physical or mental conditions, and which may include related facilities as an integral part of the institution.

"Hotel" and "lodging place" means an establishment that offers transient lodging accommodations to the general public, and which may provide such related services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, gift shops, beauty shops and recreational facilities.

"Household" means all persons, regardless of age, sex, or family relationships, that reside as a single unit in a dwelling intended for single household occupancy. Such group quarter facilities as dormitories, boarding houses, nursing homes or similar accommodations typically do not provide facilities for households.

(i)    Definitions "I":

"Illegal sign" means any sign or advertising device which was erected or altered in violation of the sign codes in effect at the time of such action and which remain in violation of existing codes.

"Impervious surface" means any material which reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. (See also "Paved surface.")

"Incidental signs" means signs that are intended for the convenience of the public, which are informational only, and which do not include the advertising of products or services. Such signs include business hours signs, credit card signs, entrance and exit signs, and similar signs, some of which may be required by law for safety purposes.

"Incubator for business" means a facility that provides organizational, mentoring or capital support intended to accelerate the successful development of start-up companies, or imparts job and business skills to employees or trainees. Incubated businesses make progress toward graduation to independence and relocation into permanent facilities.

(j)    Definitions "J":

"Junk yard" means a place where discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or otherwise handled. This includes automotive wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, and storage of structural steel materials and equipment, but does not include used or salvaged machinery in operable condition nor the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a minor part of manufacturing operations.

(k)    Definitions "K":

"Kennel" means an establishment where five (5) or more domestic animals older than six (6) months are kept, whether for compensation or not. This does not include veterinary clinics/hospitals, pet shops or zoos.

(l)    Definitions "L":

"Light industrial/manufacturing" means a land use involving assembly, processing or research and testing of parts or materials or chemicals made or refined at another location. Light industrial/manufacturing uses have little or no potential of creating noise, smoke, dust, vibration or other environmental impacts or pollution. Production processes do not employ the extensive use of hazardous or volatile materials or chemicals, produce continuous high levels of noise, produce obnoxious odors detectable off site, or produce off-site light or glare impacts. Storage of equipment or products that do not create environmental impacts, and mini-storage as a primary use is included. (See also "Heavy industrial/manufacturing.")

"Loading area" means an area designed and intended for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other materials.

"Lot" means any area, tract or parcel of land owned by or under the lawful control and in the lawful possession of one distinct ownership undivided by a dedicated street or alley or another ownership, and which has a minimum of twenty (20) feet of frontage on a street.

"Lot area" means the area within the boundary lines of a lot. When creating new lots, the calculation for each new lot area shall not include public and private streets, wetlands, and other areas that may be restricted from use or from the types of development allowed by the zone in which the property is located, except when an unbuildable critical area, as defined per BMC 20.14.200, comprises twenty-five (25) percent or less of the lot, it may be included in the lot area.

"Lot, depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a lot, measured along a line midway between the side property lines. The depth of an irregular lot or a lot having more or fewer than two (2) side lot lines will be determined in the most reasonable manner, based on the lot’s longest average dimension.

"Lot, flag" means a lot with access to its street by way of a narrow strip of land having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. A flag lot consists of two (2) parts.

(1)    The "flag" or main body of the lot; and

(2)    The "panhandle" or narrow accessway connecting the body of the lot to the street.

"Lot line, front" means any property line that abuts a public street, private street, alley (if the alley provides primary access) or ordinary high water mark, and is considered a frontage. (See also Figure 20.44(a).)

"Lot line, rear" means the property line most opposite or most distant from the designated front lot line and does not intersect any front lot line. Corner lots do not have rear lot lines. (See also Figure 20.44(a).)

"Lot line, side" means any lot line not defined as a front or rear lot line, or any lot line that intersects a front lot line. (See also Figure 20.44(a).)

"Lot, waterfront" means a lot of which any portion abuts wetlands or any water body regulated under the Bremerton Shoreline Master Program.

"Lot, width" means the average horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth line. The Director may use reasonable modifications to this procedure when determining the width of an irregular lot.

(m)    Definitions "M":

"Maintain" means to allow to exist or continue to exist. Also, where the context indicates, to keep in a safe, neat and clean condition.

"Manufactured home" means a single-family dwelling required to be built in accordance with regulations adopted under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.). The unit shall bear an insignia issued by a state or federal regulatory agency indicating that the manufactured home complies with all applicable construction standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Commercial coaches, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and motor homes are neither manufactured homes nor dwelling units. (See "Mobile home.")

"Marina" means a facility which provides moorage or wet or dry storage for watercraft or float planes, and which may offer marine-related sales and services.

"Medical office" and "clinic" means an establishment primarily engaged in providing medical, dental or other health care services to patients on the premises, but which excludes facilities for overnight patient care. Medical clinics that do not have facilities for overnight patient care are included.

"Mini-storage," for the intent of this title, means an accessory business that may contain office and individual compartmentalized self-storage units, stalls, or lockers which are rented or leased for the storage of household or business goods, supplies or materials. Mini-storage shall be an accessory use that is subordinate and incidental to the permitted principal use. (See "Light industrial/manufacturing" for further clarification of "mini-storage" when it is a primary use).

"Mobile home" means a factory-built dwelling built before June 15, 1976, to standards other than the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), and acceptable under applicable state codes in effect at the time of construction or introduction of the home into this state. Mobile homes are accommodated within some existing mobile home parks, but are not allowed on individual lots. (See "Manufactured home.")

"Monument sign" means a freestanding sign placed on a base of solid appearance, wherein the width of the base is equal to at least forty (40) percent of the width of the sign face.

"Motion picture theater" means any premises in which motion pictures are shown as the principal use of the premises, and wherein fees of any kind are charged, and wherein such movies are shown on a regular basis.

"Multiple-building complex" means a group of structures housing a combination of business, office, residential, or other uses, and which shares a common area, access, parking and/or other facilities.

"Multiple-occupancy building" means a single building housing more than one (1) retail business, office, commercial venture or other allowed land use.

"Museum" and "gallery" means a building, room, vessel (boat or ship), or site intended for the preservation and exhibition of artistic, historical, or scientific objects.

(n)    Definitions "N":

"Nonconforming sign" means a sign that was legally established, but no longer conforms to the current sign standards of this title.

"Nursery" and "greenhouse" means facilities used for the propagation and sale of agricultural or ornamental plants and related products:

(1)    "Retail nursery/greenhouse" offers products to the general public including plant materials, planter boxes, fertilizer, sprays, garden tools, and related items.

(2)    "Wholesale nursery/greenhouse" raises nursery stock for sale to retail nurseries or other businesses.

(3)    "Greenhouse" means a nursery facility constructed with transparent or translucent materials for indoor propagation of plants. A private greenhouse with no commercial sales is considered an accessory use.

"Nursing/convalescent home" means any home, place or institution which operates or maintains facilities providing convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours for three (3) or more patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who, by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable properly to care for themselves. Convalescent and chronic care may include but not be limited to any or all procedures commonly employed in waiting on the sick, such as administration of medicines, preparation of special diets, giving of bedside nursing care, application of dressings and bandages, and carrying out of treatment prescribed by a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts. It may also include community-based care. This does not include group residential facilities, hospitals, sanitariums, or treatment centers.

(o)    Definitions "O":

"Office" and "business service, general" means a place of employment providing services other than production, distribution, sale or repair of goods or commodities, excluding personal business services and medical offices. General office and business services include: legal, architectural, engineering, consulting or other professional services, or management, administrative, secretarial, marketing, advertising, or similar services.

"Off-premises sign" means any sign, including billboard signs, that contains a message or directs attention to a business, profession, product, event, activity, or service that is not related to a use or activity conducted or offered on the premises or at the location where the sign is located, excluding official road direction signs but including the sign faces(s) that contain(s) the message or direction noted above, as well as the pole or other structure upon which the sign face is attached. Off-premises signs include off-premises banners and signs carried by human beings or live animals when carried on the public right-of-way or any off-premises location.

"Open space" means areas retained for use as active or passive recreation areas or for resource protection, including, but not limited to, landscape areas, gardens, walkways, courtyards, lawns, or outdoor recreation areas.

"Outdoor athletic fields" means outdoor facilities used for sporting activities such as softball, baseball, football, soccer, running track, tennis complex and other nonmotorized sports. Outdoor athletic fields may include bleachers, concession stands, lights, restrooms and other supporting facilities.

(p)    Definitions "P":

"Parcel" means a continuous quantity of land in single ownership or under single control, consisting of one (1) or more lots, and considered a unit for purposes of development. (See "Lot.")

"Park," "playground" and "open space" mean a site designed, developed, or reserved for recreational use by the public, such as play areas, community gardens and natural areas.

"Parking, satellite" means a parking lot containing parking stalls required for a permitted land use which conforms to BMC 20.48.220.

"Parking, structure" means a parking lot in which parking stalls are located either below grade, or in a multilevel building structure.

"Paved surface" means a surface paved with asphalt, concrete, concrete pavers, brick or similar durable materials. Low-impact development technologies which provide a hard surface while allowing for water penetration shall be classified as paved areas. Paved areas do not include gravel, crushed rock, and similar nonbound materials.

"Pedestrian-oriented" means development designed with an emphasis primarily focused on pedestrian access from the street and sidewalks rather than vehicle-dominant design. In general, buildings are placed close to the street and the main entrance(s) is oriented to the street sidewalk and generally includes windows or display cases along building facades which face the street or pedestrian areas.

"Personal service" means an establishment engaged primarily in providing services involving the care of a person, apparel or minor appliances, such as: shoe repairs, laundry and dry-cleaning, beauty and barber shops, clothing/costume rental, tanning, other personal grooming facilities and domestic assistance services, and personal computing device or cellular phone repairs. This does not include massage parlors, health care services, exercise establishments, nor funeral services.

"Physical fitness and health club" means an establishment primarily engaged in providing facilities for indoor physical fitness activities and recreation. Physical fitness and health clubs may include such facilities as gymnasiums, swimming pools, and ball courts.

"Pole sign" means a freestanding sign supported by uprights or braces wherein the width of the uprights or braces comprises less than forty (40) percent of the width of the sign face.

"Porch" means a roofed open area attached to a building or other structure, usually at an entrance to the structure. A porch that is enclosed, glazed or screened may lose its status as an appurtenance.

"Portable sign" means any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building. A-frame or sandwich board signs, movable readerboard signs, and signs that are mounted, attached or painted on a trailer, boat or motor vehicle which is parked, stored or displayed conspicuously in a manner intended to attract the attention of the public are examples.

"Premises" means contiguous land in the same ownership or control not divided by a street or public right-of-way.

"Private club or lodge" means structures, facilities and grounds owned or operated by a private or fraternal organization for use by its members and guests.

"Projecting sign" means a sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to and projects from a structure or building facade and the face(s) of which is not parallel to the building’s facade. This sign may be supported by a structure in addition to its building or wall support.

"Public administration" means services and facilities operated by public agencies and serving a community need, and generally including staffed facilities or office spaces. These include government offices, post offices, satellite police and fire stations, and other public buildings.

"Public distribution/transmission facility" means the infrastructure lines and connections employed in the delivery and conveyance of utility services. Distribution facilities include equipment such as pipes, wires, cables and similar equipment necessary for delivering utilities including water, sewer, electricity, gas, broadband, and other services. Publicly owned utilities as well as privately owned utilities that serve the general public are included. (See also "Public utility facility.")

"Public information/identification sign" means a sign intended solely to inform the public of events or activities of community interest, to identify the entrance to or exit from the City or a district or neighborhood within the City, and which does not include the advertising of any business, product or service of a commercial nature, nor any logo, symbol, or other indication of a commercial message or sponsorship.

"Public services" means services provided for the benefit of the general public, including fire protection and suppression, law enforcement, public health, education, information, recreation, environmental protection, development assistance/permitting, etc.

"Public utility facility" means facilities provided for the benefit of the general public related to infrastructure and utilities. These include structures and equipment such as transfer stations, substations, pumping stations, distribution mains, wells, and related utility facilities and the structures that house them. Publicly owned utilities as well as privately owned utilities that serve the general public are included. (See also "Public distribution/transmission facility.")

(q)    Definitions "Q": Reserved.

(r)    Definitions "R":

"Rapid charging station" means an industrial grade electrical outlet that allows for faster recharging of electric vehicle batteries through higher power levels, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by Chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicular-type unit primarily designed for recreational camping or travel use that has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. These units include, but are not limited to, travel trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, folding camping trailers, truck campers, boat trailers, and motor homes.

"Recreational vehicle (RV) park" means a facility designed to provide two (2) or more sites on which to park travel trailers, motor homes or similar recreational vehicles for periods not to exceed thirty (30) days. Accessory uses to an RV park often include a swimming pool, playground equipment, convenience store, bathing and laundry facilities, and other camping/travel services.

"Recycling center" means a facility for the collection, storage and processing of recyclable materials including crushing, breaking, sorting, packaging and related operations. A "junk yard" is not a recycling center.

"Recycling collection station" means a facility consisting of structures, bins, or other containers designed or intended for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable materials until they are picked up and transported to another location for processing and/or packaging.

"Recycling collection station (limited)" means a recycling collection station for the collection of glass, tin cans, aluminum, cardboard, newspaper, magazines, plastics, and other recyclables in small units, but not including large appliances, furniture, auto parts, tires, hazardous or liquid wastes, or any forms of domestic garbage (putrescible wastes).

"Rehabilitation" means the upgrading of a building from a dilapidated or substandard condition.

"Residential, as secondary use" means when permitted in a nonresidential zone, a residential land use is not always accessory to other uses, but is considered secondary and subordinate to the principal uses of that zone. Residential uses are placed in locations that don’t conflict with street level frontage locations that are reserved for retail, office and other business uses that comprise the primary function of that zone. (See design standards in center and corridor zones.)

"Residential use" means structures meeting the definition of Group R occupancies under the edition of the International Building Code currently adopted for use by the City.

"Restaurant" means a commercial use which sells a variety of prepared food and beverages and provides accommodations for consuming those products on or off the premises.

"Restaurant, fast food" means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of a limited variety of preprepared or rapidly prepared food and beverages directly to the consumer for consumption either on premises or off premises. Food is generally not served to the customers’ tables, but is more often dispensed through a walk-up counter or drive-through take-out window.

"Retail, general" means an establishment primarily engaged in the sale or rental of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption, and primarily rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Establishments with a portion of their sales going to other businesses or contractors, such as office supply stores, butcher shops, paint stores, hardware stores and similar shall also be considered general retail. Art studios shall also be included. General retail uses do not exceed seventy-five thousand (75,000) gross square feet of ground floor building area and do not include gas stations or outdoor automobile sales. Automobile sales that are wholly indoors (no outdoor storage or vehicles), shall be considered general retail.

"Retail, large" means an establishment with a building area of seventy-five thousand (75,000) gross square feet or greater in the ground floor, primarily engaged in the sale or rental of goods or merchandise to the general public or other businesses for personal, household or business consumption and primarily rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Large retail uses often include wholesale stores, discount stores, malls, shopping plazas, outlet centers, department stores and similar.

(s)    Definitions "S":

"Senior citizen" means an individual of fifty-five (55) years of age or older.

"Senior housing complex" means a planned residential community, intended and operated for occupancy by senior citizens, which consists of any mix of detached single-family or duplex dwellings and/or retirement apartments, wherein at least eighty (80) percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one (1) senior citizen.

"Setback, maximum" means a required maximum horizontal distance between the finished exterior wall of a structure and the lot line of the lot on which it is located. Where maximum setbacks are stipulated, zone districts specify what portion of the structure’s finished front facade width must be located a distance equal to or lesser than the maximum setback from the property line. A maximum setback shall apply to the height of a structure up to fifteen (15) feet above grade, or the height of the building, whichever is less. Where not specified, no maximum setback shall apply.

"Setback, minimum" means the required horizontal distance between the finished exterior wall of a structure and the lot line of the lot on which it is located. All portions of a structure must be located away from the property line a distance equal to or greater than the minimum setback.

"Shop." Refer to the definition of "storage building."

"Shopping center" means a contiguous collection of retail businesses under one (1) ownership or common management located in a building or set of buildings.

"Sidewalk vendor" means a person(s) who sells edible or nonedible merchandise from a stand, booth, cart, basket, tray, table or other device on any sidewalk, street, highway or public place. They are not categorized as a land use.

"Sign" means any communication device, structure, or fixture which is intended to identify a building, use, business, or event; or to promote the sale of products, goods or services; using graphics, letters, figures, symbols, trademarks or written copy. Painted wall designs or patterns which do not represent a product, service or registered trademark, and which do not identify the user, are not considered signs. (See sign provisions of this code.)

"Sign structure" means any structure specifically intended to support a sign, and which may include supports, uprights, braces, framework, or other members needed for support.

"Social services" means establishments primarily engaged in providing social and rehabilitation services to improve life skills and increase socioeconomic opportunities for neighborhood or community residents of all ages. Establishments primarily engaged in providing welfare and charitable functions are included.

"Stacking lane" means a designated driving lane provided for vehicles waiting for, receiving, and exiting after receiving a service at a drive-up window from a permitted use. The lane is physically separated from other traffic and pedestrian circulation on the property and includes adequate area for cars to wait for service.

"Stadium and sports complex" means a large structure for open-air sports and entertainment generally consisting of tiered seating where people can sit and watch games or events. Sports complexes may also include recreational motor vehicle tracks such as go-cart tracks. Associated field houses and facilities for serving food are often included.

"Storage building" and "shop" mean an attached or detached accessory structure which is used for noncommercial storage of household goods or noncommercial recreational and hobby uses in association with the principal use.

"Storage yard, outdoor storage" means an outdoor area where vehicles, equipment, merchandise, raw materials, cargo containers, railroad cars, semi-truck trailers or other items are accumulated and stored for an indefinite period until needed. Storage yards are often used in conjunction with a warehouse, storage buildings, sheds or other structures and may be public or private. Unless a function of a government agency or public utility, storage yards are considered accessory to a business or other principal use.

"Story" means that portion of a building that extends from the floor surface to the surface of the floor above or, in the case of a top floor, to the ceiling or roof above. If a finished floor level is more than six (6) feet above the finished grade for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter, the area beneath that floor shall be considered a story.

"Street" means the improved section of any public or private right-of-way intended primarily for motor vehicle travel and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, together with bicycle lanes, sidewalks, and related improvements.

"Street, private" means a parcel at least twenty (20) feet in width, created specifically to provide motor vehicle access to abutting properties, the owners of which share in its ownership and maintenance responsibilities.

"Structure" means that which is built or constructed.

"Structure, accessory" means a structure that is incidental and subordinate to a principal structure and which is customarily found in connection with the principal structure and located on the same lot or parcel.

"Structure, principal" means a structure containing one or more principal uses, as permitted by the zone in which the property is located.

"Support structure" means any existing or proposed building, utility pole, or tower capable of supporting a wireless communications antenna. Support structures include, but are not limited to, existing buildings, water towers, and utility poles and/or towers.

(t)    Definitions "T":

"Temporary sign" means a sign that is not permanently affixed, and which is intended for short-term use, such as to advertise a specific activity such as a special promotion, sale, or fundraising event. For the purposes of this code, temporary signs are those displayed for between seven (7) and sixty (60) days.

"Townhouse." See "Dwelling, townhouse."

"Transient person" means a temporary lodger who stays no longer than thirty (30) days per visit.

"Transportation facility" or "multi-modal station" means a dedicated transit facility where several transit routes converge, including transit stations, transit stops, taxicab stands, transportation services, bicycle facilities, battery changing stations, electric vehicle charging stations, and similar. The transportation facility shall be owned, leased, or endorsed by a public transit authority for the purpose of providing public transportation services. A transportation facility is designed to accommodate several buses or multiple modes of transit that allows users to easily transfer between transit routes or modes. A transportation facility may provide transit passenger covered shelters and waiting areas, restrooms, and access for transit modes including buses, taxis and drop-off, and park and rides.

(u)    Definitions "U":

"Use" means the purpose or activity for which land or improvements are intended, occupied or maintained.

"Use, accessory" means a use that is incidental and subordinate to a principal use, which customarily is found in connection with the principal use, and which is located on the same lot or parcel such as a private garage, hobby shop, workshop, personal greenhouse, and required off-street parking.

"Use, conditional" means a use that is not permitted outright, but may be approved through a conditional use permit process. "Conditional use" shall have the same meaning as "special use," as employed in Bremerton Municipal Code.

"Use, principal" means the primary or main use conducted or allowed on a lot or parcel.

"Use, temporary" means a use that may occur on a lot on a short-term or seasonal basis for a prescribed period of time, which usually does not exceed a six (6) month duration during a twelve (12) month period.

(v)    Definitions "V":

"Vehicle- or trailer-mounted sign" means a sign placed or maintained on a stationary automobile, truck, trailer, or any other motor-driven vehicle. Vehicle- or trailer-mounted signs do not include signs painted or placed on commercial vehicles announcing or advertising the regular business activity of the vehicle owner. Vehicle- or trailer-mounted signs do not include signs on vehicles for sale at a licensed sales lot, nor signs on public transit vehicles including buses and licensed taxicabs.

"Vesting." A fully completed development application is "vested" at the time it is received by the permitting authority. The development may then be processed, permitted and carried out under the zoning, land division, and other regulations that were in effect when vesting occurred.

"Veterinary clinic" and "animal hospital" mean a facility providing routine and emergency medical attention to domestic pets and other animals.

(w)    Definitions "W":

"Wall sign" means a sign attached directly to or erected against the wall of a building with the face parallel to the facade of the building and extending no more than twelve (12) inches from the wall.

"Warehousing" means establishments involved in the storage and/or sale of bulk goods for resale or assembly, including wholesaling. This does not include establishments offering the sale of bulk goods to the general public, which may be classified as large retail.

"Worship and religious facility" means a building or structure primarily intended as a place for public worship and related activities such as religious education, meeting halls, and kitchens, or places for personal worship or meditation. It does not include vehicle or equipment storage yards, or other functions that are not clearly a necessary or integral part of the religious institution.

(x)    Definitions "X": Reserved.

(y)    Definitions "Y":

"Yard" means that portion of a lot that lies between a lot line (property line) and the building line. (See also "Lot, front," "Lot, side," and "Lot, rear.")

(1)    "Front yard" means the yard area extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front property line (lot line) and the front building line.

(2)    "Rear yard" means a yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear property line (lot line) and the rear building line. When irregular lots, through lots, and corner lots have no rear lot lines, they will have no rear yard areas as defined.

(3)    "Side yard" means a yard between the side lot line and the side building line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Triangular lots, corner lots, or other irregularly shaped lots may have only front and side yards. Through lots generally have two (2) front yards and two (2) side yards, but no rear yard as defined.

"Yard, construction or storage." See "Storage yard."

(z)    Definitions "Z":

"Zero lot line" means the location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one (1) of its sides rests directly on a side lot line with no setback. (Ord. 5369 §3, 2019; Ord. 5351 §2, 2018; Ord. 5345 §§5-9, 2018; Ord. 5326 §4, 2017; Ord. 5319 §§3, 4, 2017; Ord. 5312 §3, 2016; Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §4, 2014: Ord. 5222 §3, 2013; Ord. 5205 §5, 2013; Ord. 5177 §3, 2012; Ord. 5063 §2, 2008; Ord. 5046 §2, 2008; Ord. 5008 §3 (part), 2007; Ord. 4977 §5, 2006; Ord. 4971 §4 (part), 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.44 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

20.44.010    FRONT YARD.

20.44.020    TRADITIONAL FRONT YARD.

20.44.030    SIDE YARD.

20.44.040    REAR YARD.

20.44.050    ALTERNATIVE SETBACKS.

20.44.060    ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACKS.

20.44.070    MEASURING THE HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE.

20.44.080    CALCULATING LOT AREA.

20.44.090    ROUNDING OF FRACTIONS.

20.44.100    FLAG LOTS.

20.44.110    LIGHTING REGULATIONS.

20.44.120    DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.


20.44.010 FRONT YARD.

(a)    The front yard is the area extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front lot line and the front building line. (See Figure 20.44(a) for an illustration of front yards.) Structure intrusions into front yard setbacks are prohibited except:

(1)    Eaves, cornices, awnings, bay windows, architectural appendages, fireplaces, and chimneys and may project not more than two (2) feet into the front yard setback;

(2)    Decks, platforms, porches, steps, walkways, and driveways that do not exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the finished grade;

(3)    Raised decks, high or covered porches, balconies or similar architectural appendages that extend more than thirty (30) inches above finished grade may project not more than six (6) feet into the front yard setback;

(4)    Fences and freestanding walls that meet the requirements set forth in BMC 20.46.020 may be allowed.

(b)    Front yard setbacks shall be applied in the following manner for through lots:

(1)    Through Lot. A through lot has two (2) front lot lines parallel or approximately parallel to each other. The front yard setback shall apply to each front lot line, except the Director may designate one (1) of the front lot lines a rear lot line, provided the following criteria are met:

(i)    Orientation of the lot or structure shall be considered;

(ii)    At least sixty (60) percent of the lots or structures within the neighborhood block, or area being considered, are oriented in a similar direction away from the lot line being designated as a rear lot line;

(2)    Corner Lots. Corner lots have abutting streets that intersect. The front yard setbacks shall apply to each front property line.

(3)    Exceptions. When a property contains three (3) or more front yards, the Director may grant exceptions to maximum front yard setback requirements provided:

(i)    The maximum front yard setback continues to be applied to at least two (2) front yards that intersect each other;

(ii)    Relief is necessary to facilitate good design; and

(iii)    A strict application of the setback requirement would result in larger structures that are not practical for the intended use of the site. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.020 TRADITIONAL FRONT YARD.

In residential zones, the Director may grant modifications to the front yard setback provided:

(a)    Sixty (60) percent or more of the houses or garages/carports within a numbered block on the same side of the street as the subject property are set back less than the required zoning front yard setback; the average setback of the existing nonconforming structures may be used to establish the minimum front yard of all properties fronting on that side of the street; and

(b)    The minimum front yard setback shall in no case be less than five (5) feet. No portion of the primary structure shall enter within five (5) feet of the front property line, except as provided in BMC 20.44.010(a)(2). (Ord. 5319 §5, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.030 SIDE YARD.

The side yard is the area extending between the side lot line and the side building line and extends from the front yard to the rear yard. Triangle lots, corner lots and other irregular lots may have only front and side yards and no rear yards. Structure intrusions into side yard setbacks are prohibited except:

(a)    Eaves, cornices, awnings, fireplaces, and chimneys may project not more than two (2) feet into the side yard setback;

(b)    Platforms, steps, walkways, and driveways (does not include parking spaces) that do not exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the finished grade; and

(c)    Fences and freestanding walls that meet the requirements set forth in BMC 20.46.020. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.040 REAR YARD.

The rear yard is the area extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building line. Structure intrusions into rear yard setbacks are prohibited except:

(a)    Eaves, cornices, awnings, architectural appendages, fireplaces, and chimneys and may extend no more than two (2) feet into the required rear yard area setback, and are no closer than three (3) feet from any lot line.

(b)    Decks, platforms and open, uncovered porches, provided they do not exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the finished grade and are no closer than three (3) feet from any lot line.

(c)    Raised decks, high or covered porches, balconies or similar architectural appendages that extend more than thirty (30) inches above finished grade may project not more than six (6) feet into the rear yard setback.

(d)    Fences and freestanding walls that meet the requirements set forth in BMC 20.46.020; and steps, walks and driveways, provided they do not exceed thirty (30) inches in height above the finished grade. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.050 ALTERNATIVE SETBACKS.

The Director may approve alternative setbacks that generate a public benefit, provided the following criteria are satisfied:

(a)    Total site area within setbacks shall be equal to or exceed that created by adherence to the standard setbacks;

(b)    There shall be a finding of public benefit that is consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. An example of public benefit includes but is not limited to reduction of setback adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way in exchange for increased setback from a development-sensitive environment such as a wetland or an existing incompatible land use; and

(c)    The development plan shall not be inconsistent with the intent of any provision of the zoning code. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.060 ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACKS.

(a)    Accessory structures shall observe the front yard setback requirements of the zone in which they are located except for intrusions per BMC 20.44.010, 20.44.030, and 20.44.040.

(b)    Accessory structures in residential zoning districts may be constructed no closer than three (3) feet from the side or rear property lines that adjoin other property. No setback is required if the side or rear property line adjoins an alley. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §5, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.070 MEASURING THE HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE.

The height of a building or structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. Exceptions: penthouse for elevators, firewalls, chimneys, flagpoles, and wireless communications facilities in conformance with BMC 20.46.140 may exceed maximum height limits. None of these exceptions to the height regulations shall be used for advertising of any kind. (Ord. 5319 §6, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.080 CALCULATING LOT AREA.

Lot area shall include all areas within the exterior lot lines less any water areas, wetlands and other areas that may be restricted from use or from the types of development allowed by the zone in which the property is located. Lot widths, depths and setbacks on shoreline lots are measured from the ordinary high water mark. (See Figure 20.44(b) for an illustration of measuring lot area.) (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.090 ROUNDING OF FRACTIONS.

In several instances throughout the code, the number of units allowed may end in a fraction due to the mathematical equation used to determine allowable units. For instance, the number of dwelling units allowed on property using density calculations is determined by dividing the lot size by the number of square feet permitted per dwelling unit. When this number results in a fraction, round up to the next whole number (unit) when the fraction of whole number is at least 0.50. In no case shall setback requirements be rounded. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §6, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.100 FLAG LOTS.

A flag lot is defined as a lot with access to a street by way of a narrow strip of land. The lot consists of two (2) parts: the "flag" or main body of the lot and the "panhandle" or the narrow accessway connecting the lot to the street.

(a)    When creating new lots the following standards shall apply:

(1)    The minimum lot size shall be one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the minimum lot size of the underlying zone;

(2)    The "panhandle" shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet;

 

(3)    The minimum lot width and depth of the "flag" shall be the same as the underlying zone.

(b)    Flag lot dimensions shall be measured from the midpoint between two (2) opposite lot lines of the "flag" body of the lot.

(c)    The yard setbacks shall be the same as underlying zone setbacks, except the front yard setback area shall be applied per Figure 20.44(a).

(d)    In those cases where subsection (c) of this section cannot be applied, the property line that most closely parallels the street from which the lot gains its access shall be deemed the front lot line and front yard setbacks shall be measured from that line.

(e)    The accessway or driveway shall be under the same ownership as the body of the flag lot. An easement shall not be used as a method of providing access to the body of the flag lot.

(f)    The panhandle shall provide access to a paved and dedicated public right-of-way or a private street. Flag lots shall not be created in order to avoid providing turnarounds per City engineering street standards. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.110 LIGHTING REGULATIONS.

The following requirements shall apply concerning exterior lighting:

(a)    Light sources, both direct and nondirect, shall be selected and placed so that glare produced by any light source does not extend beyond the property lines, except onto adjacent sidewalks.

(b)    A photometric plan shall be submitted for all nonresidential development and multiple-family developments to confirm compliance with light requirements. The plan shall include the following items:

(1)    Location of all lighting fixtures;

(2)    Manufacturer’s model identification of each lighting fixture;

(3)    Manufacturer’s performance specifications of each fixture; and

(4)    Photometric plan of the installed fixtures which demonstrates that all illumination is confined within the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.44.120 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.

(a)    Applicability. Drive-through facilities are an accessory to a principal use of a structure and therefore are only allowed when found in association with a permitted use in commercial or industrial zones, unless drive-through facilities are expressly prohibited in the zoning districts regardless of the principal use.

(1)    Exception. While generally prohibited within the neighborhood business (NB) and DCC zones, drive-through facilities may be permitted provided the business has direct vehicular access from either Wheaton Way or Kitsap Way.

(2)    Drive-through facilities standards within this section apply to the construction of new drive-through facilities, the addition of a drive-through facility to existing developments, and/or the relocation of an existing drive-through facility on site.

(b)    Site Design Requirements. All drive-through facilities shall comply with the following requirements:

(1)    Location. All efforts should be taken to locate the drive-through facility towards the side and/or rear of buildings. Drive-through facilities shall not be located between the building and the street frontage except in the following circumstances:

(i)    Primary Frontage. A drive-through facility may be placed between a building and the street frontage only when all other site designs have been exhausted and are deemed unworkable by the Director. The drive-through facility shall be fully screened from view of the fronting street through the use of features such as sight-obscuring fencing, walls, trellises, and landscaping.

(ii)    Secondary Frontage. When a site contains more than one (1) street frontage the drive-through facility may be located between the building and secondary frontage only when all other site designs have been exhausted and found unworkable. Screening from the secondary frontage is encouraged, but not required.

(2)    Stacking. All drive-through facilities shall include a stacking lane that provides room for a minimum of four (4) cars to line up behind the drive-through window. For restaurant/food/drink uses the stacking lane shall provide room for a minimum of six (6) cars.

(3)    Design. The drive-through lane(s) shall be designed as a dedicated lane, physically separated from parking areas and internal parking circulation aisles in order to enhance pedestrian safety and provide screening from adjacent properties and right-of-way. A combination of two (2) of the following shall be provided adjacent to the drive-through lane(s):

(i)    Landscaped strips, islands, or berms that are a minimum of three (3) feet wide and fifty (50) square feet in size are required in addition to all other required landscaping areas. Said landscaped areas shall include a mix of ground covers and shrubs that act as a barrier between the drive-through lane and adjacent properties, right-of-way, and parking area;

(ii)    Hedges, decorative walls, fencing, or trellises that act as a visual barrier between the drive-through lane(s) and adjacent properties, right-of-way and parking areas;

(iii)    Decorative pavement, alternative materials (bricks, stamped concrete), or other durable ground treatment that clearly separates the drive-through lane(s) from other driving and parking areas on site that will withstand heavy traffic conditions found in association with drive-through lanes. Paint striping does not meet this requirement.

(4)    Signage.

(i)    Each ordering location shall have a maximum of (1) one menu board. One (1) additional menu board may be placed adjacent to the stacking lane for patrons waiting behind the ordering station. Each menu board sign shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet and have a maximum height of seven (7) feet.

(ii)    Menu boards shall be located in a landscaped strip or island no smaller than three (3) feet wide and fifty (50) square feet in total size. This landscaping area shall be in addition to all other required landscaping. The menu board(s) shall be oriented away from public streets and be intended for viewing by drive-through patrons only. Screening of the menu board may be required when the board is located adjacent to the right-of-way or neighboring properties. Screening shall ensure the board is not readable from the surrounding properties or street.

(5)    Pedestrian Features. In order to enhance safe pedestrian access, designated walkways from all on-site parking areas and from the public sidewalk to a building entry shall be provided as follows:

(i)    Walkways shall be a minimum five (5) feet in width, clearly marked and easily distinguished from driving surfaces by using a combination of landscaping strips or islands that delineate the pedestrian walkways; and

(ii)    Walkways shall include at least one (1) of the following treatments: decorative paving, stamped/stained concrete or raised walkways with alternative materials (such as brick, cobblestone, and decorative pavers) to clearly indicate the safe walking route. Walkways through heavy traffic areas such as the drive-through must be made of durable materials able to withstand heavy traffic conditions. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §4, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Figure 20.44(a)

Front Yard Setback Areas 

The following figure is for illustration purposes only and serves as a guideline when applying setback requirements.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Figure 20.44(a)

Front Yard Setback Areas 

The following figure is for illustration purposes only and serves as a guideline when applying setback requirements.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Figure 20.44(b)

LOT AREA CALCULATIONS 

The following illustration demonstrates the methods for calculating lot area in BMC Title 20.

1.    The drawing below represents a one (1) acre parcel before deductions from buildable areas. This is the "gross" lot area of the site.
[IMAGE]


2.    When creating new lots, the unbuildable areas such as streets and critical areas are subtracted from the gross lot area to produce a net lot area that is used when calculating the size of each new lot. If a new individual lot contains an unbuildable environmentally sensitive area that is twenty-five (25) percent or less of its gross lot area, the sensitive area may be included in the lot area. The drawing below represents a one (1) acre parcel divided into five (5) parcels with applicable deductions.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.46 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

20.46.010    ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.

20.46.020    FENCES AND WALLS.

20.46.030    HOME OCCUPATIONS.

20.46.040    MANUFACTURED HOMES.

20.46.050    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ON A PRIVATE LOT.

20.46.060    DISH ANTENNAS.

20.46.070    ADAPTIVE REUSE OF COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.

20.46.080    MINERAL RESOURCE OVERLAY.

20.46.090    TEMPORARY ENCAMPMENT PERMIT.

20.46.110    ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES.

20.46.140    WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.

20.46.150    PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES.

20.46.160    PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION/ TRANSMISSION FACILITIES.


20.46.010 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.

An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) may be permitted where a new or existing single-family dwelling unit (hereafter, "principal unit") is allowed. Accessory dwelling units are exempt from density requirements and shall be subject to the following requirements:

(a)    An ADU shall comply with the development standards of the underlying zone for the principal unit including setbacks, height, and lot coverage or BMC 20.44.060, accessory structures setbacks for detached ADUs.

(b)    An ADU may be attached or detached from the principal unit.

(c)    Only one (1) ADU may be created per lot. The lot shall only contain one (1) single-family dwelling unit and one (1) ADU.

(d)    Manufactured homes may be allowed as an accessory dwelling unit provided it complies with the design criteria of ADUs and must comply with BMC 20.46.040, manufactured home provisions, excluding BMC 20.46.040(a)(2) and (6) regarding size and roof pitch.

(e)    An ADU shall be subordinate to the principal unit. The ADU shall be limited to not more than sixty (60) percent of the principal unit’s total habitable floor area with the following exception:

(1)    To encourage the compact infill development and use of existing single-family homes, if a residence that was constructed or remodeled prior to January 1, 2017, is proposed to be divided into a principal unit and an ADU, the Director may allow equal square footage for the principal unit and the ADU if the ADU is located completely on a single floor of the existing residence. This does not apply to detached ADUs.

(f)    Any ADU shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence and should architecturally blend into the existing neighborhoods through careful design. Unless the ADU is limited to only interior remodeling of an existing single-family dwelling, a proposed ADU shall meet the following design standards:

(1)    Exterior Finish. The exterior of an ADU shall have siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are comparable to the predominant materials of the primary dwelling unit and/or characteristics of the neighborhood.

(i)    Roofing. A roof of equal or greater pitch as the principal unit.

(ii)    Eaves. The minimum projection is twelve (12) inches.

(2)    Detailed Design. All ADUs shall provide detailed design using at least four (4) of the following architectural features:

(i)    Trim to denote all building’s roof lines, porches, windows and doors that is at least three (3) inches wide;

(ii)    Dormers;

(iii)    Gables;

(iv)    Recessed entries;

(v)    Covered porch entries;

(vi)    Offsets in building face or roof (minimum sixteen (16) inches);

(vii)    Bay windows;

(viii)    Decorative cornices and roof lines;

(ix)    Shutters;

(x)    Brickwork, masonry or stucco;

(xi)    Any alternative feature providing visual relief similar to the options listed above provided it must be approved by the Director.

(g)    The entrance to an attached ADU shall not be on the same facade of the structure as an entrance to the principal unit. Exterior stairway shall not be constructed on the street-frontage side of the principal dwelling unit.

(h)    Accessory dwelling units shall provide one (1) off-street parking space in addition to that which is required for the principal unit. When adding an ADU, all driveways and areas used for loading, parking, and maneuvering vehicles on the parcel shall have a paved surface.

(i)    When development of an ADU is for people with disabilities, the Director may allow reasonable deviation from the stated requirements to install features that facilitate accessibility such as those required by the International Building Code.

(j)    An ADU shall be required to be served by City water and sewer or an approved septic system.

(k)    The property owner, which shall include titleholders and contract purchasers, must occupy either the principal unit or the ADU as their permanent residence for all twelve (12) months of the year.

(l)    An ADU shall have a deed restriction recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor to indicate the presence of the ADU, the requirement of owner occupancy, and other standards for maintaining the unit as described above. (Ord. 5330 §3, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §4, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.020 FENCES AND WALLS.

(a)    Fences and walls shall observe the following height and setback requirements:

(1)    Residential Zones.

(i)    Maximum height shall be six (6) feet.

(ii)    Maximum height within the front yard setback area shall be four (4) feet.

(iii)    On corner lots with a specified front yard setback on each street frontage, both frontages will require a height of no more than four (4) feet.

(iv)    To obtain a six (6) foot high fence on a corner lot, a fence permit is required. The Director can determine that the street frontage of the residence’s principal orientation is a "primary frontage" and may permit a six (6) foot maximum height fence in the yard on the other (secondary) frontage only if all of the following conditions are met:

(A)    The higher fence will not block any existing front yard views from an adjoining residence with its principal orientation to that same street;

(B)    The higher fence will not be closer to the residence’s front property line on the street of principal orientation than the closest part of the front facade of the residence;

(C)    The higher fence will not encroach into the front yard of the primary frontage where the maximum height limit in subsection (a)(1)(ii) of this section takes precedence.

(v)    Six (6) foot tall side yard fences may not project into the front yard setback except when the house’s front facade is within the front yard setback area, in which case the taller fence may extend no further than the front facade of the house.

(2)    Commercial Zones.

(i)    Maximum height shall be eight (8) feet.

(ii)    Maximum height shall be six (6) feet when adjacent to a public right-of-way, or to a residential zone.

(3)    Industrial Zone.

(i)    Maximum height shall be ten (10) feet.

(ii)    Maximum height shall be six (6) feet when adjacent to a public right-of-way, or to a residential zone.

(4)    District and Neighborhood Center Zones.

(i)    Maximum height shall be four (4) feet in front yard setback areas.

(ii)    Maximum height shall be six (6) feet for side and rear yard setback areas.

(iii)    To obtain an eight (8) foot tall fence, a fence permit is required. The Director may allow for a maximum height of up to eight (8) feet in side and rear yard setback areas provided the use is nonresidential and the fence is necessary for security purposes.

(5)    Essential Public Facilities. Essential public facilities may have up to ten (10) foot tall fences in any zone through a fence permit application provided the fence is the minimum necessary for security purposes.

(b)    A Type II conditional use permit may be granted for fences or walls up to eight (8) feet high in a side or rear yard only if the fence or wall is necessary to provide privacy and security between a residential and a nonresidential use.

(c)    Fences and walls shall not block or hinder the sight distance of traffic. Exact location and design of a fence or wall is subject to the approval of the City Engineer when visibility or public safety is an issue.

(d)    No electric or electrified fences shall be permitted within the City of Bremerton.

(e)    Barbed wire or similar wire protective devices are permitted only in industrial zones or any property containing a public facility above a height of six (6) feet; provided, that adjoining a residential zone, devices may be allowed by approval of a Type II conditional use permit pursuant to BMC 20.58.020 only if the following criteria are met:

(1)    The applicant demonstrates that the protective device cannot be installed outside of the specified setback without significantly diminishing the utility of the industrial property;

(2)    The protective device will be designed to minimize adverse aesthetic impact to the residential use by installing the device behind the top of a fence or wall or screening the device with landscape; and

(3)    The applicant demonstrates that the protective device is necessary to provide additional security along the residential property line to protect the industrial premises.

(f)    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1)(ii) of this section, architectural appurtenances such as trellises or entry gates that define a walkway or driveway entry are allowed in a front yard up to ninety (90) inches high; provided, that:

(1)    No individual structural support for such features shall be more than sixteen (16) inches square in section;

(2)    Any gate shall not obscure more than twenty (20) percent of visibility to the yard as viewed perpendicular to the gate’s installation; and

(3)    Any entry feature greater than three (3) feet in height shall not be more than six (6) feet wide for a walkway entry or more than sixteen (16) feet wide for a driveway entry. (Ord. 5326 §5, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §5, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.030 HOME OCCUPATIONS.

Home occupations are permitted in a residential dwelling unit subject to the following limitations:

(a)    The business shall clearly be subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.

(b)    The business shall be wholly situated indoors.

(c)    No person shall be employed in the home occupation unless a resident of the dwelling unit.

(d)    There shall be no exterior display, storage or other exterior indication of the existence of the home occupation, except as allowed by the underlying zone.

(e)    One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to the number of off-street parking spaces already required for the dwelling. The Director may waive this requirement if the home occupation involves Internet services that do not require customers or deliveries at the residence.

(f)    Any sales of product shall be limited to those produced on the premises, except products produced elsewhere may be allowed, provided the business is primarily involved in the product’s distribution and does not attract buyers to the property for retail or wholesale sales.

(g)    Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged through appointment so that only one (1) patron vehicle is on the premises at any given time.

(h)    Not more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling may be devoted to the home occupation use.

(i)    The garage shall not be used in the business unless the required off-street and customer parking can be adequately accommodated elsewhere on the site.

(j)    An independent taxi driver may operate as a home occupation; provided, that the business has only one (1) single driver and one (1) taxi vehicle.

(k)    Automotive painting, body, and engine repair, small engine repair services and any activity likely to produce excessive noise are prohibited as home occupations.

(l)    Persons engaged in legal home occupations on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be considered legal, provided the operation is consistent with all of the above-listed performance standards. Any home occupation which was legally established but does not currently conform to all those standards may not expand or enlarge and shall terminate that use upon:

(1)    Change of use or ownership of the property; or

(2)    Written complaint of adjacent or nearby property owners after due notice and hearing is provided and if the Director determines that the home occupation is interfering with the use and enjoyment of the neighboring premises and is not compatible with the residential environment in which it is located. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.040 MANUFACTURED HOMES.

(a)    Manufactured homes are permitted on one (1) individual parcel, lot, or tract in residential zones; provided, that the home is:

(1)    Approved by the Washington State Department of Labor and Industries or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the appropriate certification insignia is affixed to the unit, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 43.22 RCW;

(2)    Comprised of at least two (2) fully enclosed parallel sections each of not less than twelve (12) feet wide by thirty-six (36) feet long;

(3)    Set upon a permanent foundation, as specified by the manufacturer, and that the space from the bottom of the home to the ground be enclosed by concrete or an approved concrete product which can be either load-bearing or decorative;

(4)    Compliant with all local design standards applicable to all other homes within the neighborhood in which the manufactured home is to be located;

(5)    Thermally equivalent to the State Energy Code;

(6)    Originally constructed with and now has a composition or wood shake or shingle, coated metal, or similar roof of nominal three to twelve (3:12) pitch or greater;

(7)    Sided with exterior siding similar in appearance to materials commonly used on conventional site-built International Building Code single-family residences; and

(8)    A new manufactured home as defined in RCW 35.63.160(2).

(b)    A manufactured home which was legally placed and maintained prior to the date of adoption of this chapter, and does not meet the requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure. If a legal nonconforming manufactured home is partially or wholly destroyed, replaced, or altered, it shall be required to meet the relevant requirements set forth in the nonconforming provisions of this title.

(c)    The Building Official or designee shall inspect the installation of manufactured homes prior to occupancy and issue certificates of occupancy for manufactured homes. If all requirements are met, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. No manufactured home shall be occupied until after the City issues a valid certificate of occupancy.

(d)    If a manufactured home is replaced by another manufactured home, a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for the installation of a manufactured home after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.050 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ON A PRIVATE LOT.

A recreational vehicle, occupied or not, may be parked on a private lot or lots only as an accessory use subject to the parking provisions of this title and the following provisions:

(a)    A recreational vehicle may be occupied for a cumulative period not to exceed thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) consecutive month period;

(b)    A recreational vehicle may be parked and occupied by the owner of a lot as temporary housing during the period of new house construction on the lot for a period not to exceed one (1) year;

(c)    Only one (1) recreational vehicle may be occupied on a single lot at any time;

(d)    A recreational vehicle shall not be parked within a required front yard setback for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days and not more than thirty (30) days cumulative in any twelve (12) consecutive months; and

(e)    Any occupied recreational vehicle must be self-contained and all garbage and sanitation shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the City.

(f)    In order to legally occupy a recreational vehicle, the property owner must obtain a permit from the City indicating details such as the dates the recreational vehicle will be occupied. (Ord. 5326 §6, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.060 DISH ANTENNAS.

(a)    A ground-mounted dish antenna is subject to the setback requirements of the underlying zone.

(b)    Dish antennas may not be placed above the maximum underlying zoning district height.

(c)    All dish or other parabolic antennas having a collector dish diameter of six (6) feet or greater shall be ground-mounted, except as provided for otherwise. An antenna having a dish diameter smaller than six (6) feet may be pole- or roof-mounted in a location that has the least visual impact on surrounding properties and views while maximizing the effectiveness of the antenna’s operation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.070 ADAPTIVE REUSE OF COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.

The intent of these provisions is to provide opportunities for reusing commercial buildings that are structurally sound with new uses to extend their economic life. The adaptive reuse shall not be granted if the new use adversely affects adjacent properties. Consideration shall be given to the relative intensity of the proposed use compared to the intensity of the planned land use environment.

(a)    Approval of an administrative Type II conditional use permit (CUP) pursuant to BMC 20.58.020 is required when an adaptive reuse is for a legally established commercial building located within a residential zone. However, the notice of application shall follow BMC 20.02.100(c)(1)(iv) with notification of property owners within three hundred (300) feet. The Director may require a nonadministrative CUP whenever the use has a significant impact beyond the immediate site, is of a neighborhood or community-wide interest, or is of a controversial nature. The adaptive reuse shall meet the following criteria in order to be granted approval:

(1)    New traffic shall be accommodated within the existing levels of service on the surrounding neighborhood streets.

(2)    Provision for off-street parking must be evaluated and to the greatest extent possible, meet the parking demand for change of uses. The Director or Hearing Examiner may reduce the number of off-street parking spaces if commute trip reduction methods are employed and the adaptive reuse does not generate an increase in on-street parking demand.

(3)    The new use does not generate noise that exceeds City standards for residential zones.

(4)    Adequate street trees and landscaping are incorporated in a manner that buffers the adaptive reuse from adjacent residential uses and makes it more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

(5)    Additional conditions may be applied including, but not limited to, limiting hours of operations, density, restrictions for noise attenuation and other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding residential uses.

(b)    The following uses may be approved for adaptive reuse:

(1)    Residential, underlying zone density limit, provided no new floor area is constructed;

(2)    Foster homes;

(3)    Day care facilities;

(4)    Group residential facilities, Class I (assisted living);

(5)    Youth, teen, senior, or community centers;

(6)    Medical and dental clinic and related services (not hospitals);

(7)    Religious worship facilities;

(8)    Libraries;

(9)    Museums and art galleries;

(10)    Consultants (architectural, engineering, planning, design and similar);

(11)    Computer assistance and training (but not repair);

(12)    Office/business assistance services, call centers, and general offices;

(13)    Social services/facilities; 

(14)    Welfare and charitable services/facilities;

(15)    Public services;

(16)    Hotels and lodging places;

(17)    General retail; and

(18)    Restaurants. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §7, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.080 MINERAL RESOURCE OVERLAY.

The intent of this overlay is to protect and enhance significant sand, gravel and rock deposits as identified mineral resource lands. It is also used to ensure the continued or future use without disrupting or endangering adjacent land uses, while safeguarding life, property, and the public welfare.

(a)    Uses. Mineral resource extraction with associated structures and equipment for soil and gravel, quarried stone or ore may be allowed within the mineral resource overlay. In addition, the following provisions shall be met:

(1)    A single on-site security or superintendent dwelling for his or her family may be permitted as an accessory use.

(2)    All uses not listed above are prohibited within the development area while mineral extraction is being actively pursued.

(b)    Performance Standards. Potential impacts related to traffic, dust control, light emission, visual screening, loss of tree cover, noise emission and protection of environmentally sensitive areas shall be examined. The city recognizes impacts to other elements of the environment including air and water quality are regulated by the state, regional and federal authorities. At a minimum the following shall be met:

(1)    Hours of Operation. Noise associated with surface mining may constitute a nuisance or a public health concern, therefore, when surface mining activity, hours of operation for excavating, processing, and loading shall be prohibited on Saturday, Sundays and legal holidays, and limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; provided, that the surface mining operation may continue until 9:00 p.m. if the noise created is less than the ambient night time noise levels for that area; and further provided, that the following activities are exempt from these requirements:

(i)    Activity under public contract when in the public interest. Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

(2)    Maximum Permissible Noise Levels. Maximum permissible noise levels shall be according to the provisions of the Bremerton Noise Ordinance per Chapter 6.32 BMC with the following exceptions:

(i)    The mineral resource operation site may have the district of sound source be classified as District III during the hours of operation per subsection (b)(1) of this section.

(3)    Setbacks. The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property boundaries according to the State Department of Natural Resources standards for safety of adjacent properties, and to prevent water runoff or erosion of slopes and to provide adequate reclamation slopes per subsection (b)(4) of this section.

(4)    Slope. When reclaimed, no slope of cut and fill surfaces shall be steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall not exceed one and one-half horizontal to one vertical (1-1/2:1) for unconsolidated material such as gravel, and one-fourth horizontal to one vertical (1/4:1) for consolidated material, unless otherwise approved by the Director after a qualified professional certifies that steeper slopes are appropriate.

(5)    Access Roads Maintenance. Access roads to mining and quarrying sites shall be maintained and located to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works and Utilities, to minimize problems of dust and mud, and connection access to the city roadways.

(6)    Best Practices Management. Require mineral extraction and processing operations to implement best management practices to reduce environmental impacts and mitigate any remaining impacts.

(c)    Permitting Process. Mineral resource extraction with associated structures and equipment for soil and gravel, quarried stone or ore may be allowed if a Type III Hearing Examiner conditional use permit (CUP) is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020, with the notice of application shall be mailed to all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the property.

(1)    The owner or agent of the quarry shall submit to the City copies of all documents submitted to the Washington State Department of Natural Resources with the application.

(2)    Notice of application for the CUP shall be provided to the local tribal government, typically during the environmental review; however, if environmental review is not required, a fourteen (14) day comment period to the local tribal government of the proposal will be required prior to issuance of approval.

(d)    Transition of Uses from Mineral Resource Overlay. As an option to reclaim a property(s) and extinguish a Washington State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) surface mining permit, the City may accept, review and approve development permits for uses consistent with the property(s) underlying zone. If a permit meets all applicable, zoning, building, stormwater, fire and other county codes, such permits shall be forwarded to the DNR to be reviewed as a reclamation plan. Upon receipt by the City of DNR confirmation of the closing of the surface mining permit for the property(s), the City will revert the property(s) back to their underlying zone and compatible designation.

(e)    Special Provisions. All plats, short plats, development permits and building permits issued for land development activities on or within five hundred (500) feet of designated mineral resource overlay lands shall contain the following notice:

The subject property is within or near land in which resource activities are permitted and encouraged, including a variety of activities which may not be compatible with residential use for certain periods of limited duration. In addition to other activities, these may include noise, dust, smoke, visual impacts and odors resulting from harvesting, planting, surface mining, quarrying, application of fertilizers, herbicides and associated reclamation and management activities. When performed in accordance with state and federal law, these resource activities are not subject to legal action as a nuisance.

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §8, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.090 TEMPORARY ENCAMPMENT PERMIT.

(a)    Intent. The City of Bremerton desires to establish reasonable development standards for sponsors of outdoor temporary encampments. These facilities do not represent a permanent solution to homelessness but rather can provide vitally needed shelter and a first step to more permanent forms of housing. This section provides an equitable process, with reasonable conditions and an associated permit, to meet the need for temporary shelter for local homeless persons while ensuring public health, safety and welfare.

(b)    Definitions.

(1)    "Applicant" shall mean a group or individual(s) that host, sponsor and/or manage a temporary encampment.

(2)    "Property owner" shall mean the owner of the property or legal representative of the real property proposed for use as a temporary encampment.

(3)    "Shelter(s)" shall mean tents, sheds, huts, cabins, tiny homes, trailers or other enclosures which are not permanently attached to the ground, may be easily erected and dismantled, and are intended for temporary occupancy.

(4)    "Temporary encampment(s)" shall mean an area of a parcel(s) that hosts shelters, security, and other facilities, for housing the homeless for humanitarian purposes. Temporary encampment facilities that are established for this use shall be easily erected and dismantled and shall only be temporary.

(5)    "Temporary" shall mean, for the purposes of this section, one hundred eighty-three (183) days.

(c)    Siting Criteria. A temporary encampment may be placed on a property in the City that complies with the following:

(1)    Location. Temporary encampments can be permitted in all zoning districts.

(2)    Site Size and Encampment Size Requirements.

(i)    Site Size. The minimum site size shall be one (1) acre. The one (1) acre site can include one (1) or more contiguous parcels but in no case may the parcels be separated by a right-of-way (streets, alleyways, etc.), critical area, or other means. All property owners shall jointly apply for the temporary encampment permit and shall be equally responsible for compliance with all conditions of the permit.

(ii)    Encampment Size. The area of the parcel(s) dedicated to the encampment must equal one hundred fifty (150) square feet or more for each resident (not including the required setback area). This size requirement is to ensure that there is sufficient land area to support the activities of the temporary encampment without overcrowding of occupants, degradation of vegetation, eroding soils or otherwise overtaxing the land.

(3)    Perimeter Setback. A temporary encampment shall be set back no less than twenty (20) feet from all exterior boundary lines, with an additional twenty (20) foot setback when adjacent to residential uses (for a total of forty (40) foot setback when adjacent to a residential use). This setback is intended to ensure all activities of the temporary encampment are set back from adjacent properties a sufficient distance so as not to impinge upon or otherwise unduly influence activities on said adjacent properties. The required exterior setback may be reduced or waived if the owners of such adjacent property consent in writing to support a reduction or waiver of such setback.

(4)    Screening of Activities. All activities (shelters, toilets, cooking facilities, etc.) of the temporary encampment shall be obscured from view from adjacent properties and public right-of-way to the maximum extent feasible. This can be accomplished by a minimum six (6) foot high sight-obscuring temporary fence, existing dense vegetation, an existing topographic difference, distance from exterior property lines, or other means.

(5)    Critical Areas. A temporary encampment may not be located within critical areas or their associated buffers. All proposed temporary encampments shall comply with the City’s critical areas regulations as set forth in Chapter 20.14 BMC and the Shoreline Master Program.

(6)    Limit of Encampments. No more than one (1) temporary encampment shall be permitted and operating at any one time in the City.

(d)    Preapplication Work. Prior to application submittal, the applicant and property owners must address community and neighborhood impacts from the proposed temporary encampment by developing the following:

(1)    Impact Mitigation Plan. The applicant shall identify potential adverse effects of the proposed temporary encampment on neighboring properties and the community and shall develop measures to mitigate such effects. The applicant shall develop a temporary encampment impact mitigation plan. The plan shall contain a narrative and drawing(s) that describe the measures the applicant will use to mitigate the effects of the temporary encampment. At a minimum, the plan shall specifically describe the measures that will be implemented to satisfy the approval criteria provided in this section. The impact mitigation plan shall be updated to address the comments and suggestions received at the required neighborhood meeting and review as identified in subsections (d)(3) and (4) of this section (discussions with police, fire, school, childcare, and health district). The implementation and enforcement of the plan shall be a condition of permit approval.

(2)    Security Management Plan. The applicant shall develop a plan demonstrating security measures, site specific or otherwise, necessary to ensure the safety of the residents of the temporary encampment and the public. At a minimum, the plan shall specify the following:

(i)    The person or entity responsible for providing security;

(ii)    The type of security to be used, e.g., private security firm, volunteers, or other means; and

(iii)    Recommendations and/or requirements provided by the Police Department.

(3)    Discussions with Police, Schools, and Child Care Services. A representative of the applicant or property owner shall meet and confer with the following entities regarding the proposal and any proposed security measures for the temporary encampment: (i) the Bremerton Police Department; (ii) the administration of any public or private preschool, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school if within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the proposed site; and (iii) the operators of any properly licensed child care service(s) within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the proposed site.

(4)    Discussions with Kitsap Public Health District. A representative of the applicant or property owner shall meet and confer with the Kitsap Public Health District regarding the proposal and the proposed plan for providing adequate drinking water, solid waste management, and the waste management (trash removal) plan for the temporary encampment.

(5)    Parking Plan. The applicant shall develop a parking plan. The parking plan shall address the following:

(i)    Adequate parking for the temporary encampment shall be provided so as not to reduce parking utilized by existing site uses;

(ii)    The temporary encampment shall not displace the site’s parking lot in such a way that the site no longer meets the minimum or required parking of the principal use as required by code or previous approvals;

(iii)    An alternative parking plan may be approved by the Director if the parking plan can demonstrate how the existing use on the site and the encampment can provide off-site parking sufficient to have no off-site impact to the surrounding neighborhoods. This alternative parking plan will be not valid after the expiration of the temporary encampment;

(iv)    Parking vehicles shall only be allowed in existing approved parking areas and shall not be located in unapproved areas such as the grass or field; and

(v)    A temporary encampment permit cannot permit new site development such as paving, gravel laydown, and structure installation. This work requires a separate process through the approval of a site development permit as outlined in BMC 20.58.090.

(e)    Neighborhood Meeting. The applicant shall conduct a neighborhood meeting to inform nearby residents and the public about the proposed temporary encampment prior to submittal of an application. The following process shall be used:

(1)    Notification. The applicant shall provide notice of the neighborhood meeting by mail, first class and postage prepaid, to all owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the lot(s) containing the proposed temporary encampment, provided such area shall be expanded as necessary to send mailed notices to at least twenty (20) different property owners. The notice of the neighborhood meeting shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the neighborhood meeting.

(2)    Neighborhood Meeting. At the neighborhood meeting, a representative of the applicant or property owner shall present in writing and verbally the proposed temporary encampment location, timing, site plan, code of conduct, impact mitigation plan, accommodations concerns, and a security management plan. The presentation shall also include copies of all previously submitted comments received on the proposed temporary encampment, including comments from the Bremerton Police Department, school(s), and child care services. Copies of the agenda and the other specified comments and materials shall be provided by the applicant at the meeting. The meeting shall be conducted on the proposed temporary encampment site whenever feasible; this meeting shall be held in a location that is ADA (Americans with Disabilities) accessible.

(f)    Performance Criteria. Temporary encampments shall be operated in such a manner as to ensure the health and safety of occupants of the encampment and surrounding properties. Accordingly, all temporary encampments shall comply with the list below. Demonstration of compliance with this section is a requirement of the temporary encampment permit. Any proposed mitigation or actions from this section shall be identified in the impact mitigation plan.

(1)    Health Regulations. All applicable City, county and state regulations pertaining to public health shall be met.

(2)    Fire Safety. Inspections of the site by the City for fire safety purposes may be conducted at any time and without prior notice. Adequate access, as determined by the Fire Marshal, shall be maintained within and around the temporary encampment at all times to ensure that emergency vehicles can ingress/egress the site.

(3)    Building Code Inspections. Inspections of the temporary encampment by the City to ensure the public health and safety may be conducted at any time and without prior notice.

(4)    Drinking Water and Solid Waste. An adequate supply of potable water and adequate toilet facilities shall be available on site at all times. All City, county and state regulations pertaining to drinking water connections and solid waste disposal shall be met.

(5)    Trash. Adequate facilities for dealing with trash shall be provided on site. A regular trash patrol or other method of regular maintenance in the immediate vicinity of the site shall be provided.

(6)    Noise. Any temporary encampment shall comply with City noise regulations as set forth in Chapter 6.32 BMC.

(7)    Light and Glare. Any temporary encampment shall comply with City light and glare regulations as set forth in BMC 20.44.110.

(8)    Security. Any temporary encampment shall provide all required legal access to public areas of the site by the City of Bremerton Police Department and any other relevant law enforcement agency at all times.

(9)    Codes of Conduct. The applicant shall enforce a written code of conduct which mitigates impacts to neighbors and the community. Said code shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval. The code shall contain the following as a minimum:

(i)    Prohibit possession or use of firearms and/or illegal drugs;

(ii)    No violence;

(iii)    No open flames;

(iv)    No loitering in the surrounding neighborhood; and

(v)    Quiet hours (at a minimum between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.).

(g)    Process and Permit. Notwithstanding any other provision in the Bremerton Municipal Code, the following procedures shall apply in accepting, noticing, reviewing, and otherwise processing temporary encampment permit applications. A City-issued temporary encampment permit is required prior to the commencement of such a use.

(1)    A temporary encampment permit is a Type I action and shall be processed accordingly, as set forth in Chapter 20.02 BMC, Project Permits. The prospective temporary encampment applicant and property owner(s) shall jointly apply for the temporary encampment permit and shall be equally responsible for compliance with all conditions of the permit. A complete application for a temporary encampment permit shall be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated start of the encampment.

(2)    The following documentation is required for a complete application:

(i)    Application;

(ii)    The date that the temporary encampments will commence;

(iii)    The maximum duration requested of said temporary encampment;

(iv)    The number of residents to be accommodated on the site;

(v)    The host location;

(vi)    The names of the managing agency and host, with contact information;

(vii)    Impact mitigation plan;

(viii)    Security management plan;

(ix)    Code of conduct;

(x)    Documentation of Actions Taken Prior to Application Submittal. This document shall include a summary of the neighborhood meeting, including who was notified of the meeting (mailing list and map of mailed property owners), who attended the meeting, summary of the items discussed at the neighborhood meeting, and summary of discussion and any request for mitigations of the temporary encampment from the health district, police, fire, school district(s) and child care services;

(xi)    Vicinity map including buildings and uses on properties surrounding the proposed temporary encampment, and the distance the proposed accommodations would be set back from the property lines; and

(xii)    Site plan showing at least the following:

(A)    Existing buildings and parking and vehicle maneuvering area;

(B)    Location of where encampment will be located including overall dimensions;

(C)    Location of on-site parking for primary use of the site and number of vehicles associated with the encampment (parking plan); and

(D)    Access routes for emergency vehicles.

(xiii)    Encampment layout showing at least the following:

(A)    Layout of all encampment facilities, including, but not limited to, food and security facilities, arrangement of shelters, etc.;

(B)    Method and location of potable water;

(C)    Method and location of waste receptacles;

(D)    Method and location of required screening; and

(E)    Location of required sanitary stations including toilets and hand washing facility; and

(xiv)    Application fee.

(3)    Decisions May Be Appealed. Appeals of a Type I decision shall be heard and decided by the Hearing Examiner in accordance with the procedures set forth in BMC 20.02.140.

(4)    Emergencies. The Director may waive the requirements of this section when a natural or manmade disaster necessitates the immediate establishment of temporary encampments.

(h)    Duration and Site Restoration.

(1)    Duration. A proposed temporary encampment may be allowed at one property for up to one hundred eighty three (183) days, either consecutively or cumulatively, during any twenty-four (24) month period, except that where the one hundred eighty-third day falls on Friday through Sunday, an additional two (2) days shall be allowed to dismantle and remove the accommodation over the immediately following weekend. The applicant and/or property owner shall store, out of sight from adjacent properties, the residents’ personal belongings that are left on site after the dismantling of the site.

(2)    Restoration of Site. Upon cessation of the temporary encampment, the site shall be restored, as near as possible, to its original condition. The applicant shall replant areas in which vegetation had been removed or destroyed.

(i)    Revocation and Indemnification.

(1)    Failure to Comply. If a temporary encampment permit has been issued, and the Director determines that the applicant has violated any condition of that permit, the Director shall issue a notice of violation and require compliance in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.04 BMC, Code Enforcement. The City may revoke a temporary encampment permit for any violation of this section or the temporary encampment permit where such a violation is:

(i)    Not cured following notice from the City and an opportunity to cure such violations;

(ii)    Intentionally or knowingly committed by the applicant or property owner; or

(iii)    So severe as to substantially threaten public health and safety.

(2)    Upon revocation of the temporary encampment permit, all residents of the encampment must vacate the premises within seventy-two (72) hours of revocation. The applicant or property owner shall be required to remove all physical evidence of the use and to restore or replant any required vegetation within one (1) week of revocation. The applicant and/or property owner shall store, out of sight from adjacent properties, the residents’ personal belongings that are left on site after the seventy-two (72) hours.

(3)    Indemnification. The applicant, except for religious facilities per RCW 35.21.915, shall defend, indemnify, and hold the City, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers harmless from any and all claims, injuries, damages, losses or suits of any nature, including attorney fees, due to the acts or omissions of the applicant in connection with the operation of the temporary encampment.

(4)    Liability Insurance. Except for religious facilities, the applicant shall procure and maintain in full force, through the duration of the temporary encampment, comprehensive general liability insurance with a minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence/aggregate for personal injury and property damage. (Ord. 5393 § 3, 2019)


20.46.110 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES.

This section regulates the location of adult entertainment businesses. The purpose of these regulations is to reduce conflicts between adult entertainment businesses and other land uses. The intent is to protect the City from the blighting impacts of concentrations of adult entertainment businesses while assuring the full enjoyment of all the constitutionally guaranteed rights of the general public.

(a)    Location of Adult Entertainment Businesses.

(1)    Adult entertainment businesses as defined in subsection (c) of this section are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the following specified uses or zones:

(i)    Any zone in which residential use is listed as a principal use.

(ii)    Any public or private school.

(iii)    Any day care facility as defined in BMC 20.42.040.

(iv)    Any worship, religious, or church facility as defined in BMC 20.42.040.

(v)    Any public park.

(vi)    Any center designated within the Comprehensive Plan.

(vii)    Any public library.

(2)    The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property or parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed land is to be separated.

(3)    Violation of the use provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the City Attorney as authorized under state law or the City code.

(4)    Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city code or statute of the state regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.

(b)    Development Standards. Adult entertainment businesses are subject to the development standards of the underlying zone.

(c)    Definitions.

(1)    "Adult entertainment" means any dance, amusement, show, display, merchandise, material, exhibition, pantomime, modeling, or any other like performance of any type, for the use or benefit of a member or members of the public or advertised for the use or benefit of a member of the public where such is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of "specified anatomical areas," defined in this chapter, or the exhibition of "specified sexual activities," also defined in this chapter, or the case of live adult entertainment performances, which emphasizes and seeks to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires. Any patron of an adult entertainment business, as defined in this section, shall be deemed a member of the public.

(2)    "Adult entertainment business" means any establishment providing adult entertainment as defined in this section including, but not limited to, adult arcade, adult retail establishment, adult motion picture theater, and exotic dance studio, more specifically defined herein.

(3)    "Adult arcade" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, computer-generated or enhanced pornography, panoramic peep show, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for personal viewing, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which provide material for individual viewing by patrons on the premises of the business which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."

(4)    "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" are regularly shown for any form of consideration.

(5)    "Adult retail establishment" means any bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, or other similar commercial establishment, business service, or portion thereof, which, for money or any other form of consideration, provides as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade the sale, exchange, rent, loan, trade, transfer, and/or provision for viewing or use off the premises of adult entertainment material defined in this chapter. For purposes of this provision, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that thirty (30) percent or more of a business’ stock-in-trade in adult retail material, based on either the dollar value (wholesale or retail) or the number of titles of such material, is significant or substantial. In determining whether or not the presumption is rebutted, the Director may consider the following factors, which are not inclusive:

(i)    Whether minors are prohibited from access to the premises of the establishment due to the adult entertainment nature of the inventory;

(ii)    Whether the establishment is advertised, marketed, or held out to be an adult merchandising facility;

(iii)    Whether adult entertainment material is an establishment’s primary or one (1) of its principal business purposes; or

(iv)    Whether thirty (30) percent or more of an establishment’s revenue is derived from adult entertainment material.

An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of adult entertainment materials and still be categorized as an adult retail establishment. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult retail establishment so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified adult entertainment materials. The Director shall have full discretion to give appropriate weight to the factors set forth above as well as other factors considered depending on the particular facts and circumstances of each application.

(6)    "Exotic dance studio," also known as "erotic dance studio," "topless bar" and "adult cabaret," means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment, or any premises or facility to which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an entertainer provides live performances to any member of the public, which performances are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or simulation of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" or which emphasize and seek to arouse or excite the patron’s sexual desires.

(7)    "Adult entertainment material" means any books, magazines, cards, pictures, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video tapes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, or visual representations, CD-ROMs, DVDs, disks, electronic media, or other such media, or instruments, devices, equipment, paraphernalia, toys, novelties, games, clothing or other merchandise or material, which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or simulation of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."

(8)    "Specified anatomical areas" means:

(i)    Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

(ii)    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(9)    "Specified sexual activities" means:

(i)    The caressing, touching, fondling or other intentional or erotic touching of male genitals, female genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts of oneself or of one (1) person by another; or

(ii)    Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, intercourse, oral copulation, flagellation, sodomy, bestiality, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or

(iii)    Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence or visual state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

(iv)    Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (c)(9)(i) through (iii) of this section. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5091 §4, 2009; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.140 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.

(a)    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction, modification and removal of these facilities. These standards were designed to comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“the Act”) and Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act (the “Spectrum” Act). The provisions of this section are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services as defined in the Act. This section shall not be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services, as defined in the Act.

(b)    General Provisions.

(1)    Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section and shall be permitted in all zones:

(i)    Temporary wireless communications facilities during an emergency declared by the City;

(ii)    Licensed amateur (ham) radio stations;

(iii)    Wireless communications facilities which legally existed or had a vested application on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except that this exemption does not apply to modifications of such facilities;

(iv)    Routine maintenance or repair of wireless communications facilities and related equipment (excluding structural work or changes in height or dimensions of antennas, support structures or buildings); provided, that compliance with the standards of this code are maintained.

(2)    Principal or Accessory Use. Wireless communications facilities may be either a principal or accessory use. A different use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a wireless communications facility on that lot.

(3)    Reimbursement of Costs. In addition to the application fee, the applicant shall reimburse the City for costs of professional engineers and other consultants hired by the City to review and inspect the applicant’s proposal when the City is unable to do so with its existing staffing resources. By way of illustration and not limitation, these professional services may include engineering and technical review, legal review, planning review, Hearing Examiner services, environmental review, critical areas review, financial and accounting review, soils review, and mechanical and structural engineering review. In the event that a project requires professional services beyond that which is included in the base fee, the applicant shall reimburse the City the full cost of such engineer or consultant services plus a City service charge of ten (10) percent as calculated from before-tax cost.

(c)    Definitions.

(1)    "Base station" means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. "Base station" includes, without limitation:

(i)    Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(ii)    Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems (“DAS”) and small-cell networks).

(iii)    Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (d)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this section, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (d)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section.

(2)    "Co-location" means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

(3)    "Concealed" means a wireless communications antenna or facility that is not evident; it is disguised, hidden by, or integrated with a structure that is not a wireless communications facility.

(4)    "Eligible facilities request" means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:

(i)    Co-location of new transmission equipment;

(ii)    Removal of transmission equipment; or

(iii)    Replacement of transmission equipment.

(5)    "Eligible support structure" means any tower or base station as defined in this section; provided, that it is existing at the same time the relevant application is filed with the City of Bremerton under this section.

(6)    "Existing" means a constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of this section if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process; provided, that a tower that has not been reviewed because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this section.

(7)    "Nonsubstantial change" means any modification to an existing support structure not classified as or meeting the criteria of a substantial change, as defined in this section.

(8)    "Provider" means every corporation, company, association, joint stock company, firm, partnership, limited liability company, other entity and individual licensed to provide personal wireless services over personal wireless communications facilities.

(9)    Right-of-Way. For the purpose of this chapter, "right-of-way" means any site located in City right-of-way, or on City property.

(10)    "Site" means, for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

(11)    "Structure" means any existing building, utility pole, or tower capable of supporting a wireless communications antenna. Structures include, but are not limited to, existing buildings, water towers, and utility poles and/or towers.

(12)    "Substantial change" means a modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria:

(i)    For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater;

(ii)    For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet;

(iii)    For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

(iv)    It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;

(v)    It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or

(vi)    It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (g)(3)(i) through (iv) of this section.

(13)    "Transmission equipment" means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(14)    "Tower" means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.

(15)    "Wireless communications facility" means a facility for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for communication, cellular phones, personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile radio or any other services licensed by the FCC, and unlicensed wireless services including but not limited to associated equipment shelter, support tower and antenna array.

(d)    Process. The applicant shall provide proof of legal authority to co-locate on an existing structure, modify an existing structure, or construct a new structure at the time of permit submittal. This shall include any current franchise agreements for projects located within the City’s right-of-way and lease agreements on private or City real property. Only a complete application shall be accepted for review. Prior to acceptance, the permit application shall be reviewed for completeness. If an application is deemed complete, the application will be processed and reviewed. The Director has the discretion to elevate a Type I permit to a Type II permit, and/or a Type II permit to a Type III permit in cases where views from residential properties or views from the public right-of-way may be affected.

(1)    Type I Permit.

(i)    An eligible facilities request, as defined by this chapter.

(ii)    The installation of new wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way.

(2)    Type II Permit.

(i)    All other wireless communications facilities not exempt by this chapter, and not eligible for a Type I permit, require a Type II permit.

(ii)    A Type II permit, including the notification of adjacent property owners within three hundred (300) feet, is required for all new wireless communications facilities in residential zoning districts, and for sites adjacent to residential zones.

(e)    Siting Wireless Communications Facilities. It is the policy of the City to minimize the number of wireless communication towers. The City encourages the location of antenna arrays on existing structures and encourages the co-location of antenna arrays of more than one (1) wireless communication service provider on a single tower. All wireless communications facilities shall be screened or concealed to the greatest degree feasible unless otherwise exempt. Priority of location shall be as follows:

(1)    Co-Location. Mount antennas on eligible support structures as defined by this chapter.

(2)    Antennas on Street (Utility) Poles Located in the Right-of-Way. The total bulk added to a pole shall not exceed double the average bulk of existing poles within three hundred (300) feet. An existing street pole may be replaced with a new street pole of the same diameter and appearance as the existing street pole; provided, the highest element on the pole, including antennas, does not exceed the average height of existing poles within three hundred (300) feet. Alterations for increased height and bulk may be granted by the Director if the applicant can demonstrate that a superior method of concealment will be utilized. When well concealed, a greater number of sites spread over a larger area is preferable to replacing an existing pole with a taller pole.

(3)    Antennas Mounted on Existing Structures. The applicant shall exhaust co-location possibilities and locating on other structures (i.e., buildings, roofs, light standards, etc.) before applying for a new tower. The antennas, mounting hardware and antenna cables shall be concealed to match the existing building or structure. Rooftop equipment shall be screened in a manner and material that is architecturally compatible with the building. Examples of appropriate screening include, but are not limited to, lattice, parapet walls or rooftop plantings.

(4)    New Towers. The applicant bears the burden to show that mounting antennas on existing structures or towers is not technically feasible before applying for an application for a new tower. This burden includes documenting existing structures that were studied prior to the application and an analysis explaining why those locations were not technically feasible. New towers, support structures and equipment areas shall be designed to accommodate antennas for more than one (1) user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not technically feasible.

(f)    Siting and Design of Towers and Associated Equipment. Site location and development shall:

(1)    Be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site.

(2)    Preserve the existing on-site vegetation and minimize disturbance of the existing topography, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area.

(3)    Be designed and placed on the site in a manner that takes the maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation, and structures as to use existing site features to screen as much of the total facility as possible, and/or use existing site features as a background so that the facility blends into the background with increased sight distances. Equipment shelter/cabinets at ground level shall be screened with landscaping and/or other such material that provides screening during the entire year. Setbacks from property lines shall be maximized where practical.

(4)    When comparing potential sites for a new wireless communication tower, sites that can provide substantial screening of the tower will be preferred over sites where the tower will be highly visible.

(5)    New towers shall be located in the following locations in order of preference: City property, industrial zone (I), freeway corridor zone (FC), general commercial zone (GC), place antennas and towers in other zone districts which do not adjoin or adversely impact residential neighborhoods.

(g)    Minimum Design and Submittal Requirements. All wireless communications facilities not specifically exempted by this chapter shall provide the following:

(1)    Photo simulations of the proposed facility from affected residential properties and public rights-of-way at varying distances.

(2)    A landscaping plan which complies with BMC 20.50.050. The Director may adjust these requirements when co-locating on an existing structure.

(3)    All new wireless communications facilities shall provide signed statements indicating that:

(i)    The applicant and landowner (if different) agree they will diligently negotiate in good faith to facilitate co-location of additional wireless communications facilities by other providers on the applicant’s structure or within the same site location; and

(ii)    A letter signed by the applicant stating the tower will comply with all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations and Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA) standards and all other applicable federal and local laws and regulations.

(iii)    Certification that the antenna usage will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions.

(iv)    If technology should change and a wireless communications facility becomes obsolete, or the use of the facility abandoned or discontinued, the applicant shall remove facilities per subsection (j) of this section.

(4)    Wireless communications facilities shall be screened or concealed to the greatest degree feasible by employing the best available technology. This may be accomplished by use of compatible materials, location, color, stealth technologies, and/or other tactics to achieve minimum visibility of the facility as viewed from public streets or residential properties. All screening and concealment is subject to the approval of the City.

(5)    Tower bases, equipment enclosures and cabinets and related security fencing shall be screened from public view. This screening requirement may be met in a number of ways, including use of a solid masonry wall, earthen berms, artwork, or landscaping. If landscaping is employed, it shall meet all applicable requirements of Chapter 20.50 BMC.

(6)    In reviewing the proposed placement of a wireless facility on the site and any associated landscaping, the City may make a condition of the permit that the applicant supplement existing trees and mature vegetation to more effectively screen the facility.

(7)    Towers, antennas, and any associated hardware and equipment shall be painted a nonreflective color or color scheme appropriate to the background against which the facility would be viewed from a majority of points within its viewshed, unless otherwise required by the FAA. A proposed color or color scheme shall be approved by the City.

(8)    Fencing, if used, shall conform to BMC 20.46.020 and the following:

(i)    Security fencing shall be effectively screened from view through the use of appropriate landscaping materials; and

(ii)    Chain-link fences shall be painted or coated with a nonreflective color, and shall have a minimum three (3) foot deep area to be planted with approved plant species in a manner that will completely screen the fencing.

(9)    No wireless equipment enclosures reviewed under this section shall be located within required yard setback areas, and when located outside the right-of-way, shall not be permitted within ten (10) feet of any property line.

(h)    Proof of Necessity. Providers are required to demonstrate that their facilities must be placed in the proposed location in order to satisfy their grid system and provide adequate coverage. Regional grid maps shall be submitted showing the proposed site and its relation to sites in the area. The companies shall also demonstrate that the height of the facility they are requesting is the minimum height necessary to provide adequate coverage within the grid system. Some gaps in coverage and less than seamless coverage may be acceptable. In some instances, there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data. The City may require such a technical review, to be paid for by the applicant. The expert review may include, but not be limited to, a recommendation on the height of the proposed facilities relative to the applicant’s coverage objectives and system design parameters, or the structural requirements for accommodating co-location. Based on the results of the third party review, the City may require changes to the application that comply with the recommendations of the expert.

(i)    Noise. All wireless communications facilities and supporting equipment shall conform to levels established in Chapter 6.32 BMC. A noise study verifying that the maximum level is not being exceeded may be required prior to issuance of the building permit. If complaints regarding noise levels are registered with the City, the City may require additional testing and certification of the noise level, at the expense of the communications facility owner/operator.

(j)    Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use.

(1)    At such time that a provider plans to abandon or is required to abandon the operation of a wireless communications facility, such provider will notify the City Department of Community Development by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment.

(2)    In the event that a licensed provider fails to give such notice, the personal wireless facility shall be considered abandoned.

(3)    Upon abandonment, the provider shall physically remove the wireless communications facility within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of abandonment. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited to:

(i)    Removal of antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers from the subject property.

(ii)    Removal of towers.

(iii)    Transportation of the antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets, security barriers, and towers to a location outside of the City of Bremerton, or to an approved storage area.

(iv)    Restoring the location of the personal wireless facility to its natural condition, except any remaining landscaping and grading.

(k)    Maintenance.

(1)    Wireless communications facilities shall be maintained. For purposes of this section, "maintenance" shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following:

(i)    Keeping of all plant materials used for screening in a live and healthy condition;

(ii)    Regular painting of towers, enclosures, artwork, fences and all paintable items on the site such that rust, peeling paint, or oxidation is not evident;

(iii)    Repair of any loose or hanging equipment or parts; and

(iv)    Replacement of missing plants, artwork, fencing or fencing parts, or portions of towers, enclosures, and other equipment. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.150 PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES.

Public utility facilities as defined in Chapter 20.42 BMC may be permitted in all zones where not listed as an allowable use, provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020, and subject to the following conditions. Decisions shall be a Type II Director’s decision per Chapter 20.02 BMC.

(a)    The public facility does not substantially interfere with or detract from the intent of the zone district, as determined by the Director;

(b)    The public facility conforms to applicable development standards of the zone, including setback and height standards, unless modified by the Director;

(c)    Measures are taken to provide screening for the public facility in cases where the facility would otherwise have a negative impact on the visual character of a neighborhood as seen from rights-of-way or adjacent properties. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.46.160 PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION/ TRANSMISSION FACILITIES.

Public distribution/transmission facilities as defined in Chapter 20.42 BMC are permitted outright in all zones. The Director shall determine whether a utility facility is most appropriately classified as a public distribution/transmission facility or a public utility facility (see BMC 20.46.150) according to the definitions set forth in Chapter 20.42 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.48 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

20.48.010    INTENT.

20.48.020    APPLICABILITY.

20.48.030    NONCONFORMITIES.

20.48.040    GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

20.48.050    MODIFICATIONS TO PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.48.060    RESIDENTIAL PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.48.080    NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.48.100    PARKING REDUCTION.

20.48.120    UNLISTED USES.

20.48.140    ACCESSIBLE PARKING.

20.48.150    ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.

20.48.160    LOADING/UNLOADING SPACES.

20.48.180    OTHER REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.

20.48.200    RENT OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING.

20.48.220    SATELLITE PARKING.

20.48.240    JOINT USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.

20.48.260    DRIVE-THROUGH STACKING REQUIREMENTS.


20.48.010 INTENT.

The intent of this chapter is to require off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the parking and loading demand of land uses while minimizing the amount of impervious surface where possible. The purpose of the regulations and design standards are to ensure the usefulness of parking and loading facilities, to protect the public safety, to mitigate adverse land use impacts and to protect the visual, water and air quality of the community. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.020 APPLICABILITY.

(a)    General. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied at the time of erection of any building or structure, or at the time any principal building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity unless provided for otherwise by law. This chapter shall be used in conjunction with specific off-street parking requirements set forth in this title. In cases of conflict, the most stringent requirement shall apply.

(b)    Remodeled, Improved, or a Change of Use. When an existing structure is remodeled, improved, or a change of use or tenancy occurs on a legally established site, it shall be exempt from providing additional off-street parking; provided, that:

(1)    The structure is not enlarged, extended, or structurally altered outside the existing building envelope in a manner that would require additional parking pursuant to this chapter. In the case of a structure expanding, the number of additional spaces shall be computed only to the extent of the enlargement, regardless of whether or not the number of previous existing spaces satisfies the requirements of this chapter.

(2)    In residential structures, alterations do not increase the number of dwelling units.

(3)    The number of off street parking spaces is not decreased, except in cases where the resulting decrease in parking conforms to the minimum number required by this chapter.

(4)    This does not apply to adaptive reuses per BMC 20.46.070.

(c)    Movement of Building. If a building is moved to a new lot, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.030 NONCONFORMITIES.

Any use which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendments hereto, is nonconforming in terms of required off-street parking facilities may continue in the same manner as if they were conforming unless any of the provisions set forth in BMC 20.48.020 would apply. However, in no case shall nonconforming parking have its existing number of off-street parking spaces reduced. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.040 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

The following requirements are applicable to all zoning districts:

(a)    Occupancy. No building or structure shall be approved for occupancy unless adequate parking facilities are provided consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

(b)    Availability. All required off-street parking spaces shall be made available and continuously maintained for the parking of residents, customers, patrons and employees of the related land uses and shall not be rented, leased or otherwise assigned to any person or organization not related to the principal or accessory land use.

(c)    Plans Required. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted satisfactory plans to the City showing how the off-street parking and loading facilities required by this chapter will be provided and maintained. Development of a parking lot without a building or other structure does not require a building permit, but does require site plan review in accordance with BMC 20.58.080.

(d)    Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that parking areas and driveways are continually maintained in good condition and free of refuse and debris. All required landscaping shall be kept in a healthy condition and properly maintained.

(e)    Nonparking Activities. No business, temporary or permanent display, or other nonparking activity shall occur on any required parking space.

(f)    Parking Prohibited. Parking is prohibited on landscaped or other areas not designed and approved for parking.

(g)    Unobstructed Access and Circulation.

(1)    Unobstructed vehicular access to and from public or private streets shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces. Vehicular access drives shall be designed to ensure the safety of persons using such access or traveling on the public street.

(2)    Required parking and all maneuver areas shall remain free of all obstructions.

(3)    No parking space may block access to another parking space unless the City has approved a tandem parking design and valet parking with a tenant is made available during hours of operation.

(4)    Except for single-family and duplex structures on individual lots, parking spaces shall be designed to prevent the backing of vehicles onto a public right-of-way, or a private street other than an alley.

(h)    Shared Driveways. Shared driveways are encouraged for abutting lots whenever practical. Approval shall include easements granting access to all property owners using the shared driveway. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.050 MODIFICATIONS TO PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

The parking development standards included in BMC 20.48.060 and 20.48.080 are base standards. Individual zone chapters may provide additional parking standards, or departures from these base standards. In cases of conflict, parking development standards in individual zone chapters shall supersede. Further reductions from base parking standards may be allowable per BMC 20.48.100. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.060 RESIDENTIAL PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

The following provisions apply to off-street parking spaces for all residential development:

(a)    Surface. Driveways and areas used for loading, parking and maneuvering motorized vehicles shall have a paved surface.

(b)    Gravel Surface Driveway. A gravel surface driveway may be allowed for a single-family residence for that portion of the driveway that is more than one hundred (100) feet from the lot line where access is provided. Any driveway approved for a gravel surface shall include a paved apron in front of the garage automobile door entrance extending a minimum depth of eighteen (18) feet and at least the width of the garage door.

(c)    Side Yard Setback. Minimum three (3) feet. When parking is located in an approved driveway, the setback for parking may be reduced to zero (0) feet.

(d)    Rear Yard Setback. Minimum three (3) feet. When parking is located in an approved driveway, the setback for parking may be reduced to zero (0) feet.

(e)    Alley Setback. Zero (0) feet.

(f)    Front Yard Setback. No parking shall be located within the front yard setback area of the zone, except within paved driveways, unless allowed otherwise by law.

(g)    Stall Dimensions.

(1)    Parking stalls for a single-family dwelling shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet and depth of eighteen (18) feet.

(2)    Parking facilities for two (2) or more dwellings shall comply with the design standards prescribed in BMC 20.48.080. These design standards may be modified to allow stacked parking spaces for a residential structure containing up to four (4) dwellings, provided the parking spaces comply with setbacks.

(h)    Driveways.

(1)    A driveway may be located within any setback area for a residential use, provided it complies with all applicable city street and engineering standards established in BMC Title 11.

(2)    The driveway shall not be less than eight (8) feet in width and not more than twenty (20) feet in width within the front yard setback. The Director may approve exceptions to the maximum driveway width when necessary for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.

(i)    Required Parking Spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the use and the following corresponding standards, except as modified per BMC 20.48.050:

	Type of Use	Number of Bedrooms	Minimum Number of Parking Spaces

	(1)	ADU	 	See BMC 20.46.010

	(2)	Single-unit residential	 All	2.0 per dwelling

	(3)	Two-unit residential	 All	2.0 per dwelling

	(4)	Multi-unit residential	 1 or less	1.5 per dwelling

	(5)	Multi-unit residential	 2	1.75 per dwelling

	(6)	Multi-unit residential	 3 or more	2.0 per dwelling

	(7)	Multi-unit residential located within a center	All	1.0 per dwelling

	(8)	Group residential facility, Class I	 	2.0 plus 1.0 for each bedroom beyond the first 4 plus 1.0 for each 300 square feet of gross floor area used for counseling

	 	Group residential home	 

	 	Adult family home	 

	(9)	Senior housing complex	 3 or more	1.0 per dwelling, plus access to alternative transportation such as public transit or on-site shuttle services to access daily goods and services shall be provided

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5118 §2, 2010: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.080 NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

The following provisions apply to off-street parking spaces for all nonresidential developments and parking lots:

(a)    Surface. Driveways and areas used for loading, parking and maneuvering motorized vehicles shall have a paved surface.

(b)    Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines unless adjacent to the low density residential zone in which case a minimum of ten (10) feet of visual screening is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050. Projects which are not adjacent to low density residential may reduce setbacks to zero (0) if the following are incorporated into the design of the parking area:

(1)    A solid fence or wall is provided; and

(2)    Landscaped islands at least forty-five (45) square feet of area are provided in a manner that breaks up parking spaces adjacent to the lot line into groups of not more than six (6) spaces each.

(c)    Front Yard Setbacks. Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front lot line.

(d)    Parking Setbacks in Structures. When parking is incorporated within a structure, the parking shall comply with the setbacks of the zone applicable to the structure.

(e)    Stall and Aisle Requirements. Parking facilities for required parking shall meet the minimum stall and aisle dimensions set forth in Figure 20.48(a).

(f)    Modifications to Parking Stall Requirements. The standards set forth in subsection (e) of this section may be modified to allow for a vehicle overhang of up to two and one-half (2.5) feet, provided:

(1)    Wheel stops are attached to the ground or pavement if curbs are not provided;

(2)    The vehicle overhang would not extend beyond the lot line or into front yard setback areas;

(3)    Walkways maintain a minimum three (3) foot wide (four (4) feet for handicap access routes) unimpeded passage for pedestrian passage beyond the two and one-half (2.5) foot overhang.

(g)    Driveways. The width of nonresidential driveways shall be based on the location, intended usage, and other factors and shall be in accordance with state and City engineering standards.

(h)    Internal Parking Lot Design. Parking facilities shall incorporate the following features to provide safe and efficient circulation for vehicles and pedestrians:

(1)    Standard traffic control signs and devices to direct traffic;

(2)    Signs, crosswalks, raised pedestrian walkways and night lighting to provide for safe pedestrian movement;

(3)    Landscaped islands, raised curbs, and striping to define parking lot entrances, end of parking aisles and the patterns of internal circulation; and

(4)    Overall design coordination and adherence to all applicable design standards.

(i)    Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC.

(j)    Lighting. Parking areas shall be lighted for the safety of pedestrians and vehicle circulation on the site in the following manner:

(1)    Lights are hooded or beamed so that there is no undesirable glare directed onto any adjacent streets or property; and

(2)    Lighting shall be designed adequately to illuminate the parking area while preventing the direct illumination of adjacent properties.

(k)    Signage and Striping. Directional signs and pavement markings shall be used to control vehicular movement within parking areas and to mark spaces.

(1)    The locations of parking spaces shall be clearly indicated by curb markings, wheel stops, bollards, or other means.

(2)    Incidental signs within parking lots shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.

(3)    No signs other than those indicating entrances, exits, name of the lot or the establishment to which the lot is accessory, conditions of use, or identification of disabled parking spaces shall be erected.

(4)    Signage for handicap spaces shall comply with the requirements prescribed in RCW 70.92.120.

(l)    Required Parking Spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the use and following corresponding standards except as modified per BMC 20.48.050:

	Category of Land Use 	Minimum Number of Parking Spaces

	BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL:	 

	(1)	Barber shop/beauty salon	1 per 75 sq. ft. gross floor area (g.f.a.)

	(2)	Bank/financial	1 per 350 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(3)	Laundry (self-service)	1 per 4 washing machines, with a minimum of 5 required

	(4)	Office	1 per 300 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(5)	Retail store less than 15,000 sq. ft.	1 per 300 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(6)	Retail store 15,000 sq. ft. or larger	1 per 250 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(7)	Personal service shop (tanning, shoe repair, dry cleaner)	1 per 250 sq. ft. g.f.a., with a minimum of 2 required

	(8)	Plumbing, heating, electrical and building supplies	1 per 600 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(9)	Convenience market/food store (retail)/market and supermarket	1 per 250 sq. ft. g.f.a., with a minimum of 6 required

	(10)	Shopping center*	4.0 per 1,000 square feet of leaseable g.f.a.

	*    A shopping center is a contiguous collection of retail businesses under one ownership or common management located in a building or set of buildings.

	EATING/DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS:	 

	(1)	Restaurant/cocktail lounge/tavern less than 4,000 sq. ft.	1 per 150 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(2)	Restaurant/cocktail lounge/tavern 4,000 sq. ft. or greater	20 plus 1 per 100 sq. ft. g.f.a. greater than 4,000 sq. ft.

	ENTERTAINMENT:	 

	(1)	Bowling alley	5 per lane

	(2)	Club, lodge	1 per 4 fixed seats, plus 1 per 50 sq. ft. gross floor area of assembly area without fixed seating

	(3)	Dance hall	1 per 100 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(4)	Pool hall	1 per 100 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(5)	Theater	1 per 4 fixed seats

	(6)	Video game arcade	15 per 1,000 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	INDUSTRIAL:	 

	(1)	Industrial establishment/research and development	1 per 600 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(2)	Mini-warehouse	1 per 3,000 sq. ft. g.f.a., plus 1 loading space per 10,000 sq. ft. g.f.a., plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. g.f.a. for office area

	(3)	Wholesale establishment/warehouse, trucking and freight terminal	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. g.f.a. up to 20,000 sq. ft. (3 space minimum), plus 1 per 2,500 sq. ft. g.f.a. 20,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. (10 space minimum), plus 1 per 3,000 sq. ft. greater than 100,000 sq. ft. (40 spaces minimum)

	LODGING:	 

	(1)	Bed and breakfast	1 per guest room plus 1 for the resident household

	(2)	Hotel	1 per 2 guest rooms, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a. of common areas

	(3)	Motel	1 per 2 guest rooms, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a. of common area plus 1 for manager

	(4)	Travel trailer park/tourist court	1 per trailer site, plus 1 per 10 sites located in a secure storage area, plus 1 per 5 sites for guest parking, plus other parking for office or community buildings

	MEDICAL/DENTAL:	 

	(1)	Medical/dental office	1 per 150 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(2)	Hospital/medical centers	1.8 per overnight bed based on state license

	(3)	Nursing home/health institution/convalescent home	1 per 600 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(4)	Veterinarian/animal hospital	1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	RECREATIONAL:	 

	(1)	Health club/figure salon/physical fitness center	10 per 1,000 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(2)	Parks/playground	Based on anticipated parking demand

	(3)	Racquet/handball	2 per each court

	(4)	Swimming facility	5, plus 1 per 75 sq. ft. of gross surface water area

	PUBLIC:	 

	(1)	Library/museum	1 per 400 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(2)	Places of assembly (arenas, churches, auditoriums, stadiums, sports arenas, etc.)	1 per 4 fixed seats (20 inches of a bench or pew = 1 seat), plus 1 per 50 sq. ft. g.f.a. of assembly without seats

	EDUCATIONAL:	 

	(1)	Nursery school/day care	1 per 5 children, plus 2 loading/unloading spaces (12 or fewer children are exempt from the loading/unloading)

	(2)	School, business and trade	6 per classroom, and/or 1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a. of administrative office, and/or teaching lab or shop

	(3)	School, college or university	2 per 1,000 sq. ft. g.f.a. used for academics, plus 1 per each 4 student rooming units, plus additional space as required for nonacademics

	(4)	School, K through 9th grade	2 per classroom, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a. of administrative office

	(5)	School, 10th through 12th grade	1 per each 10 students for which building is designed, plus 1 per classroom, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a. of administrative office

	AUTOMOBILE:	 

	(1)	Automobile service	1 per 200 sq. ft. g.f.a., plus 1 per service bay (bay itself is not a space), with a minimum of 5 required

	(2)	Motor vehicle/vessel sales lots	1 per 3,000 square feet of retail indoor or outdoor sales area in addition to parking requirements for the building or structure

	(3)	Motorcycle/small engine repair	1 per 400 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(4)	Shop/store for sales and service of machinery	1 per 600 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	OTHERS:	 

	(1)	Garden nursery	1 per 400 sq. ft. g.f.a. of retail area, plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. g.f.a. of building and outside display area (wholesale)

	(2)	Marina and moorage facility	1 per 600 sq. ft. g.f.a.

	(3)	Mortuary/funeral home	1 per 75 sq. ft. of assembly area

	(4)	Uncovered storage area	1 per 2,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each vehicle anticipated to be parked overnight on a regular basis, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. g.f.a. for office

(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §3, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.100 PARKING REDUCTION.

Modifications to the requirements of this chapter may be granted for the following:

(a)    For a modification to the number of off-street parking spaces required by this title, a decrease in the required number of spaces may be granted if the number of spaces proposed is documented by an adequate and thorough parking-demand-and-utilization-study to sufficiently serve the use with appropriate off-street parking. The study shall be prepared by a licensed transportation engineer or other qualified professional with parking demand expertise, and shall analyze the operational characteristics of the proposed use which justify a parking reduction. Approval of a parking reduction shall be solely at the discretion of the City. The following reductions do not require the above mentioned report:

(1)    Covered Bicycle Storage. If covered and secured bicycle storage is provided on site, a credit towards parking requirements at a ratio of one (1) less parking stall per six (6) bicycle spaces will be granted. The Director may increase credits according to size of development and anticipated pedestrian and bicycle activity and proximity to transit facilities. A maximum reduction of five (5) percent of required parking stalls may be granted. If a reduction of five (5) or more stalls is granted, then changing facilities including showers and lockers shall be required.

(2)    Transit Improvements. For new residential development consisting of ten (10) or more dwelling units, or commercial projects consisting of fifty (50) or more employees, and located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing or planned transit facility, a reduction in parking may be requested for up to fifteen (15) percent of required spaces if improvements to the local transit system are made by the applicant. Any such plan requires the approval of Kitsap Transit and the City.

(3)    Designated Land Use Centers. If a change of use occurs on a property within a center zone designation, resulting in a significant increase in the parking requirement, the Director may reduce the minimum number of required parking spaces by up to ten (10), provided:

(i)    Sites containing multiple buildings and/or uses shall have the reduction applied to the entire site and not to individual uses;

(ii)    The number of existing off-street parking spaces is not reduced.

(4)    Group Residential Facility - Class I, Adult Family Home, and Group Residential Home. The Director may authorize a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for a group residential facility - Class I, adult family home, or group residential home if there is a clear indication that the requirements of this chapter are excessive due to such factors as the resident’s age, ability to drive, or mental or physical abilities and disabilities. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.120 UNLISTED USES.

Land uses not specifically listed in BMC 20.48.060(i) and 20.48.080(l) shall have their off-street parking requirements determined in the following manner:

(a)    A comparison is made of the unlisted use to a listed use and the Director determines that the parking demand between the two (2) uses is similar. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.140 ACCESSIBLE PARKING.

Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces shall be provided that comply with the requirements in Chapter 17.04 BMC, City Building Code (IBC Chapter 11). Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible building entrance. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.150 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.

For uses in allowed zones and where parking is provided, electric vehicle charging stations are encouraged and shall comply with the City Building Code and Washington State Electrical Code (Chapter 296-46B WAC). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §5, 2014)


20.48.160 LOADING/UNLOADING SPACES.

(a)    Standards. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following standards for all new nonresidential construction or additions having a floor area greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area that is engaged in retail, manufacturing, wholesale or storage activities, but excluding self-service storage facilities, which requires the delivery of merchandise or materials by trucks:

	Total Gross Floor Area 	Number of Loading Spaces Required

	(1)	1,000 to 20,000 square feet	1

	(2)	20,001 to 50,000 square feet	2

	(3)	50,001 to 100,000 square feet	3

	(4)	Greater than 100,000 square feet	4

(b)    Standards. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following standards for all new nonresidential construction or additions having a floor area greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area that is engaged in hotel, office, restaurant or similar use in accordance, which requires the delivery of merchandise or materials by trucks:

	Total Gross Floor Area 	Number of Loading Spaces Required

	(1)	10,000 to 50,000 square feet	1

	(2)	50,001 to 100,000 square feet	2

	(3)	Greater than 100,000 square feet	3

(c)    Loading/Unloading Zone Development Standards.

(1)    Design. Off-street loading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet in width and have a total area of not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet.

(2)    Accessibility. With the exception of gates and security fencing, loading spaces shall be accessible at all times from a street, alley, or driveway and shall not be obstructed by other loading spaces, trash receptacles, outdoor storage, or other obstacles.

(3)    Obstructions. Loading functions shall not interfere with any emergency access, fire exit, or required vehicle parking spaces.

(d)    Modifications.

(1)    If the applicant can demonstrate that deliveries are only made during nighttime or other hours when customers are not present, the loading function may be accommodated in combination with required customer/employee parking.

(2)    If the applicant can demonstrate that all deliveries are made by trucks with a gross weight of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or less, the number of required loading/unloading spaces may be reduced by one (1) if a load/unload zone located within the public right-of-way fronting the property is approved by the Public Works Department. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.180 OTHER REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.

All nonresidential uses and residential developments of six (6) or more dwellings shall provide parking spaces for the following:

(a)    Motorcycle Spaces. Motorcycle spaces shall be provided at one (1) per twenty-five (25) of the required automobile spaces with at least one (1) motorcycle space provided.

(1)    Automobile parking requirements may be reduced one (1) space for every three (3) motorcycle spaces provided, up to a maximum five (5) percent of the total required automobile spaces.

(2)    Each motorcycle space shall be no smaller than four (4) feet in width and eight (8) feet in depth.

(3)    Motorcycle spaces shall be located according to the same criteria and standards that are applicable to automobile parking spaces.

(4)    The Director may exempt those nonresidential uses that would not normally have motorcycle-riding clientele (such as warehouses, storage facilities, automobile services, etc.) from motorcycle parking requirements.

(b)    Bicycle Facilities. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided at ten (10) percent of the required automobile spaces.

(1)    The minimum number of required bicycle spaces for schools of all types except higher education institutions shall be calculated at the rate of one (1) space per twenty (20) students, based on the facility’s designed capacity.

(2)    The Director may exempt those nonresidential uses that would not normally have bicycle-riding clientele (such as self-service businesses, automobile services, gas stations, etc.) from the bicycle parking requirements.

(3)    Bicycle facilities shall be firmly attached to the ground, located near the building entrance, and designed to allow both the frame and wheels to be securely locked to the structure. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.200 RENT OF RESIDENTIAL PARKING.

(a)    The rental, lease or other use of parking spaces for commercial parking purposes within a residential zone is prohibited.

(b)    The rental, lease or other use of parking spaces associated with a residential use for commercial parking, whether they are required spaces or not, is prohibited. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.220 SATELLITE PARKING.

Off-street parking requirements may be partially or completely satisfied with the approval of a satellite parking facility. A satellite parking facility is approved by site plan review as prescribed in BMC 20.58.080. A satellite parking facility may be approved, provided:

(a)    The parking facility is located within four hundred (400) feet of the property containing the associated use or building.

(b)    The parking facility is not located on property zoned for low density residential. The Director may waive the zone restriction for a religious worship facility, public school or public use if:

(1)    The parking facility is located on a lot abutting the principal use; or

(2)    The parking facility is located within one hundred (100) feet on a lot where a street (public or private) or alley would separate it from the principal use.

(c)    A notice to title, approved by the City Attorney and executed by affected parties to set forth clearly the terms of the parking agreement, shall be recorded with the County Auditor. A copy of the recorded agreement shall be submitted to the Department.

(d)    The satellite parking facility shall meet the requirements of this chapter.

(e)    A limit on the time of day that the satellite parking facility is used may be placed as a condition of its approval if deemed necessary by the Director for the protection of adjoining areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.240 JOINT USE OF PARKING FACILITIES.

Joint use parking facilities provide for the sharing of parking facilities between different uses may be granted under the following conditions:

(a)    The principal building or use shall be located within a radius of eight hundred (800) feet of the joint parking facilities.

(b)    The principal building or use shall not be separated from its parking by an arterial street unless it is within one (1) block of a signalized intersection.

(c)    The applicant shall demonstrate there will be no substantial conflict between the two (2) uses regarding hours of operation for which joint use of parking facilities is proposed.

(d)    A notice to title, approved by the City Attorney and executed by affected parties to set forth clearly the terms of the parking agreement, shall be recorded with the County Auditor. A copy of the recorded agreement shall be submitted to the Department.

(e)    The right to occupy the primary premises shall terminate if the joint use parking facilities that are necessary and were approved cease to be available. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.48.260 DRIVE-THROUGH STACKING REQUIREMENTS.

Drive-through stacking requirements can be found in BMC 20.44.120. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §5, 2013: Ord. 4971 §10, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)

Figure 20.48(a)

Parking Minimum Design Requirements 

	Parking Angle	Standards

	Minimum Stall Width	Minimum Stall Depth	Minimum Aisle Width

	One-way	Two-way

	0°	22'0"	8'0"	10'0"	18'0"

	30°	8'6"	17'0"	12'0"	20'0"

	45°	8'6"	17'4"	12'3"	20'0"

	50°	8'6"	18'0"	12'9"	20'0"

	55°	8'6"	18'6"	13'3"	20'0"

	60°	8'6"	18'10"	14'4"	20'0"

	65°	8'6"	19'0"	15'2"	21'0"

	70°	8'6"	19'2"	16'0"	21'6"

	75°	8'6"	19'0"	17'6"	22'0"

	90°	8'6"	17'11"	22'6"	22'6"

	A	B	C	D	D


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.50 LANDSCAPING

Sections:

20.50.010    INTENT.

20.50.020    APPLICABILITY.

20.50.030    EXCEPTIONS.

20.50.040    GENERAL PROVISIONS.

20.50.050    PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

20.50.060    LANDSCAPING PLAN SUBMITTAL.


20.50.010 INTENT.

The intent of this chapter is to establish landscaping standards that contribute to a quality urban environment by connecting open spaces, maintaining native, drought-resistant vegetation, replacing nonnative and invasive species, increasing privacy for residential areas, providing visual relief of parking lots, providing habitat for fish and wildlife, retaining significant trees, and reducing erosion and stormwater runoff while providing on-site filtration to protect groundwater resources from pollutants and flooding. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.50.020 APPLICABILITY.

All new development, including expansion of existing structures and/or uses, shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.50.030 EXCEPTIONS.

(a)    Landscaping standards do not apply to residential short subdivisions or developments of single-family units on individual lots, except that all undeveloped areas of the property shall be landscaped and continually maintained or retained in a natural undisturbed state.

(b)    The Director may waive or reduce any requirement(s) of this chapter in the following cases:

(1)    The remodel of an existing building results in the expansion of floor area that is ten (10) percent or less of the existing floor area;

(2)    An expansion of a use that results in no modifications (except normal maintenance and repair of the structure) to the outdoor area of the site;

(3)    To accommodate required off-street parking spaces. Pervious pavement or other landscaping mitigation may be required to accommodate for the loss of stormwater function.

(c)    Parking lots with less than thirty (30) spaces are exempt from internal landscaping requirements if they provide at least a five (5) foot width of landscaping across the frontage and along at least one (1) other property line and only one parking lot is located on site. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 4977 §6, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.50.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(a)    Front Yards. All front yard setback areas shall be landscaped pursuant to the performance standards per BMC 20.50.050;

(b)    Street Trees. Street trees shall be planted along public and private streets per performance standards in BMC 20.50.050(a) unless otherwise required by BMC 20.50.050(c). Trees shall be located within the front yard setback area, or within a public right-of-way if approved by the City and the property owner arranges the planting and maintenance of said street trees;

(c)    Visual Screening. When any nonresidential development, as defined by the International Building Code (which includes three (3) or more units), is proposed on a site that is adjoining the low or medium density residential zones, visual screening shall be provided according to the performance standards in BMC 20.50.050(b);

(d)    Areas Adjacent to Trails and Open Spaces. All developments adjacent to publicly used or designated trails and open spaces in the Comprehensive Plan shall provide Type I visual screening along the site facing the trail or open space per the performance standards outlined in BMC 20.50.050(b);

(e)    Undeveloped Areas. Undeveloped portions of property not devoted to landscaping shall remain with existing vegetation, including significant trees, as provided for in BMC 20.50.050(d), but excluding plants that can be classified as noxious weeds or as invasive species;

(f)    Alternative Landscaping Plan. The requirements of this chapter may be modified to encourage better landscaping design as follows:

(1)    A request for approval of alternate landscaping shall be submitted and accompanied by a landscape plan as required above;

(2)    An alternative landscaping plan may be approved, provided a finding by the City of public benefit and that the total area of landscaping shall be equal to or exceed that created by adherence to the standard landscaping and buffer requirements;

(g)    Guarantee. All landscaping shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO), except that in lieu of installing required landscaping, a performance assurance device may be provided prior to the issuance of a CO. The purpose of such a requirement is to ensure that a landscape plan is carried out when required by this chapter. The following conditions apply:

(1)    A bond or other acceptable assurance device shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost required to complete the approved landscaping, in order to guarantee its installation and the replacement of any plants that die within two (2) years of the posting of the bond;

(2)    If a performance assurance device is provided, landscaping shall be installed within the next planting season and no later than one (1) year from the date of issuance of a CO. If the approved landscape plan is not carried out, the City shall use the performance assurance device to complete the landscaping;

(3)    A performance assurance device will be released two (2) years after it is posted if the landscaping vegetation is in a healthy growing condition;

(h)    Maintenance Required. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition free of weeds, trash or debris through the life and use of the development. Dead, damaged, diseased, or missing plant material shall be replanted or replaced as necessary to comply with the approved landscaping plan and the requirements of the chapter. Maintenance standards and assurances must be provided in the landscape plan as described in BMC 20.50.060. (Ord. 5364 §5, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.50.050 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

Required landscaping shall be provided in the following manner:

(a)    General landscaping is intended to provide visual separation between compatible uses and to soften the appearance of parking lots and building facades. All required setback areas, parking lots, and interior landscaping areas shall comply with the following:

(1)    Street trees are required, one (1) tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of street frontage, and shall be spaced a maximum distance of thirty-five (35) feet on center; however, trees may be spaced irregularly in natural groupings rather than uniformly spaced except as noted elsewhere in this chapter;

(2)    Planting shall include a mix of trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf grasses or combination thereof; nonliving materials shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the landscaped area within two (2) years of planting;

(3)    Each separate landscaped area shall be a minimum of fifty (50) square feet and shall include at least one (1) tree in combination with shrubs, ground cover, or other landscape materials;

(4)    Bioswales and permeable pedestrian access ways connecting landscaped areas are encouraged and are included in the calculation of required landscaping square footage. Low impact development best management practices performed on site may count towards required landscaping (tree for tree, and square footage for square footage);

(5)    Interior landscaping shall be dispersed as equally as possible throughout the site particularly in parking areas;

(6)    Parking lots shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space. Required peripheral trees and required landscaped setback areas shall not be included in the interior landscaping calculations;

(7)    For every ten (10) parking stalls one (1) tree shall be installed within a landscaped area; and

(8)    Landscaped areas shall consist of no more than fifty (50) percent deciduous species.

(b)    Visual screening is intended to function as a year-round full visual barrier between incompatible uses. Visual screening is required for all commercial projects adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones. Visual screening is required as follows:

(1)    Type I. Required along the property line(s) of all nonresidential development proposed on a site that is adjoining the low or medium density residential zones. For purposes of this subsection, nonresidential development is as defined in the International Building Code (which includes three (3) or more dwelling units) and not specifically identified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. A Type I visual screen shall include the following:

(i)    A landscaped area of at least ten (10) feet wide;

(ii)    A mix of evergreen and deciduous trees, no more than twenty (20) feet apart on center. Deciduous trees up to twenty-five (25) percent of the tree requirement are encouraged to add seasonal and textural variation;

(iii)    Shrubs shall be planted between the trees to provide an effective visual barrier. Shrubs may be spaced irregularly in natural groupings rather than uniformly spaced; however, grouped shrubs should be no more than five (5) feet apart from each other; and

(iv)    A sight-obscuring fence, wall, earthen berm or combination thereof is required adjacent to parking areas to ensure headlights do not project into residential properties. Measures shall be taken to ensure quality in the visual character of the wall or fence on the side facing the residential lot.

(2)    Type II. Required for all large retail, motion picture theaters, junk yards, heavy industrial/manufacturing, stadiums, and sports complexes proposed on a site that is adjoining the low or medium density residential zones. Type II screening shall be provided along all property lines that adjoin the low or medium density residential zones. A Type II visual screen shall include the following:

(i)    Landscaped area of at least twenty (20) feet in width;

(ii)    A double row of evergreen trees spaced no more than fifteen (15) feet apart on center (rows shall be offset and spacing triangulated); existing mature healthy trees on site are encouraged to be retained;

(iii)    Shrubs shall be planted to enhance the visual barrier. Shrubs may be spaced irregularly in natural groupings rather than uniformly spaced; however, grouped shrubs should be no more than five (5) feet apart from each other; and

(iv)    A sight-obscuring fence, wall, earthen berm or combination thereof is required adjacent to parking areas to ensure headlights do not project into residential properties. Measures shall be taken to ensure quality in the visual character of the wall or fence on the side facing the residential lot.

(c)    Centers. Intended to soften the streetscape and sidewalk areas in a dense urban environment. Projects within the centers must comply with the provisions set forth in adopted subarea plans, the provisions of this chapter, and the following:

(1)    Street trees shall be provided within the front yard setback or in the sidewalk along any facade facing a major arterial. Any trees located in the City right-of-way may require additional approval through the Department of Public Works and Utilities. Trees shall be spaced no less than three (3) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. Trees placed in the sidewalk should be provided with street grates at the sidewalk level providing a continuous walking surface to within six (6) inches of the tree base. Where existing areaways or vaults prevent this form of planting, trees shall be planted in planters equipped with irrigation. All trees shall be of a species which allows pruning of lower branches in a manner necessary to keep the sidewalk clear of obstruction to a height of at least eight (8) feet. Trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2-1/2) inches at the time of planting;

(2)    Surface parking lots, if they abut public sidewalks, shall provide a perimeter landscaping strip containing a combination of trees (with no fewer than three (3) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage) and shrubs. Masonry walls no lower than fifteen (15) inches nor higher than thirty (30) inches may be substituted for shrubs; and

(3)    For parking lots containing more than twenty (20) stalls, at least fifteen (15) percent of the interior area shall be planted with trees and shrubs. All trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2-1/2) inches at the time of planting. Pedestrian walkways from adjacent sidewalks shall be provided.

(d)    Vegetation Preservation. The retention of existing and healthy trees and vegetation is important to help promote the utilization of natural systems, reduce the impacts of development on the storm drainage system and provide a better transition between various land uses within the City. The following provisions encourage vegetation preservation as follows:

(1)    To the greatest extent possible existing healthy significant trees defined below shall be retained on site. Should a proposal include the removal of all or portions of a significant tree(s), a qualified arborculturalist or urban forester shall be retained by the applicant to inventory the tree(s) and make recommendations regarding the protection, retention, preservation or removal of the tree(s). A copy of the report and recommendations shall be submitted to the City as part of the application process.

(2)    Existing healthy trees and vegetation may substitute for newly required landscaping. Credit shall be granted tree for tree and area for area. In order to promote the retention of existing significant trees during site development, each significant tree within the landscaped area shall count as three (3) newly required trees.

(3)    Credit may be given by the Director at the time of site plan review for the preservation of significant tree(s) in exchange for the loss of a parking space.

(4)    Significant trees are defined as follows:

(i)    Evergreen Trees. Eight (8) inches in diameter or greater, measured four (4) feet above existing grade; and

(ii)    Deciduous Trees. Twelve (12) inches in diameter or greater, measured four (4) feet above existing grade.

(e)    Planting Materials. Plants shall be selected based upon site-specific conditions which may affect plant growth such as sun exposure, soil types, shoreline conditions, adjacent site improvements, etc. New plant materials shall consist of drought-resistant species, or other species that are irrigated per the provisions of BMC 20.50.060(b)(4) or located in high moisture content soils. Plant material selection shall be consistent with the list maintained by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN). Plant materials shall also be coordinated with utility company requirements to avoid conflicts. Unless otherwise specified within this chapter all required landscaping shall at a minimum meet the following size requirements:

(f)    Plant Type and Size. Plants shall be sized according to the following:

(1)    Standard deciduous trees: one and one-half (1-1/2) inch to two (2) inch caliper.

(2)    Small ornamental and flowering trees: one and one-half (1-1/2) inch to one and three-fourths (1-3/4) inch caliper.

(3)    Evergreen trees: five (5) feet to six (6) feet in height.

(4)    Shrubs: minimum size one (1) gallon container.

(5)    Ground cover: minimum four (4) inch container.

(g)    Interruptions. Screening and buffering may be interrupted where necessary for access consistent with the general provisions of this chapter.

(h)    Safety. All fire hydrants are to be free of fences, hedges, and other landscaping obstacles. Shrubs eighteen (18) inches in height and less must not be placed closer than five (5) feet to a hydrant, and shrubs or trees larger than eighteen (18) inches must not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet to a hydrant.

(i)    Freestanding Signs. An area around the base of each freestanding sign equal to the sign area must be landscaped to improve the overall appearance of the sign and to reduce the risk of automobiles hitting the sign or supports of the sign. This landscaping must include vegetation and may include other materials and components such as brick or concrete bases, planter boxes, pole covers, or decorative framing.

(j)    Outdoor Storage. Unless provided for otherwise in this title, outdoor storage in all zones is limited to the minimum number of refuse containers necessary to support approved on-site uses. Dumpsters, refuse containers for commercial uses, and outdoor storage shall comply with the following criteria:

(1)    Be surrounded by a six (6) foot high solid wall or sight-obscuring fence. The wall or fence shall be considered a structure and shall conform to setbacks which may be required for building on street frontage. Outdoor storage of materials shall not exceed six (6) feet in height when visible from a public right-of-way.

(2)    Outdoor storage and refuse containers requiring screening in the GC, R-40, NB, and land use centers shall be screened with materials which are architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(3)    Outdoor storage and refuse containers should not be located between a street and the front of the building, except in industrial zones.

(k)    Clear-Vision Triangle. A clear-vision area shall be maintained at the intersections of streets, alleys and commercial driveways, or combinations thereof as determined by the City Engineer with the following requirements:

(1)    A clear-vision area shall contain no plantings, fences, walls, other structures, or visual obstructions within a vertical area extending from three (3) feet to eight (8) feet above the ground, measured from the established centerline of the street, alley or driveway;

(2)    The foregoing provision shall not apply to:

(i)    A tree trimmed to the trunk within the three (3) to eight (8) foot clear area;

(ii)    Other plant species that are so planted and trimmed as to leave a clear and unobstructed cross-view in all seasons;

(iii)    A supporting member or appurtenance to a permanent building lawfully existing on the site;

(3)    Where the maximum setback conflicts with the clear-vision triangle, relief from the maximum setback may be granted thorough a Type I Director decision. (Ord. 5364 §6, 2018: Ord. 5319 §8, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 5008 §6, 2007: Ord. 4971 §11, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.50.060 LANDSCAPING PLAN SUBMITTAL.

A landscape plan shall accompany all land use applications, including permits for clearing, grading, and building.

(a)    A landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate:

(1)    Project name, owner’s name, designer’s name, north arrow, date and scale;

(2)    Existing property lines, easements, rights-of-way, utilities, setbacks, trees, fences, and other screening and structures;

(3)    Existing and proposed grades of at least five (5) foot intervals;

(4)    Proposed plantings, identified by scientific or common name, and caliper, size, and minimum height of specimens to be planted.

(b)    A landscape plan shall provide assurances for the following:

(1)    Landscape areas consisting of drought-resistant vegetation will not require temporary or permanent irrigation systems;

(2)    Areas where existing site conditions assure adequate soil moisture for growth within the required landscape area shall have temporary irrigation systems only as required to sustain new plantings;

(3)    Except for areas of undisturbed existing vegetation, all landscape areas that do not have high soil moisture conditions shall have temporary or permanent irrigation systems. Temporary systems may be removed after twenty-four (24) months or two (2) growing seasons, whichever occurs first; provided, that the plantings are established;

(4)    Permanent irrigation systems located within required landscape areas shall include the following features:

(i)    Moisture or precipitation sensors;

(ii)    Automatic timers set for operation to assure adequate moisture levels;

(iii)    Head-to-head spacing, if sprinkler heads are proposed;

(iv)    Pressure-regulating devices;

(v)    Backflow prevention devices;

(vi)    Separate irrigation zones for grass and planting beds;

(vii)    Other provisions applicable to state and City codes;

(5)    Irrigation water shall be applied with demonstrated consideration for avoiding runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, and impervious surfaces;

(6)    All landscaping shall be maintained in healthy growing condition for the life of the project;

(7)    All plant material shall be managed by pruning so that plant growth does not conflict with public utilities, restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, or create a traffic hazard. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §4 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.52 SIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

20.52.010    INTENT.

20.52.020    APPLICABILITY.

20.52.030    SIGN PERMIT.

20.52.040    EXEMPT SIGNS.

20.52.050    PROHIBITED SIGNS.

20.52.060    SIGN MEASUREMENTS.

20.52.070    SIGN PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.

20.52.080    TEMPORARY SIGNS.

20.52.085    NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGNS.

20.52.090    GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.100    COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.120    RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.130    SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.140    DOWNTOWN AND CENTERS SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.150    VARIATIONS TO SIGN REGULATIONS.

20.52.160    PORTABLE SIGNS.

20.52.180    NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

20.52.190    GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY.

20.52.200    REMOVAL OF SIGNS.


20.52.010 INTENT.

The intent of the sign requirements chapter is to recognize the importance of signs in the community and establish regulations to protect the public from damage or injury attributable to distractions and obstructions caused by poorly designed or improperly located signs. These regulations are also intended, in part, to stabilize or enhance the overall appearance of the community, and to protect property values. This chapter is intended to regulate the number, size, placement and physical characteristics of signs and sign structures. These regulations are not intended to and do not restrict, limit or control the content of any sign message. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.020 APPLICABILITY.

These regulations shall apply in all zoning districts and may be subject to additional requirements of certain districts, or to state regulations. In cases of conflict, the most stringent requirement shall prevail. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.030 SIGN PERMIT.

(a)    Permit Required. No sign shall be placed, erected, or displayed without first obtaining a sign permit unless exempt under BMC 20.52.040.

(b)    Removal of Nonconforming Signs. A property containing a nonconforming sign shall not be allowed a new or additional sign on the property until the nonconforming sign is removed or brought into conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the underlying zone.

(c)    Permit Application. An application for a sign permit shall include the following:

(1)    Signature of the property owner or their designated agent;

(2)    Site plan drawn to scale showing existing buildings, streets, freestanding and building signs, utility poles, and other structures within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign;

(3)    Elevation drawings of the structural details of the proposed sign including dimensions, height, illumination methods and structure supports; and

(4)    Landscaping plan showing planting materials and patterns. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.040 EXEMPT SIGNS.

The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, but may be subject to other provisions of the zoning code or building code:

(a)    Traffic signs, signals, wayfinding signs, and other traffic control devices erected by the City or other public authority.

(b)    Public notices pertaining to public health or safety issues, or for notification of legal or legislative action erected by the City or other public authority, of a temporary nature.

(c)    Permanent plaques, cornerstones, nameplates, and other building identification markings attached to or carved into the building materials and which are integral parts of the structure.

(d)    Signs within buildings, provided they do not include moving, flashing or animated signs that are visible from any private or public roadway, or from adjacent properties.

(e)    Legal nonconforming signs.

(f)    Incidental signs intended for public information or convenience and which consist of no more than ten (10) square feet for a combination of such signs. These may include restroom signs, hours of operation signs, address numbers, help wanted, credit card signs, and similar.

(g)    The American flag, State of Washington flag, and other political or special purpose flags that are not intended to contribute to a commercial advertising display.

(h)    Wall graphics of an artistic nature and that do not conform to the definition of "sign."

(i)    Public information/identification approved through a conditional use permit process pursuant to BMC 20.58.020.

(j)    Signs displayed on a lot with a property for sale or rent.

(k)    Signs displayed on a lot where construction is taking place, provided they are removed prior to occupancy approval of the building.

(l)    Noncommercial speech signs meeting the provisions in BMC 20.52.085.

(m)    Signs not readable from public or private right-of-way or waterway.

(n)    Signs intended for general public information, such as bulletin board/kiosk, that accommodate changeable copy such as private or public notices, special event information, and other short-term messages, at a scale suitable for pedestrians and not intended to be read by passing motorists, and not for commercial advertising purposes. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.050 PROHIBITED SIGNS.

The following signs are prohibited within the City limits of Bremerton and shall be subject to removal through amortization or other means:

(a)    Strobe lights or any other flashing, moving, video or animated features that are visible beyond any property line. Readerboard or message center signs that change copy no more frequently than at eight (8) second intervals are exempt from this provision.

(b)    Pole signs in all zones except the freeway corridor (FC) zone and the industrial (I) zone.

(c)    Private signs placed within a public right-of-way, except a projecting sign may be permitted over a sidewalk if a clearance of at least eight (8) feet is maintained between the sidewalk and the bottom of the sign.

(d)    Any sign that is determined by the City Engineer to be a hazard to public safety due to its design, materials, physical condition, or placement.

(e)    Signs painted, attached to, or otherwise supported by rock formations, utility poles, trees or other plant materials.

(f)    Bench signs, when installed within the public right-of-way. When on private property, the size of a bench sign will be counted toward the total allowable sign area.

(g)    Portable signs within the public right-of-way except portable signs per BMC 20.52.160.

(h)    Off-premises signs including billboards, but not including co-op signs, portable signs, or noncommercial speech signs where permitted. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 5249 §6, 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.060 SIGN MEASUREMENTS.

(a)    The area of sign faces shall be measured as the area bounded by any six (6) straight lines intersecting at right angles, and shall include any surrounding frames or cabinet edges.

(b)    Sign area does not include supports, foundations or structures that are not part of the sign.

(c)    Only one (1) side of a double-faced sign is counted in the sign’s total area.

(d)    Multiple copy signs or shopping center signs consisting of several individual signs on the same support structures are calculated as the total of all individual sign components.

(e)    A round or cylindrical sign is calculated as the maximum area that can be seen at one (1) time from one (1) position, or fifty (50) percent of the total area, whichever is greater.

(f)    The height of a sign is measured from grade, as defined, to the highest point of the sign.

(g)    Sign clearances are measured from grade directly below the sign to the bottom of the sign or sign frame.

(h)    Street corner signs (at an intersection) shall be assigned to one (1) of the frontages by the applicant and shall conform to the requirements of that frontage only.

(i)    Portable signs shall be calculated as part of the total freestanding sign area available to the site. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.070 SIGN PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.

(a)    All signs, including supporting structures, shall be erected or placed totally within the boundaries of the site and not within any public right-of-way, except for the following:

(1)    Public authority and other traffic-related signs;

(2)    Temporary banner signs erected by the City;

(3)    Approved signs overhanging public walkways; and

(4)    Approved portable signs per BMC 20.52.160.

(b)    Intersections Standard. A vision clearance setback shall be maintained of at least fifteen (15) feet from the edge of all private and public roadways, alleys and driveway intersections.

(c)    General Road Standard. A vision clearance setback shall be maintained of at least ten (10) feet from the edge of existing or planned roadways. Signs may be allowed within the clear-vision setback if:

(1)    A pole sign is allowed by the zone;

(2)    The top of the sign is three (3) feet or less above the grade;

(3)    The bottom of the sign is eight (8) feet or greater above the grade; or

(4)    The posts and support structure have a diameter no greater than twelve (12) inches within this area.

(d)    A pedestrian clearance is required for any projecting sign (8) feet above grade or sidewalk as measured to the bottom of the sign.

(e)    A projecting sign may extend over a public right-of-way or public pedestrian walkway up to six (6) feet past the property line, but in no case shall the sign extend over a street or other area used by motor vehicles.

(f)    The setbacks for freestanding signs may be reduced to zero (0), provided the applicant provides justification and documented proof that the sign’s placement will not hinder vision clearance for existing and future development on the site.

(g)    Freestanding signs shall not extend beyond property lines. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §7, 2014: Ord. 5046 §5, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.080 TEMPORARY SIGNS.

All temporary signs are subject to the placement, size, and height requirements of this chapter, and the requirements set forth in the underlying zone. Additionally, the following requirements shall apply:

(a)    The sign area of individual temporary signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; except a banner may be permitted with a sign area of up to one hundred (100) square feet.

(b)    The maximum height of a temporary sign is six (6) feet, except a banner may be allowed a maximum height of twenty (20) feet.

(c)    Signs may be displayed for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. Any time a temporary sign is removed by a business, it shall not be replaced by the same or other temporary sign for a period of not less than ninety (90) consecutive days.

(d)    Temporary signs meeting the following standards are exempt from the requirements of BMC 20.52.030 and BMC 20.52.090 through 20.52.140:

(1)    The sign is displayed for a period of seven (7) days or less;

(2)    The area of the sign is twenty-four (24) square feet or less; and

(3)    The height of the sign is six (6) feet or less.

(e)    Temporary signs shall not be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or to any other structure, other than what is necessary to secure it to prevent theft, wind damage or safety problems.

(f)    Advertising wind signs or devices that flutter, wave, sparkle, or otherwise move from the pressure of the wind are permitted for specific promotions or events but shall not be permanently displayed. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.085 NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH SIGNS.

Noncommercial speech signs express noncommercial speech such as public community events, religious, political, social, or other philosophical messages.

Noncommercial speech signs do not promote commercial products or services. The content of such signs is not regulated, but is subject to the following requirements:

(a)    The sign area of noncommercial speech signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.

(b)    The maximum height is limited to six (6) feet.

(c)    Noncommercial speech signs that do not comply with the requirements of this section shall be subject to the permit requirements, sign area, setback and other provisions of this chapter. All noncommercial speech signs shall comply with general sign regulations per BMC 20.52.090. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016)


20.52.090 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS.

The following regulations apply to signs in all zone districts:

(a)    Vision Clearance. Signs shall conform to the clearance requirements of BMC 20.52.060.

(b)    Extension above Rooftop. No sign that is attached to a building shall extend above the highest point of the roof except for commercial and center zones up to fifty (50) percent of the area of a wall sign that is integrated into an architectural facade design element to define the primary entry to the premises may project above the parapet of a flat roof; provided, that all components of the sign are only visible to public view on the primary entry side of the building.

(c)    Window Signs. Signs placed on the inside of windows and directed toward the outside of a building shall be included in the total sign area calculations.

(d)    Canopies and Awnings. Signs placed on projecting canopies and awnings, whether lighted or not, shall be calculated only for the area of the canopy or awning taken up by the sign itself.

(e)    Landscaping. All freestanding signs shall have a landscaped island at the base of the sign equal to, or greater than, the sign area.

(f)    Illumination. In order to avoid unreasonably distracting pedestrians or motorists, nearby residents, and to protect marine life, illumination from or upon any sign shall be shielded or directed so as to avoid undue brightness, glare or reflection of light on private or public property and waterways. Illumination shall be adjusted to ensure there is no undue brightness. "Undue brightness" is illumination in excess of 0.3 footcandles above ambient light conditions.

(g)    Sign Maintenance. All signs erected in the City of Bremerton are required to remain in good repair. The following requirements shall apply for sign maintenance:

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by said person any sign which is in a damaged or deteriorated condition and constitutes a danger or hazard to public safety.

(2)    Sign components and materials shall be kept in good repair which shall include the sign being free of holes, chipping, cracking, peeling, fading, rusting or nonfunctional components that are detectable from beyond the property line. Any sign in violation of this section shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. A permit may be required for maintenance work.

(3)    Temporary signs, noncommercial speech signs or banners showing evidence of deterioration, such as rips, tears, color fading, frayed edges or otherwise showing need of general maintenance that can be seen from the property line shall be removed, repaired or replaced promptly (provided the replacement complies with all other portions of this chapter). (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §12, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.100 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS SIGN REGULATIONS.

The following standards shall apply to signs placed on property zoned commercial:

(a)    Freestanding Signs.

(1)    No use or combination of uses on a single lot or building shall have more than one (1) freestanding sign per street frontage, with the following exceptions:

(i)    Parcels with five hundred (500) feet of continuous frontage may have one (1) additional sign.

(ii)    Co-Op Signs. See subsection (d) of this section.

(2)    Maximum Height and Design. Freestanding signs shall comply with the height and design requirements set forth in Figure 20.52(a).

(b)    Building Signs.

(1)    Commercial Uses. The building sign standards shall be in accordance with the following:

(i)    Sign Area. Signs attached to a building may have an aggregated area that shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each one (1) lineal foot of building facade width.

(ii)    Maximum Sign Size. A building sign attached individually shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area, except it may exceed the maximum if the total sign area is less than ten (10) percent of the total building facade area of the side with the signage.

(2)    Industrial Uses. The building sign standards for industrial uses and other uses not engaged in the sale of goods or services to the public shall be in accordance with the following:

(i)    Sign Area. The maximum aggregated area for all building signs attached to a single building shall be one hundred (100) square feet.

(3)    Number of Signs. There is no limit to the number of individual building signs, provided the maximum aggregated sign area is not exceeded.

(4)    Illumination. Signs may be illuminated directly, indirectly, or internally, provided the lighting is directed away from other land uses, and away from oncoming traffic.

(c)    Large Multiple-Occupant Development. A shopping center, professional office complex, or similar large multiple-occupancy development may have an identification sign to a maximum size of three hundred (300) square feet placed along one (1) street frontage, provided the parcel has an area of at least eight (8) acres, and the sign is no closer than one hundred (100) feet from an adjacent property on the same side of the street.

(d)    Co-Op Signs. A co-op sign is intended to permit businesses that do not have street frontages on Kitsap Way or Wheaton Way a reasonable opportunity to advertise. Co-op signs are an incentive for the consolidation of signage. A co-op sign transfers the right to place a freestanding sign from a nonfronting parcel to a parcel with street frontage on Kitsap Way or Wheaton Way.

(1)    Co-Op Sign Eligibility. Co-op signs may be permitted along Wheaton or Kitsap Way provided all the following are met:

(i)    At a minimum, two (2) parcels are coordinating to create consolidated signage to reduce visual clutter and limit distractions to pedestrians and motor vehicles. It will be required for the nonfronting parcel to transfer the right to develop an on-site freestanding sign to the parcel fronting Kitsap Way or Wheaton Way. The owners of both the fronting parcel and the nonfronting parcel(s) shall record a "Notice to Title" prepared by the Department recognizing the presence of a co-op sign with the Kitsap County Auditor. The notice shall be notarized and the applicant must submit proof that the notice has been legally recorded before the sign permit is issued.

(ii)    The nonfronting business shall not have a property line fronting Wheaton Way or Kitsap Way.

(iii)    The parcel where the co-op signage is installed shall have at least seventy-five (75) feet of continuous street frontage on Wheaton Way (defined as Wheaton Way from Riddell Road to Sheridan Road) or Kitsap Way.

(iv)    The parcels (fronting and nonfronting) must share a property line, or for nonfronting businesses that do not have a shared property line with the fronting business, co-op signage may be allowed if all of the following are met:

a.    The structure containing the nonfronting businesses is within eight hundred (800) feet of Wheaton or Kitsap Way; and

b.    The nonfronting parcel is within four hundred (400) feet from the fronting parcel where the co-op sign is to be installed; and

c.    There is no public right-of-way between the nonfronting and fronting parcel where the co-op sign is to be installed; and

d.    Vehicle or pedestrian access to the nonfronting business is adjacent to, or is in close proximity to, the fronting business.

(v)    Any existing freestanding sign(s) on the fronting and nonfronting businesses should be removed prior to installation of the co-op sign, unless allowed elsewhere in the code.

(2)    Size and Quantity. Co-op signs shall be in accordance with the following standards:

(i)    A parcel may only participate in one (1) co-op sign.

a.    The nonfronting parcel may place a directional sign at each entrance, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in size.

(ii)    The co-op sign is the only permitted freestanding sign on the participating parcels, except as provided above.

(iii)    The sign does not exceed the maximum height limit as identified in Figure 20.52(a).

(iv)    A co-op sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, except for the following:

a.    When a co-op sign has multiple nonfronting parcels, a twenty-five (25) percent bonus in square footage is permitted (for a maximum sign area of one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet). (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.120 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS.

The following regulations apply to properties in residential zones:

(a)    Freestanding Signs.

(1)    One (1) freestanding sign may be permitted at each street entrance to a neighborhood, subdivision, manufactured park, apartment/condominium complex, or other homogeneous residential area, provided:

(i)    The sign area is fifty (50) square feet or less.

(2)    Individual Properties. Each residential property may have one (1) freestanding permanent sign that shall not exceed two (2) square feet in sign area.

(3)    Height. Freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet as measured from grade directly below the sign to the highest point on the sign or its support structure.

(b)    Building Signs.

(1)    The freestanding sign limitations prescribed in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section may be applied to building signs in lieu of freestanding signs.

(c)    Resident name plaques and address numbers shall not be included in total sign area calculations, but shall be limited to a size and character of other such signs in the immediate neighborhood.

(d)    Advertising wind signs or devices that flutter, wave, revolve, or sparkle, or are otherwise moved by the wind, are prohibited. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.130 SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGN REGULATIONS.

When a sign that is not otherwise regulated by this title and is located in a residential zone, the special purpose sign regulations shall apply. Specifically, special purpose signs are signs located in a residential zone that are for either (1) commercial uses, such as an adaptive reuse, or legally established nonconforming commercial use, or (2) noncommercial signs such as signs for churches, schools and parks. The following shall apply:

(a)    Freestanding Signs.

(1)    Sign Area. The maximum area of a freestanding sign shall be limited to fifty (50) square feet.

(2)    Number of Signs. Only one (1) freestanding sign is allowed per each street frontage.

(3)    Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed six (6) feet.

(b)    Building Signs.

(1)    Sign Area. The aggregate area of all building signs, projecting signs, and other signs attached to buildings shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.

(2)    Number of Signs. There is no limit to the number of individual building signs, provided the maximum aggregated sign area is maintained.

(c)    Illumination. When located within a residential zone, the sign shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §8, 2014: Ord. 4971 §13, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.140 DOWNTOWN AND CENTERS SIGN REGULATIONS.

The following standards shall apply to signs located in a center:

(a)    Freestanding Signs.

(1)    Sign Area. The requirements prescribed in BMC 20.52.100(a)(1) shall apply, except wide parcels shall be limited to only one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet.

(2)    Spacing. Freestanding signs shall be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from adjacent properties, except this may be modified by the Director where such factors as the width of the lot or the driveway access make compliance impossible.

(3)    Maximum Height and Design. Freestanding signs shall comply with the height and design requirements set forth in Figure 20.52(a).

(b)    Building Signs. The requirements prescribed in BMC 20.52.100(b) shall apply.

(c)    Moving, flashing, or animated signs are prohibited in downtown and centers zones. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.150 VARIATIONS TO SIGN REGULATIONS.

(a)    The Director shall have the authority to grant administrative approval for minor adjustments to sign heights, numbers of signs, sign placement, and sign size, provided:

(1)    The adjustments do not exceed ten (10) percent of the basic requirement; and

(2)    The adjustment is based on a hardship or problem with the site, existing building placements, or poor site visibility, and not based on economic factors or personal design preference.

(b)    A request for adjustments beyond ten (10) percent shall be processed as a variance pursuant to BMC 20.58.030. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.160 PORTABLE SIGNS.

Portable signs may be placed on sidewalks or portions of the pedestrian public right-of-way subject to the following conditions:

(a)    A minimum four (4) feet of unobstructed sidewalk or pedestrian path must be maintained. A portable sign shall not be allowed on sidewalks with less than four (4) feet in width.

(b)    Portable signs may not be placed in the driving lanes of a public street or in parking stalls on the public right-of-way.

(c)    One (1) portable sign is allowed for any licensed business. The sign must be displayed immediately adjacent to the main entrance of the business employing the sign.

(d)    Portable signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) inches in width or thirty-six (36) inches in height as displayed.

(e)    Portable signs shall be professionally lettered, neatly painted or assembled, and remain in good repair.

(f)    Portable signs shall be constructed to avoid being blown from their intended location and to avoid tipping or falling.

(g)    Portable signs shall not be internally lit, not have moving parts, nor shall any attachment or portion of the sign extend beyond the thirty-two (32) by thirty-six (36) inch maximum dimensions established in subsection (d) of this section.

(h)    Portable signs shall be displayed during daylight hours only and shall be removed by the business owner immediately after dusk each day.

(i)    Any site landscaping required by the City shall not be altered to accommodate a portable sign.

(j)    Portable signs shall not block intersections or otherwise constitute a public safety hazard.

(k)    Pursuant to Chapter 47.42 RCW and Chapter 468-66 WAC, placement of portable signs on the public right-of-way of SR 3, SR 303, SR 304, and SR 310 is prohibited.

(l)    Placement of portable signs on the public right-of-way in violation of this section will result in immediate removal of the sign from the public right-of-way by City personnel. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §9, 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.180 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

(a)    Applicability. This section applies to the maintenance, repair, as appropriate, and removal of nonconforming signs. "Nonconforming sign" means a sign that was legally established, but no longer conforms to the current sign standards of this title.

(b)    Maintenance and Repair of Off-Premises Signs. Any nonconforming off-premises sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation, and be removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter, when one (1) or more of the following events occur:

(1)    Alterations to Sign.

(i)    Any structural alteration to an off-premises sign shall result in the loss of its nonconforming status. This does not include replacing the sign’s message or painting.

(ii)    In no case shall an off-premises sign be permitted to be expanded or enlarged. Adding electronic components that move, flash, or change copy is not permitted.

(2)    Alteration to Associated Business or Site. Should a business or site with an off-premises nonconforming sign undergo remodel or site improvements the sign shall lose its nonconforming status under any of the following circumstances:

(i)    The on-site renovation, construction, or other site improvements exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the assessed improvement value of the site; or

(ii)    On-site construction/improvements costs exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000); or

(iii)    Unless the structure was damaged by fire or other casualty not intentionally caused by the owner or tenant and a permit is applied for within one (1) year of such fire or casualty.

(c)    Maintenance and Repair of On-Premises Signs. Any nonconforming on-premises sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation, and be removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter, when one (1) or more of the following events occur:

(1)    Alterations to Sign.

(i)    If alterations are made to the sign that exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the replacement cost of the sign, it shall lose its nonconforming status; or

(ii)    For freestanding signs, refacing the sign with a new message is permitted; however, if the cabinetry housing the sign is removed, or is intended to be replaced, the sign shall lose its nonconforming status; or

(iii)    In no case shall an on-premises sign be permitted to be expanded or enlarged.

(2)    Alteration to Associated Business or Site. Should a business with a nonconforming sign undergo remodel or site improvements, the sign shall lose its nonconforming status under any of the following circumstances:

(i)    The on-site renovation, construction, or other site improvements exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the assessed improvement value of the site;

(ii)    On-site construction/improvements costs exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000); or

(iii)    Unless the structure was damaged by fire or other casualty not intentionally caused by the owner or tenant and a permit is applied for within one (1) year of such fire or casualty. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 5249 §11, 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.190 GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY.

(a)    A sign that becomes nonconforming with respect to its setback from the edge of a public right-of-way as a result of a local, state, or federal government acquisition of property for right-of-way expansion shall be characterized as a legal nonconforming sign and shall be allowed subject to the requirements of this section.

(b)    The City may allow, by a Type II permit as prescribed in Chapter 20.02 BMC, the placement of a new sign or relocation of an existing sign within a required setback if it meets all of the following criteria:

(1)    The enforcement of this code would result in substantial hardship to the applicant because no feasible location exists to place a sign on the subject property other than in a required setback, and such hardship was created solely by local, state, or federal government acquisition of property for right-of-way expansion and not by any action of the applicant.

(2)    The sign is not prohibited by BMC 20.52.050 and, except for location within a required setback, complies with all other requirements of this chapter.

(3)    The sign complies with the City’s minimum sight distance at intersection requirements pursuant to BMC 20.52.070.

(4)    Location of the sign within a required setback is otherwise consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.52.200 REMOVAL OF SIGNS.

The sign user, owner and/or owner of the property on which an abandoned, dangerous, defective, illegal, or prohibited sign is located shall remove or cause to be removed any such sign as required in this chapter. Failure to comply shall subject the sign user, owner and/or owner of the property on which the sign is located to the remedies and penalties of BMC 20.40.200. (Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)

Figure 20.52(a) 

Freestanding Signs: Zone-Specific Size and Design Requirements 2 

	Commercial Zones	Freestanding Sign Type	Max. Height	Max. Size1,4

	General Commercial (GC)	Monument only	8'3	60 sq. ft.

	Neighborhood Business (NB)	Monument only	6'	60 sq. ft.

	Freeway Corridor (FC)	Any	35'	150 sq. ft.

	Industrial (I)	Any	25'	-

	Institutional (INST)	Monument only	8'	60 sq. ft.

	All Centers (except the Puget Sound Industrial Center - Bremerton)	Monument only	8'3	60 sq. ft.

	Puget Sound Industrial Center - Bremerton	Any	25'	-

1.    Larger signs for large multiple-occupant development are allowable per BMC 20.52.100(c).

2.    Freestanding sign size for special purpose zones not listed in this table is subject to the requirements of BMC 20.52.130.

3.    Freestanding signs fronting Wheaton Way (from Riddell Road to Sheridan Road) and Kitsap Way may increase the maximum height to fifteen (15) feet.

4.    Pursuant to BMC 20.52.100(d) co-op signage may increase the maximum size provided a transfer of development rights for the nonfronting parcel is provided (nonfronting parcel does not get a freestanding sign as the transfer of development rights was for a larger sign on the fronting parcel).

(Ord. 5312 §4 (part), 2016: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5263 §3 (part), 2014: Ord. 5249 §12, 2014; Ord. 5046 §6, 2008; Ord. 4977 §7, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005) 


Chapter 20.54 NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS

Sections:

20.54.010    INTENT.

20.54.020    ESTABLISHMENT OF A LEGAL NONCONFORMITY AND APPLICABILITY.

20.54.030    ANNEXATION.

20.54.040    DEFINITIONS.

20.54.050    NONCONFORMING LOTS.

20.54.060    NONCONFORMING USES.

20.54.070    NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.

20.54.080    NONCONFORMING LANDSCAPING.

20.54.100    NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

20.54.110    UNLAWFUL USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS.


20.54.010 INTENT.

(a)    Within the zones established by BMC Title 20 and amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures which were lawful at the time of their establishment but are prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the existing zone requirements. These nonconformities are declared incompatible with the zone because they do not conform to the requirements of the zone in which they are located.

(b)    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or site legally established. The intent of this chapter is to set forth the conditions under which these nonconformities may continue to exist until such time they are discontinued as prescribed by law. (Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF A LEGAL NONCONFORMITY AND APPLICABILITY.

(a)    A party asserting the existence of a lawfully established nonconforming lot, use or structure has the burden of proof that the lot, use or structure was not substandard in meeting the requirements of the zone which were in effect at its creation.

(b)    The rules of this chapter are applied by first reviewing which provisions are applicable to the nonconformity. (Does the nonconformity involve a lot, use, structure or a combination?) When a combination of nonconforming lot, structure or use exists, each segment of the nonconformity is reviewed independent of the others. Example: a legally established single-family dwelling not allowed in the zone and not meeting setback requirements would be allowed to rebuild from substantial destruction (BMC 20.54.060(e)(1)), but the new structure would have to comply with the current setback requirements (BMC 20.54.070(c)). (Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.030 ANNEXATION.

Lots, structures, uses of land and structures that were legally in existence prior to annexation to the City, but that do not conform to the requirements of the zone in which they are located following the date of annexation, shall become a legal nonconformity subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.040 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

(a)    Nonconforming Lots. A lot that does not meet the lot area, width, street frontage, or other requirements of the zone in which it is located, but was lawfully created prior to the effective date of the zone or subsequent amendments thereto.

(b)    Nonconforming Use. Any activity, development or condition that by the zone in which it is located is not permitted outright or as an accessory use, or is not permitted by a conditional use permit or other special permitting process; but was lawfully created prior to the effective date of the zone or subsequent amendments thereto and was continually maintained as defined in this chapter. A nonconforming use may or may not involve buildings or structures and may involve part of or all of a building or property.

(c)    Nonconforming Structure. A building or structure that does not comply with the required setbacks, height, lot coverage and other development requirements of the zone in which it is located, but was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of the zone or subsequent amendments thereto and was continually maintained as defined in this chapter. This term does not apply to any substandard condition that was legally granted a variance.

(d)    Substantial Destruction. For the purpose of this chapter, "substantial destruction" means the repair or replacement of a building or structure which exceeds one (1) of the following:

(1)    Seventy-five (75) percent of the assessed value of the structure as determined by the Kitsap County Assessor. An appraised value may be substituted for the assessed value at the request of the applicant and as deemed appropriate by the Director.

(2)    For accessory structures which are typically not assessed (such as decks, sheds, garages, and retaining walls) and the value cannot be determined, substantial destruction will occur at the point that seventy-five (75) percent or more of the structure is replaced. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.050 NONCONFORMING LOTS.

The following provisions shall apply to all lots meeting the definition in BMC 20.54.040(a):

(a)    Continuation and Development. A nonconforming lot may be developed for any use allowed by the zone, provided the development meets, through design or by an approved variance, the requirements of the zone in which it is located.

(b)    Illegal Lot Modifications or Split. The following is applicable to all lots:

(1)    No lot may be modified, divided or adjusted in a manner that would violate dimensional, area, or other requirements of the zone in which it is located.

(2)    A government agency may lawfully modify a lot in a manner that would result in nonconformity, if portions of a lot are acquired for a public use or purpose, or is allowed otherwise by law. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.060 NONCONFORMING USES.

The following provisions shall apply to all uses meeting the definition in BMC 20.54.040(b):

(a)    Continuation. Any legally established nonconforming use may be continued until such time that it is discontinued as prescribed in subsection (d) or (e) of this section.

(b)    Change of Use. A structure or property containing a nonconforming use may be changed to the following:

(1)    A use that conforms to the requirements of the zone; or

(2)    Another nonconforming use; provided, that:

(i)    A conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020;

(ii)    The existing nonconforming use was not discontinued as prescribed in subsection (d) or (e) of this section;

(iii)    The new use is clearly a reduction in the nonconformity and intensity of the existing nonconforming use; and

(iv)    The applicant demonstrates that there is a demand for the use in the neighborhood that provides a public benefit.

(c)    Expansion. A nonconforming use may not be expanded or enlarged, except under one (1) of following circumstances:

(1)    Alterations are permitted, provided it is within the existing physical space of the building or use.

(2)    Residential dwellings may have the building area expanded if the number of dwelling units is not increased above or below the requirements of the zone in which it is located, there is no decrease in the number of off-street parking spaces below the minimum requirements and the addition complies with all zoning requirements.

(3)    The acquisition of additional accessory off-street parking is not an expansion of a nonconforming use.

(d)    Discontinuation. A nonconforming use that is discontinued shall have its legal nonconforming status terminated and any subsequent use of the property or building shall be that of a use that conforms to the requirements of the zone. A nonconforming use is determined to be discontinued if any of the following circumstances apply:

(1)    The nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use;

(2)    Another nonconforming use is approved pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section; or

(3)    The nonconforming use has ceased for a period of more than one (1) year.

(e)    Damage or Destruction. If a structure containing a nonconforming use experiences substantial destruction, it shall constitute a discontinuation of the nonconforming use, except the nonconforming use may be allowed to continue under any of the following circumstances:

(1)    The structure has suffered substantial destruction as a result of fire or other casualty not intentionally caused by the owner or tenant and a complete building permit application is filed within one (1) year of such fire or other casualty.

(f)    Repair and Maintenance. A building or structure containing a nonconforming use may be repaired and maintained if the work does not restore it from substantial destruction. (Amended during 6/17 update; Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.070 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.

The following provisions shall apply to all structures and buildings meeting the definition in BMC 20.54.040(c):

(a)    Continuation. Any legally established nonconforming structure may be continued until such time that it is discontinued as prescribed in subsection (c) of this section.

(b)    Expansion. Buildings may be expanded, provided:

(1)    A nonconforming structure may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered, provided the enlargement or alteration complies with the setback, height, lot coverage, and other site development requirements of the zone in which the structure is located.

(2)    Structures not conforming to the setback may be expanded by up to twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area and to the building line, provided the enlargements do not further violate setback requirements.

(c)    Damage or Destruction. A nonconforming structure experiencing substantial destruction shall be considered discontinued and have its nonconforming status terminated. Any subsequent repair or reconstruction of the structure shall comply with the requirements of the zone, with the following exception:

(1)    The nonconforming structure may be allowed to be rebuilt within the same footprint and size if the structure has suffered substantial destruction as a result of fire or other casualty not intentionally caused by the owner, and a complete building permit application is filed within one (1) year of such fire or other casualty.

(d)    Partial Damage or Destruction. A nonconforming structure suffering from less than substantial destruction may have its nonconforming status suspended for a time period determined by the Director and be considered conforming for the purpose of improvements and repair, if:

(1)    The structure is damaged by fire or other casualty not intentionally caused by the owner or tenant and a complete building permit application is filed within one (1) year of such fire or other casualty; or

(2)    A building permit application is submitted prior to partial destruction. The building permit must remain active and if it is allowed to expire, the legal nonconforming status shall terminate and subsequent repairs and improvements shall comply with the requirements of the zone.

(3)    In no case shall the nonconformity be allowed to expand.

(e)    Repair and Maintenance. Normal repair and maintenance work on a nonconforming structure may be performed that maintains continued safe and sanitary conditions. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4971 §14, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.080 NONCONFORMING LANDSCAPING.

Uses which were lawfully established which do not conform to landscaping requirements need not provide additional landscaping, except:

(a)    Expansion of a Structure. If an existing structure or use is expanded, additional landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 20.50 BMC. The amount of additional landscaping shall be computed only to the extent of the expansion regardless of whether existing landscaping complies with the requirements.

(b)    Change of Use. A change to a use that requires greater amounts of landscaping than the former use shall provide landscaping in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 20.50 BMC. The Director may modify the amount of landscaping required if providing the required landscaping would result in a reduction of the parking below the minimum required by Chapter 20.48 BMC.

(c)    Parking Lot. When an existing unpaved parking area is paved, it shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 20.50 BMC. The Director may modify the amount of landscaping required if the landscaping would result in a reduction of the parking below the minimum required by Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.100 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

Refer to Chapter 20.52 BMC for regulations pertaining to nonconforming signs. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.54.110 UNLAWFUL USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS.

(a)    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to be authorization for, or approval of, the continuation of the use of a structure that is in violation of any ordinance in effect at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, structure, and/or lot.

(b)    Any use, structure or lot which did not comply with the zoning code requirements at the time it was established or constructed and does not comply with the current zoning code is illegal and shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of BMC Title 20, Division III. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.58 LAND USE PERMITS

Sections:

20.58.010    GENERAL.

20.58.020    CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.

20.58.030    VARIANCE.

20.58.040    SITE-SPECIFIC REZONE.

20.58.050    AREA-WIDE REZONES.

20.58.060    RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.

20.58.080    SITE PLAN REVIEW.

20.58.090    SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.


20.58.010 GENERAL.

(a)    Applicability. This chapter contains the provisions and approval criteria for land use permits applicable to BMC Title 20. The provisions of this chapter are applied in conjunction with Chapter 20.02 BMC, Project Permits, in establishing the appropriate review procedures and criteria by which land use permits are reviewed and a decision rendered.

(b)    Fees. The corresponding application fees prescribed in the fee schedules set forth in Chapter 3.01 BMC shall accompany applications. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.020 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.

(a)    Authority. Uses listed as a conditional use may be permitted if a conditional use permit (CUP) is approved.

(b)    Applicant. The City, federal, state or local agencies, property owner(s), or their designated agents may initiate a request for a CUP.

(c)    Procedure. A CUP application may be processed as an administrative Type II Director decision or as a nonadministrative Type III Hearing Examiner decision pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 20.02 BMC.

(1)    The Director may require a nonadministrative CUP whenever the use has a significant impact beyond the immediate site, is of a neighborhood or community-wide interest, or is of a controversial nature.

(2)    The Director may convert a Type II administrative CUP to a Type III nonadministrative CUP any time prior to the issuance of a decision on the application.

(3)    In addition to the notification requirements prescribed in BMC 20.02.100, the notice of application shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property.

(d)    Criteria for Approval. The City shall approve a CUP only if it is found that:

(1)    The use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan goals and policies;

(2)    The use complies with all applicable zoning and development standards and requirements;

(3)    The use satisfies all of the conditional use approval criteria specified in the zone in which the use is located;

(4)    The design of the proposal and conditions of approval has mitigated all identifiable adverse impacts;

(5)    The use is compatible with nearby land uses and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of the level of light and glare, noise and parking demand, hours of operation and air quality; and

(6)    Stipulations are made for the availability of adequate water, sewer, stormwater, utilities and urban governmental services.

(e)    Conditions of Approval. Conditions such as site orientation, fencing, buffering, parking location, lighting, access, hours of operation, and others may be imposed as a condition of approval if it is found they are necessary to mitigate identifiable adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with nearby uses.

(f)    Lapse of Approval. If the CUP is not acted on within one (1) year from the date the decision became final, it shall expire. Expiration is automatic and notice is not required. The Director may grant a single six (6) month extension if the applicant makes such a request in writing prior to the expiration date and can show good cause for granting the extension. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.030 VARIANCE.

(a)    Authority. The variance is a mechanism that allows the provisions of BMC Title 20 to be varied on a case-by-case basis. Approval of a variance may only be granted when it is for relief from a dimensional standard when the requirement of such would result in an unusual or unreasonable hardship due to physical characteristics of the site, or due to existing improvements on or adjacent to the site.

(b)    Applicant. The City, federal, state or local agencies, property owner(s), or their designated agents may initiate a request for a variance.

(c)    Procedures. A variance application is processed as a Type III Hearing Examiner decision pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 20.02 BMC. If the variation would not exceed ten (10) percent of the required dimensional standard from which relief is being sought, the Director may approve the variance as a Type II Director decision.

(d)    Criteria for Approval. The City may grant a variance only if it is found that:

(1)    The variance will not be materially detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood and avoids adverse impacts on other properties and residences;

(2)    The variance is necessary to overcome exceptional or extraordinary hardship circumstances related to the size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings of the subject property, or the location of a preexisting legal nonconformity that may exist on or adjacent to the site;

(3)    The variance will not grant relief for a self-created hardship, or for a personal or financial hardship or inconvenience;

(4)    The variance will only grant the subject property the same general rights enjoyed by other properties in the same area and zoned as the subject property;

(5)    The variance is the minimum necessary to allow the subject property the same general rights enjoyed by other property in the same area and zone; and

(6)    Other solutions, uses, or design options that might achieve a similar result without the need for a variance have been evaluated and rejected.

(e)    Prohibited. Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted for any of the following:

(1)    To alter any definition or interpretation of this title;

(2)    To alter any provision establishing a use within a zoning district;

(3)    To alter any procedural provisions; or

(4)    To alter residential density standards.

(f)    Conditions of Approval. Conditions may be imposed as a condition of approval if it is found they are necessary to mitigate identifiable adverse impacts and ensure compatibility with nearby uses.

(g)    Lapse of Approval. If the variance is not acted on within one (1) year from the date the decision became final, it shall expire. Expiration is automatic and notice is not required. The Director may grant a single six (6) month extension if the applicant makes such a request in writing prior to the expiration of the variance and can show good cause for granting the extension. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.040 SITE-SPECIFIC REZONE.

(a)    Authority. A site-specific rezone is a change to the zoning classification of a specific property or properties. The new zone must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and results in a change to the City’s official zoning map.

(b)    Procedures. A site-specific rezone application is processed as a Type IV City Council decision pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 20.02 BMC. The City Council shall act on the proposal after the Administrative Hearing Examiner holds an open-record public hearing and makes a recommendation to the City Council.

(c)    Applicant. The City, federal, state or local agencies, property owner(s), or their designated agents may initiate a request for a site-specific rezone.

(d)    Criteria for Approval. The City may grant a site-specific rezone only if it is found that:

(1)    The rezone is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;

(2)    The rezone will advance the public health, safety, or welfare, and will not have adverse impacts on adjacent properties;

(3)    The rezone is necessary because either:

(i)    Conditions in the immediate vicinity or neighborhood have so markedly changed that it is in the public interest to approve the rezone; or

(ii)    The rezone will correct a zone classification or zone boundary that was inappropriate when established; and

(4)    The rezone is in the public interest.

(e)    Comprehensive Plan Consistency. If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required in order to satisfy subsection (d)(1) of this section, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval on the rezone. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.050 AREA-WIDE REZONES.

(a)    Authority. An area-wide rezone is a change to zoning classifications that is not site-specific. New zoning designations must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and approval changes the City’s official zoning map.

(b)    Applicant. Only the City may initiate an area-wide rezone.

(c)    Procedures. These are legislative actions exempt from the requirements of Chapter 20.02 BMC. Specific procedural requirements are prescribed in Chapter 36.70A RCW. The Planning Commission conducts public hearings for area-wide rezones and makes a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council, following its own public hearing(s), may approve, approve with modifications, deny or remand the Planning Commission’s recommendation for additional study.

(d)    Notice. Published notice shall be given prior to public hearing dates in the official newspaper in accordance with the following schedule:

(1)    Ten (10) calendar days for the first Planning Commission public hearing; and

(2)    Five (5) calendar days for the first City Council public hearing;

(3)    Subsequent hearing dates on the same proposal do not require additional publication of notice;

(4)    Consideration shall be given to WAC 365-195-600 (Public Participation) in determining if additional notice requirements are necessary.

(e)    Approval Criteria. The City Council may approve an area-wide rezone if it is found that:

(1)    It is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and

(2)    It does not conflict with other City, state and federal codes, regulations and ordinances.

(f)    Comprehensive Plan Consistency. If a Comprehensive Plan amendment is required in order to satisfy subsection (e)(1) of this section, approval of the Comprehensive Plan amendment is required prior to or concurrently with the granting of an approval on the rezone. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.060 RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.

(a)    Intent. The intent of the residential cluster development (RCD) is to accommodate urban densities of the underlying zoning district while allowing residential development to utilize less land area. These provisions aim to allow greater flexibility in the design of subdivisions to ensure development is in harmony with the natural characteristics onsite and to preserve features such as critical areas, open space, recreation areas, or scenic vistas. 

(b)    Applicability. A RCD may be applied to all subdivisions as permitted in Chapter 20.12 BMC, Land Division. 

(c)    Procedures.

(1)    A RCD shall be processed in coordination with a subdivision application and will follow the permitting procedures established in Chapter 20.12 BMC, Land Division.

(2)    The Director has the discretion to convert a Type II administrative subdivision application that is using the RCD provisions to a Type III nonadministrative conditional use permit any time prior to the issuance of a decision on the application should the Director find the project to have significant impacts beyond the immediate site, is of a neighborhood or community wide interest, or is of a controversial nature.

(3)    In addition to the notification requirements prescribed in BMC 20.02.100, the notice of application shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property.

(d)    Development Standards. Modification may be allowed to the underlying zone for which a RCD applies as follows:

(1)    Density. The minimum and maximum density of the underlying zone shall apply, however, unbuildable critical areas as defined in Chapter 20.14 BMC may be included in the area for calculating density; however, land used for right-of-way may not. 

(2)    Minimum Lot Size. Lot size may be reduced to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, provided all lots are buildable. 

(i)    Reductions below two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet will only be permitted if the applicant provides an additional ten (10) percent of permanently protected open space as required by subsection (d)(8) of this section.

(3)    Setbacks.

(i)    For the purposes of this section perimeter setbacks shall be defined as the exterior boundary of the entire property to be subdivided. Structures and parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from all perimeter property lines.

(ii)    All other setbacks may be modified to encourage innovative site design. 

(4)    Lot Width. Deviations are permitted.

(5)    Development Coverage. The development coverage is limited to fifty (50) percent of the total site area including open space. 

(6)    Parking. Two parking spaces are required for each primary residence. All deviations from the standard parking requirements shall be accompanied by a detailed analysis showing how alternative parking will provide better site design and will provide clear benefits to the residents. Deviations are permitted as follows: 

(i)    Setbacks may be modified;

(ii)    Parking may be applied to the entire site rather than to individual lots;

(iii)    Parking tracts shall be placed in easily accessible locations;

(iv)    Designated parking spaces should be clearly marked.

(7)     Housing Type. Attached and detached single-family homes and townhomes are allowed as primary residential structures. Accessory dwelling units are permitted pursuant to BMC 20.46.010.

(8)    Open Space Designation and Preservation.

(i)    Each RCD shall provide not less than twenty (20) percent of the gross site area for common open space which shall be primarily concentrated in large areas. When these areas are designated as critical areas they should be designed to provide connectivity for habitat functions;

(ii)     Open space areas shall be located on separate tract(s), and shall be developed for passive or active recreational uses or set aside to preserve critical areas as defined in the critical area regulations in Chapter 20.14 BMC; 

(iii)    Parking areas, rights-of-way, driveways, and yards within individual lots shall not be included in common open space;

(iv)    Facilities and other improvements that enhance recreational use(s) may be located in an open space area (provided they are not prohibited by other sections of the BMC). Such facilities can include, but are not limited to, fields, picnic areas, playgrounds, and athletic courts.

(v)    Open space areas shall be restricted in perpetuity from further subdivision and/or land development. This restriction shall be noted on the face of the plat.

(vi)    Open Space Plan. For all designated open space areas the proposal shall include an open space plan. This plan is to ensure the open space is maintained and preserved in perpetuity. Open space requirements established in the critical areas regulations (Chapter 20.14 BMC) shall be met for all designated critical areas. All open space areas excluding critical areas shall comply with the following: 

(A)    Identify all proposed improvements such as public facilities, proposed vegetation, and existing vegetation to remain; and

(B)    The plan must comply with the requirements of the landscaping chapter, found in Chapter 20.50 BMC; and

(C)    The plan shall outline maintenance responsibilities in a format acceptable to the Director; and

(D)    The plan shall include a notice to title approved by the City and recorded with the County Auditor. This notice shall include provisions for the designation and retention of open space, and provisions for permanent maintenance of the open space and/or commonly owned facilities.

(e)    Criteria for Approval. The decision-making authority may grant a RCD only if it is found that:

(1)    A RCD shall be approved with the approval of a subdivision. The RCD shall follow the same approvals and timelines as the concurrent subdivision application pursuant to Chapter 20.12 BMC, Land Division. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5063 §3, 2008: Ord. 4977 §8, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.080 SITE PLAN REVIEW.

(a)    Authority. Site plan review is an evaluation of development plans to identify environmental impacts and overall compliance with applicable development regulations including zoning and engineering standards. It is a preliminary review and does not constitute approval to develop the site.

(b)    Applicability. Site plan review is required for all new development, expansion of existing structures, or other exterior site improvements that will change the physical conditions of a site.

(c)    Applicant. The City, federal, state or local agencies, property owner(s), or their designated agents may initiate a request for site plan review.

(d)    Procedures. A request for a site plan review is processed as a Type I or Type II Director’s decision pursuant to Chapter 20.02 BMC. Site plan review may be conducted independently or may be reviewed concurrently with a site development permit set forth in BMC 20.58.090. When a site development permit is not required, site plan review may be consolidated with the review of a building permit application.

(e)    Application Requirements. An application for a site plan review shall include the following components. The Director may modify these requirements based on the size, scope and complexity of the project.

(1)    Vicinity Map. Showing the subject property in relation to all other properties and major structures within a two hundred fifty (250) foot radius of the property.

(2)    Site Plan. Containing, but not limited to, the following information:

(i)    The location, size, bulk, height, number of stories, and use of all structures and areas on the subject parcel, both existing and proposed.

(ii)    Existing and proposed pedestrian walkways, bikeways, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, activity centers, landscaped areas, and other areas and facilities of a public or recreational nature.

(iii)    Existing and proposed utility systems, drainage structures, fire hydrants, and other infrastructure improvements.

(iv)    An environmental summary, including such features as shorelines, bulkheads, creeks, culverts, wetlands, steep slopes, unstable soils, rock outcroppings, significant trees, other "sensitive areas," etc.

(v)    All property lines, easements, fences, walls, signs, and other points of reference.

(vi)    Other information, maps or data that is helpful to better understand the nature and scope of the proposal and its impacts on surrounding properties, people, and land uses.

(3)    Parking Plan. A parking plan shall be included showing all of the parking spaces, aisles, handicapped stalls, loading spaces, motorcycle spaces, setbacks and other dimensional information necessary to evaluate the project. This information may be shown on the site plan or may be a provided in a separate plan.

(4)    Landscape Plan. When required, a plan showing the areas of landscaping and street trees shall be provided. This information may be shown on the site plan or may be provided in a separate plan.

(5)    Stormwater Plan. When required, a storm drainage report and preliminary storm drainage plans shall accompany the application.

(6)    Water and Sewer Availability. A letter summarizing the utility service requirements per BMC Title 15 shall be obtained from the City Public Works Department and submitted with the application.

(7)    Other Reports. When required, studies such as traffic reports, geotechnical reports, wetland reports and other environmental studies shall accompany the application.

(8)    Narrative. A written explanation of the proposal including:

(i)    Calculations of gross residential density, size of the site in square feet, and square footage of structures, parking areas, landscaped and recreational open space areas;

(ii)    Elevations and/or perspective drawings of proposed structures and other major improvements being proposed;

(iii)    The specific nature of any agreements, covenants, or other provisions that govern or affect the proposal; and

(iv)    Signatures, mailing addresses, and phone numbers of all owners of record or agents of the subject property.

(9)    Plans. All plans shall be drawn to scale, legible, in a reproducible black and white format and shall include a north arrow.

(f)    Criteria for Approval. A site plan that complies with all applicable development regulations shall be approved, or approved with conditions. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.58.090 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

(a)    Authority. A site development permit shall be required prior to constructing, enlarging, or demolishing a building or structure; grading, excavating or filling of earth; or other exterior site improvements that will change the physical conditions of a site. A site development permit constitutes approval for those activities to develop a site, not including buildings.

(b)    Applicability. A site development permit is required for the following activities:

(1)    The construction of five (5) or more residential dwelling units;

(2)    The construction or expansion of a structure or structures of more than four thousand (4,000) square foot gross floor area for a nonresidential use or uses;

(3)    Any filling, grading, excavating, placing or dumping of soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel, rock, and similar materials in excess of one hundred (100) cubic yards;

(4)    Any activity or use located within an environmentally sensitive area as designated in Chapter 20.14 BMC, Critical Areas;

(5)    Any development or redevelopment of a site that requires street frontage improvements pursuant to BMC 11.12.110;

(6)    Any proposal that requires an engineered storm drainage system pursuant to Chapter 15.04 BMC;

(7)    Construction of a nonaccessory surface or structural parking lot; or

(8)    Construction of an accessory off-street parking facility of more than twenty (20) automobile spaces.

(c)    Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirement for a site development permit:

(1)    Forest practices other than Forest Practice IV regulated under WAC Title 222;

(2)    Development that is undertaken by the Washington State Department of Transportation in state highway rights-of-way and is regulated by Chapter 173-270 WAC, the Puget Sound Highway Runoff Program; or

(3)    Road and utility construction and related activities undertaken by the City’s Public Works Department.

(d)    Applicant. The City, federal, state or local agencies, property owner(s), or their designated agents may initiate a request for a site development permit.

(e)    Procedures. A request for a site development permit is processed as a Type I Director’s decision pursuant to Chapter 20.02 BMC. The review may be conducted independently or may be reviewed concurrently with a site plan review.

(f)    Application Requirements. An application for a site development permit shall include the following components:

(1)    Vicinity Map. Showing the subject property in relation to all other properties and major structures within a two hundred fifty (250) foot radius of the property.

(2)    Site Plan. Containing the following information:

(i)    The location, size, bulk, height, number of stories, and use of all structures and areas on the subject parcel, both existing and proposed;

(ii)    Existing and proposed pedestrian walkways, bikeways, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, activity centers, landscaped areas, and other areas and facilities of a public or recreational nature;

(iii)    Existing and proposed utility systems, drainage structures, fire hydrants, and other infrastructure improvements;

(iv)    An environmental summary, including such features as shorelines, bulkheads, creeks, culverts, wetlands, steep slopes, unstable soils, rock outcroppings, significant trees, other "sensitive areas," etc.;

(v)    All property lines, easements, fences, walls, signs, and other points of reference;

(vi)    Other information, maps or data that is helpful to better understand the nature and scope of the proposal and its impacts on surrounding properties, people, and land uses; and

(vii)    Dimensional information or drawn to scale at not less than one (1) inch = fifty (50) feet.

(3)    Parking Plan. Showing all existing and proposed off-street parking spaces. This may be integrated into the base site plan or shown on a separate plan. Parking plans should show all spaces, aisles, handicapped and motorcycle spaces, loading spaces, transit facilities, and parking lot access and internal circulation. It should also show dimensions of all parking areas, spaces, driveways, setbacks, and distances from curb cuts to intersection corners, and similar detail.

(4)    Landscape Plan. Showing details of existing vegetation to be preserved and the general planting pattern as well as the numbers and types of new plants being provided. This may be integrated into the base site plan or provided in a separate plan.

(5)    Elevation and/or Perspective Drawings. Drawings showing proposed structures and other major improvements.

(6)    Civil Engineering Drawings. "Final" plans for street frontage improvements, circulation and street lighting.

(7)    Final Storm Drainage Report. Storm drainage system meeting City engineering standards.

(8)    Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. Erosion control plans prepared pursuant to Chapter 15.04 BMC.

(9)    Phasing. If the project is designed to be permitted and/or constructed in phases, a site plan showing the phases of development and a written schedule of development is required.

(10)    Narrative. A written explanation of the proposal, including:

(i)    Calculations of gross residential density, size of the site in square feet, and square footage of structures, parking areas, landscaped and recreational open space areas;

(ii)    Elevations and/or perspective drawings of proposed structures and other major improvements being proposed;

(iii)    The specific nature of any agreements, covenants, or other provisions that govern or affect the proposal; and

(iv)    Signatures, mailing addresses, and phone numbers of all owners of record or agents of the subject property.

(11)    Other Reports. When required, studies such as traffic reports, geotechnical reports, wetland reports and other environmental studies shall accompany the application.

(12)    Plans. All plans shall be drawn to scale, legible, in a reproducible black and white format and shall include a north arrow.

(g)    Criteria for Approval. A site development permit that complies with all applicable development regulations and requirements for construction shall be approved.

(h)    Time Limits on Approval. Approval of a site development permit shall become void if building permits are not applied for or construction has not begun within one (1) year. The expiration is automatic and notice is not given. Exterior site improvements and the exterior of all structures shall be completed within three (3) years of issuance of the site development permit. If the permit expires, a new site development permit is required that meets the development standards in effect at the time a new permit is applied for.

(i)    Compliance Required. No person shall violate or fail in complying with an approved site development permit or any conditions thereof. Nor shall a building permit be valid for any structure which violates or fails to comply with any approved site development permit for the parcel(s) on which such structure is to be located. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.60 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-10)

Sections:

20.60.010    INTENT.

20.60.020    PERMITTED USES.

20.60.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.60.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.60.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.60.065    ALLOWABLE DENSITY AND LOT AREA.

20.60.080    OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.60.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.60.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.60.010 INTENT.

The intent of the low density residential (R-10) zoning district is to accommodate single-family housing by infilling at a range of lot sizes consistent with urban growth patterns. Some attached single-family housing, duplexes and townhouses may be appropriate when responding to sensitive areas or with innovative design. Residential development at higher densities is encouraged at the edge of designated centers. (Ord. 5364 §12, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.020 PERMITTED USES.

Only one (1) principal use shall be allowed on each residentially zoned lot unless allowed for otherwise by law. This limitation shall not include permitted accessory uses associated with a permitted principal use.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Cemetery;

(b)    Colocation of wireless communications per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Community facilities of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area or less;

(d)    Day care facility of twelve (12) or fewer persons receiving care;

(e)    Education and schools (K-12) of twelve (12) or fewer students;

(f)    Foster home;

(g)    Group residential home;

(h)    Manufactured home per BMC 20.46.040;

(i)    Parks, playgrounds and open space equal or less than one-half (0.5) acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet);

(j)    Residential Uses.

(1)    Single-unit dwelling unit, detached;

(2)    Single-unit dwelling unit, attached (zero (0) lot lines) per BMC 20.60.060(b);

(3)    Duplex that meets BMC 20.60.060(f);

(4)    Townhouse that meets BMC 20.60.060(f);

(k)    Worship and religious facilities of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area or less;

(l)    Incubator for business associated with a worship and religious facility or community facility, provided the following conditions are met:

(1)    The incubated business is a use that is permitted outright in the neighborhood business zone, BMC 20.82.020;

(2)    Landscaping and signage requirements of the neighborhood business zone, Chapter 20.82 BMC, shall be met; and

(3)    The parcel upon which the incubated business is situated shall have frontage on an arterial street. (Ord. 5364 §13, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4977 §9, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted when found in connection with a principal use:

(a)    Attached or detached accessory dwelling unit per BMC 20.46.010;

(b)    Detached garage, carport, and parking facilities for the residents of the property;

(c)    Home occupation per BMC 20.46.030;

(d)    Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Director to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate;

(e)    Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, swimming pools and incidental household storage buildings. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted, provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020 subject to the corresponding conditions:

(a)    Bed and breakfast, provided:

(1)    The operators of the business shall occupy the house as their primary residence;

(2)    No more than one (1) full-time equivalent (FTE) employee who is not a resident of the dwelling may be employed;

(3)    No more than six (6) bedrooms are made available for rent to guests and all guest rooms are contained within the principal structure;

(4)    Two (2) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) off-street parking space per each guest bedroom, are required;

(5)    Off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets;

(6)    Rooms shall not be made available to guests for more than fourteen (14) days during any thirty (30) day period;

(7)    No commercial receptions, parties, or other public gatherings, or serving of meals to nonresident guests for compensation, are allowed; and

(8)    Any remodeling of the residential structure shall maintain the residential nature of the structure and not alter the structure in such a manner that would prevent it from being used as a residence in the future.

(b)    Group residential facilities - Class I, provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Minimum setbacks, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(3)    Off-street parking shall be at a minimum of one (1) space per each employee during the peak shift, plus one (1) space per two (2) residents the facility will provide service to;

(4)    If counseling services are provided to nonresidents, additional parking spaces are required at one (1) per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area used for counseling services;

(5)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets; and

(6)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(c)    Senior housing complex, provided the following conditions are satisfied:

(1)    Minimum site area shall be no less than two (2) acres;

(2)    Minimum setbacks, density, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(3)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum one (1) space per dwelling;

(4)    Except for a community building/clubhouse for the exclusive use of complex residents, all accessory uses shall be located within a structure containing residential units;

(5)    Attached or detached structure types are permitted and dwelling units may be owned by individuals or occupied as rentals;

(6)    Access to alternative transportation such as public transit or on-site shuttle services to access daily goods or services shall be provided; and

(7)    A management agreement or covenants on individual properties to maintain the complex as a senior citizen complex shall be recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor’s office.

(d)    Nursing/convalescent homes, provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Minimum site area shall be no less than one (1) acre;

(3)    Minimum setbacks, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(4)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum of one (1) space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area;

(5)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets; and

(6)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(e)    Day care facilities (thirteen (13) or more persons receiving care), provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum one (1) space per each five (5) children based on the state license maximum occupancy load;

(3)    One (1) loading/unloading space without backup is required for the first twenty (20) children and one (1) additional space for up to each additional twenty (20) children;

(4)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets;

(5)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties; and

(6)    The maximum height of a fence or wall within a front yard setback may be increased up to six (6) feet, provided it enhances safety and security of an outdoor play area.

(f)    Adaptive reuse of commercial buildings, provided the conditions set forth in BMC 20.46.070 are satisfied.

(g)    Manufactured home park or expansion of existing parks, provided:

(1)    It is exempt pursuant to RCW 58.17.040 from requirements for property segregation;

(2)    The minimum site size shall be five (5) acres;

(3)    Density shall meet the underlying zone;

(4)    Adequate water, sewer, and utility services are available to all building sites;

(5)    A fire protection system meeting the requirements of the City Fire Marshal is provided;

(6)    Interior circulation shall meet the City Engineer road standards plus the following standards:

(i)    All interior circulation routes shall be constructed within a tract or easement;

(ii)    Roads and driveways shall be paved;

(iii)    The City Fire Marshal and City Engineer shall approve all fire turnarounds;

(7)    The following setbacks shall apply to manufactured homes or mobile homes, together with their additions and appurtenant structures, accessory structures, and other structures on the site (excluding fences), excluding any hitch or towing fixture:

(i)    From interior roads, at least fifteen (15) feet from centerline of the tract or easement, but in no case shall the setback be less than five (5) feet from the paved surfaced edge;

(ii)    Structures near the perimeter lot lines of the property shall comply with the setbacks of the underlying zone;

(iii)    A minimum of ten (10) foot separation between all manufactured homes;

(8)    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following manner:

(i)    One (1) parking space per home site; plus

(ii)    One (1) parking space for each five (5) home sites for guest parking; plus

(iii)    Additional parking spaces to provide for the parking needs of offices, community buildings, recreational facilities, or other uses within the park that may be used by park residents or others;

(9)    Outside storage of vessels (boats), household items and equipment is prohibited, except a common central storage area may be provided for residents of the park. The storage area shall be screened by a minimum five (5) foot high by five (5) foot wide sight-obscuring barrier consisting of landscaping and fencing or wall, and shall meet minimum setbacks of the underlying zone;

(10)    Ten (10) percent of the site shall be maintained as common recreational open space for the use of residents and:

(i)    May include community areas and facilities such as playgrounds, swimming pools, and hobby and craft shops;

(ii)    However, it shall not include required landscaping areas, perimeter setback areas, parking areas, storage areas, building separation areas or other areas deemed impractical by the Director for the recreational enjoyment of the residents;

(11)    Trees meeting the standards set forth in Chapter 20.50 BMC shall be provided along all property lines abutting a residential zone and public streets. Exceptions for trees may be allowed when a property line abuts an alley or is obstructed by a building or other structure;

(12)    Adequate lighting to illuminate streets, driveways, and walkways for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles is required; and

(13)    All water, sewer, electrical, and communication service lines shall be underground.

(h)    Worship, religious, and community facilities greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided:

(1)    The site area shall be one (1) acre or more; and

(2)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(i)    Golf course, provided:

(1)    A site plan review and a site development permit are approved pursuant to Chapter 20.58 BMC;

(2)    Through the conditional use permit, modifications to parking and landscaping may be allowed in order to facilitate good design;

(3)    Other conditions are applied as deemed necessary to mitigate impacts to nearby residential properties and ensure compatibility with the neighborhood.

(j)    Schools, parks and associated uses may be approved in accordance with the following: 

(1)    The following uses are permitted through approval of a conditional use permit:

(i)    All public schools and associated gymnasiums and auditoriums;

(ii)    Private schools (K-12) with thirteen (13) or more students;

(iii)    Parks and playgrounds greater than one-half (1/2) acre;

(iv)    Outdoor athletic fields; 

(v)    Boat launching and related facilities;

(vi)    Maintenance and service yards;

(vii)    Bus and other vehicle and equipment maintenance and storage facilities;

(viii)    Administrative office related to the facilities greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet gross floor area;

(ix)    Buildings and structures for nonprofit groups on public lands;

(2)    Uses permitted pursuant to subsection (j)(1) of this section shall be subject to complying with the following conditions:

(i)    Front, side and rear yard setbacks of structures and outdoor storage areas shall be at least thirty (30) feet;

(ii)    Setbacks may be reduced for those portions of a structure fronting interior streets;

(iii) The maximum height for any new construction may be increased to match the architecture of existing buildings; provided, that it is set back an additional foot from any property line for each additional foot of allowed height, and in no case shall the new construction exceed forty-five (45) feet;

(iv)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties; 

(v)    Additional measures may be required if deemed necessary to mitigate any noise impacts to adjacent residential uses; and

(vi)    The maximum height of a fence or wall within a front yard setback may be increased to six (6) feet, provided it enhances safety and security around an outdoor play area.

(k)    Public utility facilities located above ground, provided:

(1)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties;

(2)    The maximum height of a fence or wall may be increased within a front yard setback that will provide screening from adjacent uses and enhance safety and security around the facility; and

(3)    Exceptions to setbacks may be allowed if the applicant can demonstrate that the public interest is better served by allowing the modification.

(l)    Law enforcement and fire facilities, provided:

(1)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(2)    The maximum height of a fence or wall may be increased within a front yard setback that will provide screening from adjacent uses and enhance safety and security around the facility.

(m)    Mineral resource extraction per BMC 20.46.080, provided:

(1)    The site is located within a mineral resource overlay. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5111 §3, 2010: Ord. 4977 §10, 2006: Ord. 4971 §15, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

(a)    Lot Standards. Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with this section and the following standards unless allowed for by law otherwise:

(1)    Setbacks.

(i)    Minimum front yard setback is fifteen (15) feet;

(ii)    Minimum side yard setback is five (5) feet;

(iii)    Minimum rear yard setback is fifteen (15) feet.

(2)    Maximum structure height is thirty-five (35) feet.

(3)    Maximum structure height in (R-10) areas within the downtown regional center shall be pursuant to Figure 20.74(a) and shall supersede subsection (a)(2) of this section.

(4)    Minimum lot width is thirty (30) feet.

(5)    Maximum development coverage is sixty (60) percent.

(b)    Zero (0) Lot Line (ZLL) Development. An attached single-family dwelling and/or garage structure may have a single shared side or rear lot line, and a setback reduced to zero (0), provided the structure complies with building code fire separation requirements.

(c)    Accessory Structures. The following standards shall apply but are not limited to: garages, carports, shops, barns, covered patios, cabanas, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings, excluding accessory dwelling units per BMC 20.46.010 and structures not requiring a building permit:

(1)    The maximum area for all accessory structures shall be eighty (80) percent of the principal residential use not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

(2)    Setbacks of detached accessory structures are pursuant to BMC 20.44.060.

(d)    Garages, Storage Buildings and Shops.

(1)    Any garage, storage building or shop structure shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence including the following:

(i)    Constructed of similar materials as the principal unit;

(ii)    A roof of equal or greater pitch as the principal unit;

(iii)    A height no more than twenty-five (25) percent greater than the principal unit not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

(2)    Any garage, storage building, or shop may be exempt from the accessory structure size requirements provided it is contained within the principal unit.

(3)    Garage, Carport, and Shop Vehicle Entrance Setbacks. When the vehicle entrance faces the street, the garage, carport, or shop shall have a front yard setback of at least twenty (20) feet, except as provided in BMC 20.44.020 (Traditional front yard).

(e)    Lot Area for Parks and Schools. Parks and schools may exceed maximum lot area requirements if approved by a conditional use permit.

(f)    A duplex or townhouse may only be permitted as follows:

(1)    The underlying density of the zone is met; and

(2)    Within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial district or center. (Ord. 5364 §14, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §7, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.065 ALLOWABLE DENSITY AND LOT AREA.

The purpose of this section is to establish compatible levels of density within existing neighborhoods. The intent is to allow infill residential development. The following density and lot area standards are applicable to development within the zone:

(a)    Minimum Density. The minimum required density is five (5) dwellings per acre.

(b)    Maximum Density. The maximum allowed density is ten (10) dwellings per acre.

(c)    Maximum Lot Area. The maximum lot area is eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, with the following exceptions:

(1)    The lot area may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development pursuant to BMC 20.58.060; 

(2)    One (1) lot within a proposal for a division of land may exceed eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, provided the remaining lots do not exceed the eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square foot maximum lot size; and

(3)    A flag lot that complies with the requirements in BMC 20.44.100 may exceed eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, provided the total area of the flag lot does not exceed thirteen thousand sixty-eight (13,068) square feet. 

(d)    Minimum Lot Area. The minimum allowed lot area is four thousand three hundred (4,300) square feet.

(e)    Exception to Minimum Lot Areas.

(1)    The minimum lot area may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development pursuant to BMC 20.58.060, provided the development complies with the maximum density requirement set forth in subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §8, 2007: Ord. 4972 §1, 2006; Ord. 4971 §16, 2006: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.080 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.60.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC and the following:

(a)    One (1) sign with a sign area of up to eight (8) square feet may be allowed to advertise a permitted bed and breakfast, provided it matches the architectural features of the primary residence.

(b)    For a home occupation sign, the residential district sign regulations in BMC 20.52.120 shall apply.

(c)    When an established business use is located in the low density residential zone, the special purpose sign regulations in BMC 20.52.130 shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §9, 2007: Ord. 4971 §17, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.62 GENERAL COMMERCIAL (GC)

Sections:

20.62.010    INTENT.

20.62.020    PERMITTED USES.

20.62.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.62.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.62.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.62.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.62.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.62.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.62.010 INTENT.

The intent of the general commercial (GC) district is to provide locations for high intensity commercial uses serving the entire community while preserving views, forested areas, and buffering impacts to adjacent residential areas. The corridor accommodates access to businesses by automobile while also creating a pedestrian-friendly, transit-supporting corridor. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.020 PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Automobile service and repair;

(b)    Co-location of wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Community facility;

(d)    Day care;

(e)    Drinking place;

(f)    Education and school;

(g)    Entertainment use;

(h)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(i)    Fully enclosed boat storage;

(j)    General office and business service;

(k)    General retail;

(l)    Hospital;

(m)    Hotel and lodging place;

(n)    Medical office and clinic;

(o)    Museum and gallery;

(p)    Park, playground, and open space;

(q)    Personal service;

(r)    Physical fitness and health club;

(s)    Public administration use;

(t)    Residential of all types except group residential facility - Class II;

(u)    Restaurant;

(v)    Senior housing complex;

(w)    Transportation facility;

(x)    Veterinary clinic. (Ord. 5326 §7, 2017: Ord. 5319 §10, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §10, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020:

(a)    Hardware and materials supply stores including garden supply, provided:

(1)    The structure(s) is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area;

(2)    Outdoor storage and product display shall be screened from view by a solid fence or wall;

(3)    No loading areas shall be located in a front yard or side yard abutting or located across from a residentially zoned property; and

(4)    Outside storage is limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet.

(b)    Gas stations and car washes, provided:

(1)    No more than two (2) points of ingress/egress are allowed per street frontage. Ingress/egress points shall be separated in accordance with City engineering requirements.

(2)    Buffering is provided pursuant to BMC 20.50.050, and in addition, trees at least ten (10) feet in height of two (2) inch caliper, measured four (4) feet above ground at time of planting and/or construction shall be included at intervals not greater than fifteen (15) feet.

(c)    Dry storage of marine vessels commonly referred to as dry stacking, provided:

(1)    Located along Pennsylvania or Thompson Avenue;

(2)    The maximum height of dry stacking may not exceed fifty (50) feet; and

(3)    The dry stacking facility will not substantially obscure existing views to the water from existing residences.

(d)    Light industrial/manufacturing, excluding marijuana production or processing for distribution, provided:

(1)    The applicant can demonstrate that the use will not significantly detract from the visual character of the neighborhood;

(2)    Building Design. All structures shall have the appearance of a multistory building that emulates a commercial office or multifamily structure;

(3)    Development/Design Standards. Must meet all the development and design criteria in BMC 20.62.060 and 20.62.070;

(4)    No odor, dust or smoke byproduct will be detectable off site and the use meets the noise provisions of Chapter 6.32 BMC;

(5)    Light sources, both direct and nondirect, shall be selected and placed so that glare produced by any light source does not extend beyond the property lines, except onto adjacent sidewalks; and

(6)    Mini-storage facilities are allowed provided:

(i)    Site Design. All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the site. Doors for the storage units may not face the public right-of-way with the exception of alleys;

(ii)    Outdoor Storage. Storage of boats, RVs, vehicles, etc., or storage of outdoor pods or shipping containers are considered outdoor storage subject to BMC 20.62.070(b);

(iii)    Hours of Operation. Mini-storage facilities located adjacent to a residential zone shall not operate or allow tenant access between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and

(iv)    Uses. Each storage unit shall be used for storage only. No commercial or manufacturing activities, vehicle repair or services, or related activities, whether for business or personal purposes, are permitted in any storage unit. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

(a)    Lot development shall be in accordance with the following standards, unless allowed for otherwise by law:

(1)    Maximum front yard setback: ten (10) feet. At least sixty-five (65) percent of the building’s front facade must meet the maximum front yard setback. The setback may be increased if the Director finds that such increase is the minimum necessary to facilitate a superior site design. In order to obtain approval for an increased setback, the applicant shall submit a written analysis establishing how the project facilitates superior site design, is the minimum necessary, is consistent with specific goals and policies within the Comprehensive Plan, and is compliant with all applicable sections of the BMC. The following list identifies examples of circumstances where increased setbacks may be found to be appropriate:

(i)    When the site includes more than one (1) street frontage;

(ii)    To accommodate existing topography, utilities, or other physical site constraints that make compliance with the setback infeasible;

(iii)    To accommodate phasing of infill development;

(iv)    On sites that are significantly developed with existing legally established nonconforming uses or structures whereby strict code compliance will not facilitate effective circulation; or

(v)    For projects that in the opinion of the Director provide enhanced public amenities within the setback area which include, but are not limited to, the following: public plazas, increased landscaping, architectural features, improved pedestrian connections.

(2)    Minimum side yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b).

(3)    Minimum rear yard setback: zero (0), except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b).

(4)    No residential density requirements; provided, that:

(i)    Site design provides for internal circulation connections for both pedestrians and vehicles between all portions of the site;

(ii)    Landscaping and/or screening adjacent to residential zones shall be provided per BMC 20.50.040(c).

(5)    Maximum building coverage: fifty (50) percent unless increased per subsection (b) of this section. In no case shall maximum lot coverage exceed seventy-five (75) percent.

(6)    Maximum development coverage is seventy-five (75) percent unless increased per subsection (b) of this section. In no case shall maximum lot coverage exceed ninety-five (95) percent.

(7)    Maximum height: forty-five (45) feet, except that structures within one hundred (100) feet of the low or medium density residential zones shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

(8)    Maximum building heights within the downtown regional center are pursuant to the Downtown Subarea Plan and shall supersede subsection (a)(7) of this section.

(b)    A development that provides the following may have its maximum development and lot coverage increased by adding bonus percentages to the maximum base area percentage, provided the total does not exceed the maximum allowed above:

(1)    Commercial/residential mixed use development: twenty (20) percent bonus;

(2)    Development containing seventy-five (75) percent of the building footprint with three (3) and four (4) story buildings: ten (10) percent bonus;

(3)    Ten (10) percent bonus if a sidewalk ten (10) feet in width or greater is installed extending to the front of the building and continuing along the entire arterial frontage of the parcel;

(4)    Pedestrian through-corridor that provides pedestrian access to a location approved by the Director: five (5) percent bonus;

(5)    Fifty (50) percent of off-street parking is provided underground or within a building designed for occupancy: twenty (20) percent bonus. (Ord. 5364 §15, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §6, 2013; Ord. 5046 §7, 2008; Ord. 5008 §11, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Orientation. All properties adjacent to a public right-of-way shall orient structures toward the primary street. Properties located at intersections should orient their structures toward the intersecting corner.

(3)    Minimum Transparency. At least sixty (60) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(4)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way, common parking areas, or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(5)    Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Three (3) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(5)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade.

(6)    Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7)    Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5319 §11, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §8, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 20.48 BMC, and the following standards shall be met:

(a)    On-site parking shall be to the rear or to the side of buildings on the site and shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the site frontage facing the arterial street frontage(s). The site frontage includes all of the area between the right-of-way and front building wall which applies to the entire length of the property regardless of building width. Corner lots have two (2) site frontages as they are positioned on two (2) street frontages.

(b)    All efforts shall be taken to avoid installing parking on street corners. Parking located between the building frontage and street corners shall be fully screened. Screening shall consist of the following:

(1)    A four (4) foot tall decorative wall within the front yard landscaping area that fully screens the parking areas. The wall shall be located such that it blocks views of the parking from the right-of-way. For long spans of frontage (one hundred (100) feet or more), the wall shall include modular articulation to add architectural variety.

(2)    Shrubs or other alternative materials may be substituted for the wall, provided it is demonstrated that the shrubs/alternative will provide equal to or better visual screening than the wall. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet tall at time of installation and shall be additional to the landscaping required in Chapter 20.50 BMC.

(3)    Openings may be required within a wall section in order to provide a sidewalk from the right-of-way to the building entry. The entry shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate a sidewalk that is a minimum of five (5) feet in width, clearly marked, and distinguished from driving surfaces by using decorative paving, stamped/stained concrete, or raised walkways with alternative materials (such as brick, cobblestone, decorative pavers). Paint striping does not meet this requirement.

(c)    Access to parking may be from adjacent nonprincipal arterial streets, or from driveways off of the principal arterial.

(d)    Driveways providing access to parking area shall be well marked. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §7, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

The landscaping requirements set forth in Chapter 20.50 BMC shall be satisfied. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §9, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.62.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.70 DISTRICT CENTER CORE (DCC)

Sections:

20.70.010    INTENT.

20.70.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.70.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.70.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.70.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.70.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.70.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.70.010 INTENT.

The intent of the district center core (DCC) zone is to provide a mixed-use "town center" to support the surrounding neighborhoods and general public. The DCC provides opportunities for a variety of services including commercial and residential development that demonstrates planning and design to create a pedestrian friendly community while still accommodating a certain level of regional auto-dependent uses. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Bed and breakfast;

(b)    Co-location of wireless communications facility per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Community facility;

(d)    Day care facility;

(e)    Drinking place;

(f)    Entertainment use;

(g)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(h)    General office and business services;

(i)    General retail;

(j)    Group residential facilities - Class I;

(k)    Hotel and lodging place;

(l)    Hospital, medical office and clinic;

(m)    Motion picture theater;

(n)    Museum and gallery;

(o)    Nursing/convalescent home;

(p)    Park, playground and open space;

(q)    Personal services business;

(r)    Physical fitness and health club;

(s)    Public or private park, playground or open space;

(t)    Public administration;

(u)    Residential of all types except group residential facility - Class II;

(v)    Restaurant;

(w)    School and education;

(x)    Senior housing complex;

(y)    Transportation facility;

(z)    Veterinary clinic. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5251 §5, 2014: Ord. 5008 §15, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Lot development shall be in accordance with the following unless allowed for otherwise by law:

(a)    Maximum front yard setback: ten (10) feet. At least sixty-five (65) percent of a building’s front facade shall meet the maximum front yard setback. The setback may be increased if the Director finds that such increase is the minimum necessary to facilitate a superior site design. In order to obtain approval for an increased setback, the applicant shall submit a written analysis establishing how the project facilitates superior site design, is the minimum necessary, is consistent with specific goals and policies within the Comprehensive Plan, and is compliant with all applicable sections of the BMC. The following list identifies examples of circumstances where increased setbacks may be found to be appropriate:

(1)    When the site includes more than one (1) street frontage;

(2)    To accommodate existing topography, utilities, or other physical site constraints that make compliance with the setback infeasible;

(3)    To accommodate phasing of infill development;

(4)    On sites that are significantly developed with existing legally established nonconforming uses or structures whereby strict code compliance will not facilitate effective circulation; or

(5)    For projects that in the opinion of the Director provide enhanced public amenities within the setback area which include, but are not limited to, the following: public plazas, increased landscaping, architectural features, improved pedestrian connections.

(b)    Side yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b).

(c)    Rear yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b).

(d)    There is no maximum density for residential use.

(e)    Maximum building coverage: sixty (60) percent base maximum; provided, that through the use of any combination of the following, building coverage may be increased up to eighty-five (85) percent maximum:

(1)    Projects containing mixed uses: ten (10) percent bonus.

(2)    Projects with a three (3) or four (4) story building: ten (10) percent bonus; projects with five (5) or more story building: fifteen (15) percent bonus.

(3)    Projects providing a pedestrian-oriented plaza or area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet along a pedestrian walkway at an intersection corner, bus stop or other key pedestrian area approved by the City. Such areas shall contain seating for at least four (4) people, a trash receptacle and three (3) or more of the following: a pedestrian shelter, a drinking fountain, a bike rack, pedestrian-scale lights, pavers on the walkway surfaces, a kiosk, a street vendor station providing food or beverages, trees, an appropriately sized statue or sculpture, or a public restroom. Interior courtyards with these amenities qualify if they would be readily apparent and accessible to pedestrians on adjoining sidewalks: twenty (20) percent bonus.

(4)    Projects providing a through-block corridor that facilitates pedestrian access in a location approved by the City: five (5) percent bonus.

(5)    Projects providing at least fifty (50) percent of their required parking underground or within the building: twenty (20) percent bonus.

(f)    Maximum development coverage: maximum development coverage by impervious surfaces, seventy-five (75) percent; provided, that through the use of any combination of the mechanisms listed in subsections (e)(1) through (5) of this section, up to ninety-five (95) percent maximum development coverage may be allowed.

(g)    Maximum building height: eighty (80) feet except:

(1)    Structures within fifty (50) linear feet of parcels zoned for low density residential shall not exceed four (4) stories in height; and

(2)    Structures within fifty (50) and one hundred (100) linear feet of parcels zoned for low density residential shall include architectural features to gradually transition the building height from four (4) stories to a maximum height of eighty (80) feet at the one hundred (100) foot distance from the low density residential zoned parcel.

(h)    Mixed-Use Requirement. All structures that include residential uses located adjacent to, are oriented towards, or are viewable from a public right-of-way (not required on private streets) shall provide retail/commercial uses along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the ground floor building facade. Exceptions to this requirement will be made for projects that comply with BMC 20.70.070(a)(6). (Ord. 5364 §7, 2018: Ord. 5351 §3, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5251 §6, 2014: Ord. 5222 §14, 2013; Ord. 5046 §15, 2008; Ord. 5008 §16, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer is exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a) Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1) Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2) Orientation. All properties adjacent to a public right-of-way shall orient structures toward the primary street. Properties located at intersections should orient their structures toward the intersecting corner.

(3) Minimum Transparency. At least sixty (60) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(4) Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way, common parking areas, or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(5) Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(6) Ground-Floor. Ground-floor frontage of a structure facing a public right-of-way must conform to either subsection (a)(6)(i) or (ii) of this section, except as provided in subsection (a)(6)(iii) of this section:

(i) Constructed for Pedestrian-Oriented Uses. At least fifty (50) percent of the floor area abutting the linear sidewalk level shall be designed and constructed for "pedestrian-oriented" uses.

(ii) Constructed for Future Pedestrian-Oriented Uses. At least fifty (50) percent of the floor area abutting the linear sidewalk level shall be designed and constructed to accommodate potential future conversion to "pedestrian-oriented" uses and may be occupied by any use permitted in BMC 20.70.020. The areas designed and constructed to accommodate future conversion shall meet the following standard, in addition to any other required design standards: The sidewalk level facade must include an entrance or entrances to accommodate a single or multiple tenants or be structurally designed so entrances can be added when converted to the building uses listed in BMC 20.70.020.

(iii) Exception. For structures that abut two (2) or more public rights-of-way and contain topography or other site constraints that would make the placement of the pedestrian-oriented use on the ground floor difficult for the public to utilize, the pedestrian-oriented requirement in subsections (a)(6)(i) and (ii) of this section may be reduced to one (1) street frontage.

(b) Secondary Design Features. Four (4) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1) Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2) Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3) Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4) Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(5) Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade.

(6) Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7) Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5351 §4, 2018: Ord. 5319 §12, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §15, 2013; Ord. 5046 §16, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC and the following requirements. For legally established existing buildings that comply with BMC 20.48.020(b) the parking will be exempt from the following requirements:

(a)    For nonresidential uses, the minimum parking requirement is one (1) space per employee.

(b)    On-site parking for nonresidential uses shall not exceed four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.

(c)    On-site parking shall be to the rear or side of buildings and shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the site frontage facing the arterial street(s). The site frontage includes the area between the right-of-way and front building wall which applies to the entire length of the property regardless of building width. Corner lots have two (2) site frontages as they are positioned on two (2) street frontages.

(d)    All efforts shall be taken to avoid placing parking on street corners. Parking located between the building frontage and street corners shall be fully screened as follows:

(1)    A four (4) foot tall decorative wall within the front yard landscaping area that fully screens the parking areas. The wall shall be located such that it blocks views of the parking from the right-of-way. For long spans of frontage (one hundred (100) feet or more), the wall shall include modular articulation to add architectural variety.

(i)    Alternate architectural features, shrubs may be substituted for the wall, provided it is demonstrated that the shrubs/alternative will provide equal to or better visual screening than the wall. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet tall at time of installation and shall be additional to the landscaping required in Chapter 20.50 BMC.

(ii)    Openings and architectural features may be required within a wall section in order to tie the wall feature into the architecture of the building and to provide pedestrian access. The entry shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate a sidewalk that is a minimum of five (5) feet in width, clearly marked, and distinguished from driving surfaces by using decorative paving, stamped/stained concrete, or raised walkways with alternative materials (such as brick, cobblestone, decorative pavers). Paint striping does not meet this requirement.

(e)    Access to parking shall be provided per the following priority:

(1)    First, from an alley if available; if an alley is not available, then from local street;

(2)    If neither is available, then from a nonprincipal arterial street;

(3)    If none of the above are available then from a principal arterial street.

Project applicants shall be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that access design has been considered with the preceding priorities. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed access is provided from the highest priority facility per the above list.

(f)    Driveways providing access to parking shall be well marked. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §16, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC and the following standards shall be met:

(a)    All development proposed on properties abutting Almira Drive NE shall provide a Type II visual screen as established in BMC 20.50.050(b). (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5251 §7, 2014: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.70.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.74 BUSINESS CORE (BC)

Sections:

20.74.010    INTENT.

20.74.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.74.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.74.090    LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.

20.74.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.74.010 INTENT.

The intent of this zone is detailed in the adopted Downtown Regional Center Subarea Plan. This chapter supplements the adopted plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §17 (part), 2008)


20.74.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted:

(a)    Bed and breakfast;

(b)    Co-location of wireless communications facility per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Communication/broadcasting facility;

(d)    Community facility;

(e)    Day care facility;

(f)    Detoxification center;

(g)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(h)    General office and business services;

(i)    General retail;

(j)    Group residential facilities - Class I;

(k)    Hotel and lodging place;

(l)    Indoor automobile sales, service, repair, or car wash;

(m)    Indoor entertainment use;

(n)    Indoor recreational facility;

(o)    Hospital, medical office and clinic;

(p)    Motion picture theater;

(q)    Museum and gallery;

(r)    Parking structure;

(s)    Personal services business;

(t)    Physical fitness and health club;

(u)    Park, playground or open space;

(v)    Public administration;

(w)    Public facility;

(x)    Residential use of all types;

(y)    Restaurant and drinking place;

(z)    School and education use;

(aa)    Social services facility;

(bb)    Transportation facility;

(cc)    Veterinary clinic;

(dd)    Welfare and charitable services and facility;

(ee)    Worship and religious facility. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §17 (part), 2008)


20.74.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC, the automobile off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Downtown Subarea Plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §17 (part), 2008)


20.74.090 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §17 (part), 2008)


20.74.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §17 (part), 2008)


Chapter 20.75 DOWNTOWN CORE (DC)

Sections:

20.75.010    INTENT.

20.75.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.75.050    PROHIBITED USES.

20.75.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.75.090    LANDSCAPING.

20.75.100    SIGN STANDARDS.

20.75.110    CHANGE OF USE OR REHABILITATION OF EXISTING BUILDING.


20.75.010 INTENT.

The intent of this zone is detailed in the adopted Downtown Regional Center Subarea Plan. This chapter supplements the adopted plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Community facility;

(b)    Drinking place;

(c)    Education and school;

(d)    Entertainment use;

(e)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(f)    General retail;

(g)    General office and business service;

(h)    Hotel and lodging place;

(i)    Hospital, medical office and clinic;

(j)    Motion picture theater;

(k)    Museum and gallery;

(l)    Parks, playgrounds and open space;

(m)    Parking structure;

(n)    Personal service business;

(o)    Public administration;

(p)    Restaurant;

(q)    Residential uses of all types;

(r)    Transportation facility;

(s)    Veterinary clinic;

(t)    Worship and religious facilities;

(u)    Mini-storage, as an accessory use, provided access is not located on the ground floor where the pedestrians oriented access is to the primary use, and the design standards emulate an office-type or multifamily structure from the view of the public street. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.050 PROHIBITED USES.

The following uses are specifically prohibited:

(a)    Light and heavy industrial/manufacturing uses;

(b)    Drive-through facility;

(c)    Automobile sales, service, repair or car wash;

(d)    Adult entertainment;

(e)    Work release facility;

(f)    Commercial surface parking lot not serving a permitted use. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC, the automobile off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Downtown Subarea Plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.090 LANDSCAPING.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §19 (part), 2008)


20.75.110 CHANGE OF USE OR REHABILITATION OF EXISTING BUILDING.

When an existing building or structure is remodeled, improved or a change in use or tenancy occurs, it shall be exempt from off-street parking and landscaping requirements; provided, that:

(a)    The structure is not enlarged, extended or structurally altered outside the existing building envelope in a manner that would require additional parking pursuant to Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


Chapter 20.76 DOWNTOWN WATERFRONT (DW)

Sections:

20.76.010    INTENT.

20.76.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.76.050    PROHIBITED USES.

20.76.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.76.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.76.100    SIGN STANDARDS.

20.76.110    MEASURING HEIGHT.


20.76.010 INTENT.

The intent of this zone is detailed in the adopted Downtown Regional Center Subarea Plan. This chapter supplements the adopted plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Drinking places;

(b)    General office and business services comprising no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross floor area of a mixed-use development;

(c)    General retail, including marine retail;

(d)    Hospitals;

(e)    Hotels and lodging places;

(f)    Medical offices and clinics;

(g)    Parks, playgrounds and open spaces;

(h)    Residential uses of all types;

(i)    Restaurants;

(j)    Structured parking with other permitted uses;

(k)    Transportation facilities;

(l)    Veterinary clinics. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.050 PROHIBITED USES.

The following uses are specifically prohibited:

(a)    Adult entertainment;

(b)    Automobile sales, service, repair and car wash;

(c)    Commercial surface parking lots not serving a permitted use;

(d)    Drive-through facilities and drive-through lanes;

(e)    Light and heavy industrial/manufacturing uses;

(f)    Stand-alone commercial parking not serving a permitted use;

(g)    Storage of equipment and materials;

(h)    Work release facilities. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC, the automobile off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance to the Downtown Subarea Plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards in Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


20.76.110 MEASURING HEIGHT.

The maximum height shall be measured from the average grade on Washington Avenue adjacent to the subject property’s front lot line. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §20 (part), 2008)


Chapter 20.78 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-18)

Sections:

20.78.010    INTENT.

20.78.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.78.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.78.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.78.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.78.065    ALLOWABLE DENSITY AND LOT AREA.

20.78.080    OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.78.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.78.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.78.010 INTENT.

The intent of the medium density residential (R-18) zoning district is to accommodate single-family housing and existing medium density-type development, and encourage redevelopment opportunities by permitting a wider variety of housing types. Consistency throughout the neighborhoods between low density residential (R-10) and medium density residential shall be implemented. (Ord. 5364 §8, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

Only one (1) principal use shall be allowed on each residentially zoned lot unless allowed for otherwise by law. This limitation shall not include permitted accessory uses associated with a permitted principal use.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Cemetery;

(b)    Co-location of wireless communications per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Community facilities of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area or less;

(d)    Day care facility of twelve (12) or fewer persons receiving care;

(e)    Education and schools (K-12) of twelve (12) or fewer students;

(f)    Foster home;

(g)    Group residential home;

(h)    Manufactured home per BMC 20.46.040;

(i)    Parks, playgrounds and open space equal or less than one-half (1/2) acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet);

(j)    Residential Uses.

(1)    Single-unit dwelling unit, detached;

(2)    Single-unit dwelling unit, attached (zero (0) lot lines) per BMC 20.78.060(b);

(3)    Duplexes (meeting underlying zoning density);

(4)    Townhouse (meeting underlying zoning density);

(k)    Worship and religious facilities of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area or less;

(l)    Incubator for business associated with a worship and religious facility or community facility, provided the following conditions are met:

(1)    The incubated business is a use that is permitted outright in the neighborhood business zone, BMC 20.82.020;

(2)    Landscaping and signage requirements of the neighborhood business zone, Chapter 20.82 BMC, shall be met; and

(3)    The parcel upon which the incubated business is situated shall have frontage on an arterial street. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted when found in connection with a principal use:

(a)    Attached or detached accessory dwelling unit per BMC 20.46.010;

(b)    Detached garage, carport, and parking facilities for the residents of the property;

(c)    Home occupation per BMC 20.46.030;

(d)    Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Director to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate;

(e)    Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, swimming pools and incidental household storage buildings. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted, provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020 subject to the corresponding conditions:

(a)    Bed and breakfast, provided:

(1)    The operators of the business shall occupy the house as their primary residence;

(2)    No more than one (1) full-time equivalent (FTE) employee who is not a resident of the dwelling may be employed;

(3)    No more than six (6) bedrooms are made available for rent to guests and all guest rooms are contained within the principal structure;

(4)    Two (2) off-street parking spaces, plus one (1) off-street parking space per each guest bedroom, are required;

(5)    Off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets;

(6)    Rooms shall not be made available to guests for more than fourteen (14) days during any thirty (30) day period;

(7)    No commercial receptions, parties, or other public gatherings, or serving of meals to nonresident guests for compensation, are allowed; and

(8)    Any remodeling of the residential structure shall maintain the residential nature of the structure and not alter the structure in such a manner that would prevent it from being used as a residence in the future.

(b)    Group residential facilities - Class I, provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Minimum setbacks, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(3)    Off-street parking shall be at a minimum of one (1) space per each employee during the peak shift, plus one (1) space per two (2) residents the facility will provide service to;

(4)    If counseling services are provided to nonresidents, additional parking spaces are required at one (1) per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area used for counseling services;

(5)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets; and

(6)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(c)    Senior housing complex, provided the following conditions are satisfied:

(1)    Minimum site area shall be no less than two (2) acres;

(2)    Minimum setbacks, density, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(3)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum one (1) space per dwelling;

(4)    Except for a community building/clubhouse for the exclusive use of complex residents, all accessory uses shall be located within a structure containing residential units;

(5)    Attached or detached structure types are permitted and dwelling units may be owned by individuals or occupied as rentals;

(6)    Access to alternative transportation such as public transit or on-site shuttle services to access daily goods or services shall be provided; and

(7)    A management agreement or covenants on individual properties to maintain the complex as a senior citizen complex shall be recorded with the Kitsap County Auditor’s office.

(d)    Nursing/convalescent homes, provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Minimum site area shall be no less than one (1) acre;

(3)    Minimum setbacks, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone shall apply;

(4)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum of one (1) space per six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area;

(5)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets; and

(6)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(e)    Day care facilities (thirteen (13) or more persons receiving care), provided:

(1)    All state licensing requirements are satisfied;

(2)    Off-street parking shall be a minimum one (1) space per each five (5) children based on the state license maximum occupancy load;

(3)    One (1) loading/unloading space without backup is required for the first twenty (20) children and one (1) additional space for up to each additional twenty (20) children;

(4)    The number of required off-street parking spaces may be reduced, provided the applicant can demonstrate that parking will not spill over into nearby residential properties and any streets;

(5)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties; and

(6)    The maximum height of a fence or wall within a front yard setback may be increased up to six (6) feet, provided it enhances safety and security of an outdoor play area.

(f)    Adaptive reuse of commercial buildings, provided the conditions set forth in BMC 20.46.070 are satisfied.

(g)    Worship, religious, and community facilities greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided:

(1)    The site area shall be one (1) acre or more; and

(2)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(h)    Golf course, provided:

(1)    A site plan review and a site development permit are approved pursuant to Chapter 20.58 BMC;

(2)    Through the conditional use permit, modifications to parking and landscaping may be allowed in order to facilitate good design;

(3)    Other conditions are applied as deemed necessary to mitigate impacts to nearby residential properties and ensure compatibility with the neighborhood.

(i)    Schools, parks and associated uses may be approved in accordance with the following:

(1)    The following uses are permitted through approval of a conditional use permit:

(i)    All public schools and associated gymnasiums and auditoriums;

(ii)    Private schools (K-12) with thirteen (13) or more students;

(iii)    Parks and playgrounds greater than one-half (1/2) acre;

(iv)    Outdoor athletic fields;

(v)    Boat launching and related facilities;

(vi)    Maintenance and service yards;

(vii)    Bus and other vehicle and equipment maintenance and storage facilities;

(viii)    Administrative office related to the facilities greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet gross floor area;

(ix)    Buildings and structures for nonprofit groups on public lands;

(2)    Uses permitted pursuant to subsection (j)(1) of this section shall be subject to complying with the following conditions:

(i)    Front, side and rear yard setbacks of structures and outdoor storage areas shall be at least thirty (30) feet;

(ii)    Setbacks may be reduced for those portions of a structure fronting interior streets;

(iii)    The maximum height for any new construction may be increased to match the architecture of existing buildings; provided, that it is set back an additional foot from any property line for each additional foot of allowed height, and in no case shall the new construction exceed forty-five (45) feet;

(iv)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties;

(v)    Additional measures may be required if deemed necessary to mitigate any noise impacts to adjacent residential uses; and

(vi)    The maximum height of a fence or wall within a front yard setback may be increased to six (6) feet, provided it enhances safety and security around an outdoor play area.

(j)    Public utility facilities located above ground, provided:

(1)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties;

(2)    The maximum height of a fence or wall may be increased within a front yard setback that will provide screening from adjacent uses and enhance safety and security around the facility; and

(3)    Exceptions to setbacks may be allowed if the applicant can demonstrate that the public interest is better served by allowing the modification.

(k)    Law enforcement and fire facilities, provided:

(1)    Landscaping is provided meeting the minimum requirements for nonresidential uses prescribed in Chapter 20.50 BMC. Additional landscaping for screening purposes may be required if it is found necessary to mitigate any impacts to adjoining residential properties.

(2)    The maximum height of a fence or wall may be increased within a front yard setback that will provide screening from adjacent uses and enhance safety and security around the facility. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

(a)    Lot Standards. Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with this section and the following standards unless allowed for by law otherwise:

(1)    Setbacks.

(i)    Minimum front yard setback is fifteen (15) feet;

(ii)    Minimum side yard setback is five (5) feet;

(iii)    Minimum rear yard setback is fifteen (15) feet.

(2)    Maximum structure height is thirty-five (35) feet.

(3)    Maximum structure height in R-10 areas within the downtown regional center shall be pursuant to Figure 20.74(a) and shall supersede subsection (a)(2) of this section.

(4)    Minimum lot width is twenty-five (25) feet.

(5)    Maximum development coverage is sixty (60) percent.

(b)    Zero (0) Lot Line (ZLL) Development. An attached single-family dwelling and/or garage structure may have a single shared side or rear lot line, and a setback reduced to zero (0), provided the structure complies with building code fire separation requirements.

(c)    Accessory Structures. The following standards shall apply but are not limited to: garages, carports, shops, barns, covered patios, cabanas, gazebos, and incidental household storage buildings, excluding accessory dwelling units per BMC 20.46.010 and structures not requiring a building permit:

(1)    The maximum area for all accessory structures shall be eighty (80) percent of the principal residential use not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

(2)    Setbacks of detached accessory structures are pursuant to BMC 20.44.060.

(d)    Garages, Storage Buildings and Shops.

(1)    Any garage, storage building or shop structure shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains that of a single-family residence including the following:

(i)    Constructed of similar materials as the principal unit;

(ii)    A roof of equal or greater pitch as the principal unit;

(iii)    A height no more than twenty-five (25) percent greater than the principal unit not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

(2)    Any garage, storage building, or shop may be exempt from the accessory structure size requirements provided it is contained within the principal unit.

(3)    Garage, Carport, and Shop Vehicle Entrance Setbacks. When the vehicle entrance faces the street, the garage, carport, or shop shall have a front yard setback of at least twenty (20) feet, except as provided in BMC 20.44.020 (Traditional front yard).

(e)    Lot Area for Parks and Schools. Parks and schools may exceed maximum lot area requirements if approved by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 5364 §2, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.065 ALLOWABLE DENSITY AND LOT AREA.

The purpose of this section is to establish compatible levels of density within existing neighborhoods. The intent is to allow infill residential development. The following density and lot area standards are applicable to development within the zone:

(a)    Minimum Density. The minimum required density is five (5) dwellings per acre.

(b)    Maximum Density. The maximum allowed density is eighteen (18) dwellings per acre.

(c)    Maximum Lot Area. The maximum lot area is eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, with the following exceptions:

(1)    The lot area may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development pursuant to BMC 20.58.060;

(2)    One (1) lot within a proposal for a division of land may exceed eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, provided the remaining lots do not exceed the eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square foot maximum lot size; and

(3)    A flag lot that complies with the requirements in BMC 20.44.100 may exceed eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet, provided the total area of the flag lot does not exceed thirteen thousand sixty-eight (13,068) square feet.

(d)    Minimum Lot Area. The minimum allowed lot area is two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

(e)    Exception to Minimum Lot Areas.

(1)    The minimum lot area may be modified through the approval of a residential cluster development pursuant to BMC 20.58.060, provided the development complies with the maximum density requirement set forth in subsection (b) of this section. (Ord. 5364 §3, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.080 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.78.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC and the following:

(a)    One (1) sign with a sign area of up to eight (8) square feet may be allowed to advertise a permitted bed and breakfast, provided it matches the architectural features of the primary residence.

(b)    For a home occupation sign, the residential district sign regulations in BMC 20.52.120 shall apply.

(c)    When an established business use is located in the medium density residential zone, the special purpose sign regulations in BMC 20.52.130 shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


Chapter 20.79 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-40)

Sections:

20.79.010    INTENT.

20.79.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.79.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.79.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.79.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.79.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.79.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.79.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.79.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.79.010 INTENT.

The intent of the high density residential (R-40) zoning district is to provide a high standard of development for residential multifamily type structures and to provide a variety of housing options for a wide diversity of people, within neighborhoods that are currently developed with multifamily development. In addition, this zone supports the adopted Downtown Subarea Plan. (Ord. 5390 §5, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Co-location of wireless communications per BMC 20.46.140;

(b)    Residential Use. Dwelling units, including a duplex or townhouse, must meet the underlying density of this zone unless otherwise allowed for by state law or City code. Residential uses include:

(1)    Day care facility (twelve (12) or fewer persons receiving care);

(2)    Foster home;

(3)    Class I group residential facility;

(4)    Multi-unit dwelling units;

(5)    Single-unit dwelling unit, attached (zero (0) lot lines);

(6)    Single-unit dwelling unit, detached;

(7)    Townhouses;

(8)    Duplexes. (Ord. 5390 §6, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted when found in connection with a principal use:

(a)    Attached or detached accessory dwelling unit per BMC 20.46.010;

(b)    Detached garage, carport, and parking facilities for the residents of the property;

(c)    Home occupation per BMC 20.46.030;

(d)    Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Director to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate;

(e)    Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, swimming pools and incidental household storage buildings. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following conditional uses shall be permitted pursuant to BMC 20.58.020, provided the conditional use complies with the corresponding standard as listed in BMC 20.60.040 (low density residential (R-10) zone), except the criteria for minimum site area is not applicable to this zone for the following uses:

(a)    Bed and breakfast;

(b)    Senior housing complex;

(c)    Nursing/convalescent home;

(d)    Day care facilities (more than twelve (12) persons receiving care);

(e)    Worship, religious, and community facilities;

(f)    Schools, parks and associated facilities of the types set forth in BMC 20.60.040(j). (Ord. 5390 §7, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5111 §5, 2010: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

(a)    For properties located within the downtown regional center, the Downtown Subarea Plan will regulate development standards. The following development standards listed are for all other locations where the R-40 zone is located.

(b)    Lot Standards. Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with this section and the following standards unless allowed for by law otherwise:

(1)    Setbacks.

(i)    Minimum front yard setback is fifteen (15) feet;

(ii)    Minimum side yard setback is five (5) feet;

(iii)    Minimum rear yard setback is fifteen (15) feet.

(2)    The maximum height of the structure shall meet the following:

(i)    Maximum structure height is forty-five (45) feet, except that conditionally allowed uses per BMC 20.79.040 may be sixty (60) feet unless otherwise noted; and

(ii)    For properties that are adjacent to low density residential (R-10) zone, buildings taller than thirty-five (35) feet shall increase the setback by one (1) foot from the R-10 zone property line for every one (1) foot building height increase over thirty-five (35) feet.

(3)    Maximum development coverage is seventy-five (75) percent.

(c)    Zero (0) Lot Line (ZLL) Development. An attached dwelling and/or garage structure may have shared side or rear lot line, and setback reduced to zero (0), provided the structure complies with building code fire separation requirements.

(d)    Garages, Storage Buildings and Shops.

(1)    Garage, Carport, and Shop Vehicle Entrance Setbacks. When the vehicle entrance faces the street, the garage, carport, or shop shall have a front yard setback of at least twenty (20) feet, except as provided in BMC 20.44.020 (Traditional front yard).

(e)    Minimum density: eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre.

(f)    Maximum density: forty (40) dwelling units per acre.

(g)    Open Space. For projects of twenty-five (25) units or more, a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the net site area shall be set aside and utilized as open space for use and enjoyment of future residents either as passive and/or active space. Designated critical areas pursuant to Chapter 20.14 BMC shall not be used for the open space. Such open spaces shall at a minimum meet the following standards:

(1)    Passive and Active Open Spaces. All open spaces must include facilities for active and/or passive recreation. Passive spaces could include facilities such as trails, benches, shelters, public plazas, and year-round water features. Active spaces can include children’s play equipment, paved hard court (basketball or tennis court), flat, open lawn for ballfield and other such facilities.

(2)    Open Space Plan. For all designated open space areas the proposal shall include an open space plan. This plan is to ensure the open space is maintained and preserved in perpetuity. All open space areas shall comply with the following:

(i)    Identify all proposed improvements such as public facilities, proposed vegetation, and existing vegetation to remain; and

(ii)    The plan must comply with the requirements of the landscaping chapter, found in Chapter 20.50 BMC; and

(iii)    The plan shall outline maintenance responsibilities; and

(iv)    The plan shall include a notice to title approved by the City and recorded with the County Auditor. This notice shall include provisions for the designation and retention of open space, and provisions for permanent maintenance of the open space and/or commonly owned facilities. (Ord. 5390 §8, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.79.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section; however, stacked flats are permissible only when meeting the criteria provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Minimum Transparency. At least forty (40) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(3)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(4)    Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Three (3) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(2) of this section.

(5)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade.

(6)    Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7)    Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5319 §13, 2017)


20.79.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

In addition to the off-street parking requirements set forth in Chapter 20.48 BMC, the automobile off-street parking spaces located within the downtown regional center shall be provided in accordance to the Downtown Subarea Plan. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.79.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §21 (part), 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.82 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS (NB)

Sections:

20.82.010    INTENT.

20.82.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.82.030    PROHIBITED USES.

20.82.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.82.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.82.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.82.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.82.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.82.110    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.82.010 INTENT.

The intent of the neighborhood business (NB) zone is to provide for small-scale business districts that reflect the scale and character of surrounding neighborhoods. The NB zone shall include uses such as small groceries, convenience stores, offices, restaurants, and mixed use opportunities. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Bed and breakfast;

(b)    Co-location of wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140;

(c)    Community facility;

(d)    Day care facility;

(e)    Drinking place;

(f)    Entertainment uses;

(g)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(h)    General office and business services;

(i)    General retail;

(j)    Hotels and lodging places;

(k)    Medical offices and clinics;

(l)    Museum and gallery;

(m)    Park, playground and open space;

(n)    Personal services;

(o)    Public administration;

(p)    Recycling collection station;

(q)    Residential as a secondary use;

(r)    Restaurant drinking place;

(s)    Senior housing complex;

(t)    Transportation facility;

(u)    Veterinary clinic;

(v)    Worship and religious facility. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.030 PROHIBITED USES.

(a)    Drive-through facilities. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020:

(a)    Automobile service and repair, provided:

(1)    The property is not located within the Manette Neighborhood Center; and

(2)    The business is located in an existing building; and

(3)    Any parking areas adjacent to a residential property shall provide a Type I visual screen pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b); and

(4)    Business hours shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m.; and

(5)    No outdoor storage is permitted. This prohibition includes but is not limited to outdoor storage of vehicles being used for parts, inoperable vehicles, and storage of tires. Customer vehicles waiting to be serviced, which do not require towing, must be parked in an approved parking area that complies with Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5326 §8, 2017)


20.82.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with the following standards unless allowed for by law otherwise:

(a)    Maximum front yard setback: ten (10) feet. At least sixty-five (65) percent of a building’s front facade must meet the maximum front yard setback. The setback may be increased if the Director finds that such increase is the minimum necessary to facilitate a superior site design. In order to obtain approval for an increased setback, the applicant shall submit a written analysis establishing how the project facilitates superior site design, is the minimum necessary, is consistent with specific goals and policies within the Comprehensive Plan, and is compliant with all applicable sections of the BMC. The following list identifies examples of circumstances where increased setbacks may be found to be appropriate:

(1)    When the site includes more than one (1) street frontage;

(2)    To accommodate existing topography, utilities, or other physical site constraints that make compliance with the setback infeasible;

(3)    To accommodate phasing of infill development;

(4)    On sites that are significantly developed with existing legally established nonconforming uses or structures whereby strict code compliance will not facilitate effective circulation; or

(5)    For projects that in the opinion of the Director provide enhanced public amenities within the setback area which include, but are not limited to, the following: public plazas, increased landscaping, architectural features, and improved pedestrian connections;

(b)    Side yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to a residential zone where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(c)    Rear yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to a residential zone where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(d)    Maximum building size: nonresidential uses may not exceed a footprint of fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet;

(e)    Maximum building coverage: sixty (60) percent base maximum; provided, that through the use of any combination of the following, building coverage may be increased up to eighty-five (85) percent maximum:

(1)    Projects containing mixed uses: twenty (20) percent bonus;

(2)    Projects within a two (2) or three (3) story building: ten (10) percent bonus;

(3)    Projects providing a pedestrian-oriented plaza or area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet along a pedestrian walkway at an intersection corner, bus stop or other key pedestrian area approved by the City. Such areas shall contain seating for at least four (4) people, a trash receptacle and three (3) or more of the following: a pedestrian shelter, a drinking fountain, a bike rack, pedestrian-scale lights, pavers on the walkway surfaces, a kiosk, a street vendor station providing food or beverages, trees, a statue or sculpture, or a public restroom. Interior courtyards with these amenities qualify if they would be readily apparent and accessible to pedestrians on adjoining sidewalks: ten (10) percent bonus;

(4)    Projects providing a through-block corridor that facilitates pedestrian access in a location approved by the City: five (5) percent bonus;

(5)    Projects providing at least fifty (50) percent of their required parking underground or within the building: twenty (20) percent bonus;

(f)    Maximum development coverage: maximum coverage by impervious surfaces seventy-five (75) percent; provided, that through the use of any combination of the mechanisms listed in subsections (e)(1) through (5) of this section, up to ninety-five (95) percent maximum development coverage may be allowed;

(g)    Maximum building height: thirty-five (35) feet;

(h)    There is no maximum density for residential as a secondary use. (Ord. 5319 §14, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §17, 2013; Ord. 5046 §22, 2008; Ord. 4977 §13, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Orientation. All properties adjacent to a public right-of-way shall orient structures toward the primary street. Properties located at intersections should orient their structures toward the intersecting corner.

(3)    Minimum Transparency. At least fifty (50) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(4)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way, common parking areas, or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(5)    Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Three (3) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(5)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of pedestrian areas.

(6)    Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7)    Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5319 §15, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.82.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC and the following:

(a)    On-site parking shall be to the rear or to the side of buildings on the site and shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the site frontage facing the arterial street frontage(s). The site frontage includes the area between the right-of-way and front building wall which applies to the entire length of the property regardless of building width. Corner lots have two (2) site frontages as they are positioned on two (2) street frontages.

(b)    All efforts shall be taken to avoid placing parking on street corners. Parking located between the building frontage and street corners shall be fully screened as follows:

(1)    A four (4) foot tall decorative wall within the front yard landscaping area that fully screens the parking areas. The wall shall be located such that it blocks views of the parking from the right-of-way. For long spans of frontage (one hundred (100) feet or more), the wall shall include modular articulation to add architectural variety.

(i)    Alternate architectural features, shrubs may be substituted for the wall, provided it is demonstrated that the shrubs/alternative will provide equal to or better visual screening than the wall. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) feet tall at time of installation and shall be additional to the landscaping required in Chapter 20.50 BMC.

(ii)    Openings and architectural features may be required within a wall section in order to tie the wall feature into the architecture of the building and to provide pedestrian access. The entry shall be the minimum necessary to accommodate a sidewalk that is a minimum of five (5) feet in width, clearly marked, and distinguished from driving surfaces by using decorative paving, stamped/stained concrete, or raised walkways with alternative materials (such as brick, cobblestone, decorative pavers). Paint striping does not meet this requirement.

(c)    Access to parking shall be provided per the following priority:

(1)    First, from an alley if available; if an alley is not available, then from local street;

(2)    If neither is available, then from a nonprincipal arterial street;

(3)    If none of the above are available then from a principal arterial street.

(d)    Driveways providing access to parking area shall be well-defined, highly visible entryways. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5222 §18, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §23, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.82.110 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.86 FREEWAY CORRIDOR (FC)

Sections:

20.86.010    INTENT.

20.86.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.86.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.86.050    PROHIBITED USES.

20.86.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.86.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.86.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.86.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.86.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.86.010 INTENT.

The intent of the freeway corridor (FC) zone is to identify areas for commercial activities that will typically be region-serving in nature and scale. Uses in the zone benefit from high visibility from freeways serving the region, incorporate signage legible to fast-moving traffic, provide large areas for parking, and may include large-scale structures and/or outdoor display or storage areas. Design standards, buffering and/or other techniques are used to mitigate the effects of the intense uses allowed in the FC zone on less intense adjacent uses. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

In the freeway corridor zone all uses are permitted outright except for those uses set forth as conditional uses per BMC 20.86.040, and those uses prohibited per BMC 20.86.050. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

A conditional use permit, which is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020, may permit the following uses:

(a)    Heavy industrial/manufacturing, provided:

(1)    All standards of the noise levels ordinance, Chapter 6.32 BMC, are met;

(2)    No unshielded light or glare will be visible during periods of darkness in a residential zone;

(3)    No odor, dust or smoke byproduct will be clearly detectable on any adjacent or adjoining commercial or residential lot;

(4)    The applicant can demonstrate that the use will not significantly detract from the visual character of the area as seen from public rights-of-way or any adjacent lot. Unkept or unsightly storage, refuse, yard, or equipment areas are elements with the potential to negatively impact visual character.

(b)    Adult business per BMC 20.46.110.

(c)    Group residential facility – Class II, provided:

(1)    The facility will not create an operational conflict with the efficiency of large-scale freeway-oriented commercial use; and

(2)    Neighborhood Protection Area. A site containing a Class II facility shall not be located within eight hundred eighty (880) feet from any parcel containing an existing residential use, including multifamily and single-family units. The protection area shall not be applied to the residential uses on the east side of Highway 3. (Ord. 5369 §4, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5177 §4, 2012: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.050 PROHIBITED USES.

The following uses are prohibited in the freeway corridor zone:

(a)    Residential, as a primary or secondary use, except for Class II group residential facilities as a conditional use per BMC 20.86.040;

(b)    Recreational vehicle park;

(c)    Junk yard;

(e)    Motion picture theater;

(d)    Any use with significant adverse impacts on less intense uses in neighboring residential zones, determined by the City by having any combination of the following criteria:

(1)    Noise Encroachment. Generation of sound not meeting the provisions of the noise levels ordinance, Chapter 6.32 BMC;

(2)    Light/Glare Encroachment. Unshielded glare visible during periods of darkness in an adjacent residential zone;

(3)    Odor, Dust or Smoke Encroachment. Emission of an odor, dust or smoke byproduct clearly detectable in any residential zone. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with the following standards unless allowed for by law otherwise:

(a)    Minimum front yard setback: twenty (20) feet;

(b)    Minimum side yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(c)    Rear yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(d)    No maximum building coverage, except all setback and landscaping requirements shall be met;

(e)    No maximum development coverage, except all setback and landscaping standards shall be met;

(f)    Maximum building height: sixty (60) feet. (Ord. 5364 §9, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §26, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(3)    Curb Cuts. The number of curb cut site entries from public rights-of-way shall be limited to the minimum number of curb cuts required for safe and efficient vehicle circulation into and out of the site.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Two (2) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of the front facade shall not extend for more than one hundred (100) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least five (5) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade. (Ord. 5319 §16, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC and the following requirements:

(a)    Buffers and screening adjacent to rights-of-way. All off-street parking areas, vehicle storage areas, and outdoor storage or work areas, except for those areas for display of vehicles or products for sale or lease, shall be screened or buffered from public rights-of-way by any combination of the following:

(1)    Five (5) foot wide landscaped buffer with evergreen hedge or other screen plantings of a size that will provide an immediate effective visual screen having a minimum height of five (5) feet;

(2)    Solid fence or wall a minimum of five (5) feet in height unless modified by the City to correct a visibility obstruction; or

(3)    An earthen berm planted with grass, shrubs, or other groundcover and having an effective visual height of at least five (5) feet;

(b)    Buffers or screening between commercial uses. The City may determine that landscape buffering or screening is required along an interior property line shared by commercial uses in cases where a higher intensity use such as light or heavy manufacturing/industry abuts a commercial use that is frequently visited by members of the public. Such buffering or screening is intended to minimize potential conflicts. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.86.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.92 EMPLOYMENT CENTER (EC)

Sections:

20.92.010    INTENT.

20.92.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.92.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.92.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.92.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.92.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.92.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.92.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.92.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.92.010 INTENT.

The intent of the employment center (EC) zone is to offer a well planned and designed environment where a potentially large employee population is offered the option to live near places of employment. The EC zone provides for integration of employment activities with housing and commercial activities scaled to serve the employee population at the center, thereby reducing home-to-workplace commute trips. Employment centers create large numbers of jobs in uses to include office and services. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted outright:

(a)    Co-location of wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140;

(b)    Community facility;

(c)    Day care facility;

(d)    General office and business services;

(e)    Finance, insurance and real estate;

(f)    General retail;

(g)    Hospitals;

(h)    Hotels and lodging places;

(i)    Medical offices and clinics;

(j)    Outdoor athletic fields;

(k)    Parks, playgrounds and open space;

(l)    Personal service;

(m)    Physical fitness and health clubs;

(n)    Public administration;

(o)    Residential uses of all types except group residential facility - Class II;

(p)    Restaurants and drinking places;

(q)    Schools and education uses;

(r)    Transportation facility;

(s)    Veterinary clinic;

(t)    Worship and religious facility. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §13, 2014: Ord. 5222 §21, 2013: Ord. 5008 §23, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted when found in connection with a principal use:

(a)    Light industrial/manufacturing to support the associated primary use, such as development of products on site, provided the business is primarily involved in the products distribution (general retail).

(1)    The applicant shall demonstrate that the use will not significantly detract from the visual character as seen from public rights-of-way or any adjacent lot. This accessory use shall be fully screened or fully enclosed, with no outdoor storage visible from the right-of-way or adjacent lot.

(b)    Mini-storage, provided:

(1)    Mini-storage facilities are permitted as an accessory use, and may occupy no more than fifty (50) percent of the property’s building gross floor area. With the exception of the mini-storage business office, mini-storage facilities shall not be permitted upon the street level of the multistory building where the primary entrance is located.

(2)    All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the buildings or site, such as access from the alley. No unit doors may face the street.

(3)    Mini-storage facilities located adjacent to a residential zone shall:

(i)    Not be visible from the residential property. This may require that the property be screened by a Type I visual screen per BMC 20.50.050 for the facility loading bays, docks or doors.

(ii)    Not operate or allow tenant access between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The Director may permit extended hours of operation if the facility will not have significant noise impacts on the adjacent properties.

(4)    Outdoor Storage Prohibited. All goods and property stored in a mini-storage facility shall be stored in an enclosed building. No outdoor storage of boats, RVs, vehicles, etc., or storage in outdoor pods or shipping containers is permitted.

(5)    Each storage unit shall be used for storage only. No commercial or manufacturing activities, vehicle repair or services, or related activities, whether for business or personal purposes, are permitted in any storage unit. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.92.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted, provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020:

(a)    Light industrial/manufacturing, provided:

(1)    No odor, dust or smoke byproduct will be clearly detectable on any abutting commercial or residential lot;

(2)    All standards of the noise levels ordinance, Chapter 6.32 BMC, are met;

(3)    No unshielded light or glare will be visible during periods of darkness on adjacent commercial or residential lots;

(4)    The applicant can demonstrate that the use will not significantly detract from the visual character as seen from public rights-of-way or any adjacent lot. Unkempt or unsightly storage, refuse, yard, or equipment and mechanical areas are elements with potential to negatively impact visual character. This use shall be fully screened or fully enclosed, with no outdoor storage visible from the right-of-way or adjacent lot(s).

(5)    Does not include business activities related to marijuana production or processing for distribution. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Development shall be in accordance with the following standards:

(a)    Minimum density for residential uses: fifteen (15) dwelling units/acre;

(b)    Minimum side yard setback: zero (0), except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(c)    Minimum rear yard setback: zero (0), except when adjacent to the low or medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(d)    Minimum front yard setback requirements: zero (0), except that for residential uses with garages facing a public right-of-way, the garage shall have a setback five (5) feet greater than that of the principal structure;

(e)    Maximum building coverage: sixty-five (65) percent base maximum; provided, that through the use of any combination of the following, building coverage may be increased to a maximum of eighty-five (85) percent:

(1)    Projects with two or more stories: ten (10) percent bonus;

(2)    Projects containing mixed uses: ten (10) percent bonus;

(3)    Projects incorporating at least fifty (50) percent of required parking underground or within the structure: twenty (20) percent bonus;

(f)    No maximum development coverage, provided all setbacks and landscaping requirements are met;

(g)    Maximum Building Height. Eighty (80) feet for residential uses and sixty (60) feet for nonresidential uses. For mixed uses, the building height will be based on the use that predominantly (fifty (50) percent or greater) occupies the structure. (Ord. 5364 §10, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §31, 2008; Ord. 4971 §18, 2006; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Orientation. All properties adjacent to a public right-of-way shall orient structures toward the primary street. Properties located at intersections should orient their structures toward the intersecting corner.

(3)    Minimum Transparency. At least sixty (60) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(4)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way, common parking areas, or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(5)    Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Four (4) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(5)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade.

(6)    Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7)    Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5319 §17, 2017: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §32, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §33, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.92.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)

 


Chapter 20.94 INDUSTRIAL (I)

Sections:

20.94.010    INTENT.

20.94.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.94.030    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.94.050    PROHIBITED USES.

20.94.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.94.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.94.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.94.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.94.010 INTENT.

The intent of the industrial (I) zone is to accommodate light and heavy industrial uses in locations where there is limited interaction with residential uses. Uses include large-scale and/or heavy industries in a manner that reduces impact to the community while meeting industry’s needs for easy access, large sites, and locations that do not cause conflicts with residential and other less intense use areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

In the industrial zone, all uses are permitted outright except for those uses set forth as conditional uses per BMC 20.94.030, and those uses prohibited per BMC 20.94.050. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5008 §24, 2007: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.030 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted, provided a conditional use permit pursuant to BMC 20.58.020 is approved:

(a)    Junk yard, provided:

(1)    The use is not adjacent to a residentially zoned lot;

(2)    A view-obscuring screen consisting of a solid wall or dense evergreen shrub to a height of ten (10) feet is provided along all lot lines.

(b)    Adult business as defined in BMC 20.46.110.

(c)    Group residential facility – Class II, provided:

(1)    The facility will not create an operational conflict with the efficiency of large-scale industrial uses; and

(2)    Neighborhood Protection Area. A site containing a Class II facility shall not be located within eight hundred eighty (880) feet from any parcel containing an existing residential use, including multifamily and single-family units. (Ord. 5369 §5, 2019: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.050 PROHIBITED USES.

The following uses are prohibited in the industrial zone:

(a)    Residential, as a primary or secondary use, except for Class II group residential facilities as a conditional use per BMC 20.94.030(c);

(b)    Recreational vehicle park;

(c)    Motion picture theater;

(d)    Any use with significant adverse impacts on less intense uses in neighboring residential zones, determined by the City by having any combination of the following criteria:

(1)    Noise Encroachment. Generation of sound not meeting the provisions of the noise levels ordinance, Chapter 6.32 BMC;

(2)    Light/Glare Encroachment. Unshielded glare visible during periods of darkness in an adjacent residential zone;

(3)    Odor, Dust or Smoke Encroachment. Emission of an odor, dust or smoke byproduct clearly detectable in any residential zone. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016)


20.94.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Lot development requirements shall be in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise allowed by law:

(a)    Minimum front yard setback: ten (10) feet, except twenty (20) feet where abutting or across a public right-of-way from a residential zone;

(b)    Minimum side yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low and medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(c)    Minimum rear yard setback: zero (0) except when adjacent to the low and medium density residential zones where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(d)    No maximum building coverage, provided all setbacks and landscaping standards are met;

(e)    No maximum development coverage, provided all setbacks and landscaping standards are met;

(f)    Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet for structures intended for human occupancy, and no height limit for unoccupied structures such as cranes, antennas, and mechanical apparatuses employed in industry, provided setback requirements are met;

(g)    Where abutting a residential zone, structures shall be set back one (1) additional foot for each additional foot of height above thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. 5364 §11, 2018: Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §34, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall be provided per the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §35, 2008: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.94.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signs shall meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.52 BMC. For freestanding signs, the maximum size and height standards of Figure 20.52(a) shall apply. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.96 CITY UTILITY LANDS (CUL)

Sections:

20.96.010    INTENT.

20.96.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.96.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.96.040    CONDITIONAL USES.

20.96.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.96.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.96.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.96.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.96.010 INTENT.

The intent of the city utility lands (CUL) zone is to preserve resource-related functions of land, and to protect watersheds and timberlands. The CUL zone is also intended to ensure healthy forest cover and provide habitat for wildlife. The zone will accommodate some limited commercial and recreational activities, which adhere to a high standard of environmental best management practices, and low impact development. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted:

(a)    Educational and resource activities compatible with forest resources;

(b)    Forest and wildlife management activities and forest practices;

(c)    Groundwater development and aquifer protection;

(d)    Hydropower activities and facilities;

(e)    Public utilities functions and activities, and nonresidential structures necessary to execute such functions and activities;

(f)    Wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted:

(a)    Caretaker’s residence associated with a permitted use;

(b)    Temporary quarters associated with a permitted use. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.040 CONDITIONAL USES.

The following uses may be permitted, provided a conditional use permit is approved pursuant to BMC 20.58.020. The conditional use permit may allow modifications to parking, landscaping and other development requirements necessary to mitigate environmental impacts.

(a)    Residential development, provided:

(1)    The project consists of attached or detached single-unit dwelling units, townhouses, or senior housing complex;

(2)     The location does not interfere with City public utility functions and activities;

(3)     The location is adjacent to an existing recreational or residential use;

(4)    Sustainable development and best environmental management practices are employed to minimize environmental impacts such as:

(i)    Low impact stormwater management and natural drainage;

(ii)    Preservation of significant trees;

(iii)    Clustered development;

(iv)    Minimization of impervious surfaces;

(5)    Maximum density shall be ten (10) dwelling units per acre, except twenty (20) dwelling units per acre for senior housing complexes;

(6)    Development standards per the low density residential zone, BMC 20.60.060(a)(2) through (d) are met;

(b)    Passive outdoor public recreation such as trails, provided:

(1)    The location does not interfere with City public utility functions and activities;

(2)    The location is adjacent to an existing recreational or residential use;

(3)    Sustainable development and best environmental management practices are employed to minimize environmental impacts such as:

(i)    Low impact stormwater management and natural drainage;

(ii)    Identification and preservation of significant trees;

(iii)    Minimization of impervious surfaces. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Development standards for conditional uses shall be pursuant to the criteria set forth in BMC 20.96.040. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC and the following requirements:

(a)    Parking may not exceed two (2) stalls per residential dwelling unit;

(b)    On-site parking requirements for a permitted or a conditional use may be reduced by up to forty (40) percent, provided it can be demonstrated through a parking analysis that the reduction would decrease impervious surface area, and the reduction would not cause parking to spill over into adjacent areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC, except landscaping requirements may be modified or reduced if it can be demonstrated that such modifications or reductions preserve existing or native vegetation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.96.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 § 8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.97 WATERSHED (WS)

Sections:

20.97.010    INTENT.

20.97.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.97.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.97.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.97.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.97.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.97.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.97.010 INTENT.

The intent of the watershed (WS) zone is to protect the Bremerton public water supply by controlling activities and maintaining high water quality at the source, consistent with state and federal regulations. It is further intended to maintain strict control of access to and activities within the Union River drainage to allow the Union River water supply source to continue in its unfiltered status. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted:

(a)    Educational and resource activities compatible with public water supply;

(b)    Forest and wildlife management activities, and forest practices;

(c)    Groundwater development and aquifer protection;

(d)    Hydropower activities and facilities;

(e)    Location of wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140;

(f)    Public utilities functions and activities related to the monitoring and distribution of potable water. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.030 ACCESSORY USES.

The following accessory uses may be permitted:

(a)    Caretaker’s residence or gate guard associated with an outright permitted use;

(b)    Nonresidential structures necessary for the execution of an outright permitted use;

(c)    Temporary quarters associated with an outright permitted use. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Development shall be in accordance with the following standards:

(a)    All developments shall minimize the amount of impervious surface to that necessary to execute a permitted use;

(b)    Sustainable development and best environmental management practices shall be employed to minimize environmental impacts such as:

(1)    Low impact stormwater management and natural drainage;

(2)    Identification and preservation of significant trees;

(3)    Minimization of impervious surfaces. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC, except required parking may be reduced or waived by the Director in the watershed (WS) zone in order to reduce impervious surface area. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC, except landscaping requirements may be modified or reduced if it can be demonstrated that such modifications or reductions preserve existing or native vegetation. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.97.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Chapter 20.98 INSTITUTIONAL (INST)

Sections:

20.98.010    INTENT.

20.98.020    OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

20.98.030    ACCESSORY USES.

20.98.060    DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

20.98.070    DESIGN STANDARDS.

20.98.080    PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

20.98.090    LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

20.98.100    SIGN STANDARDS.


20.98.010 INTENT.

The intent of the institutional (INST) zone is to provide for continued operation and facilitate managed growth of Olympic College. Growth of the College and supporting uses should be promoted in the zone while being compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods and nearby areas. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.020 OUTRIGHT PERMITTED USES.

The following uses are permitted:

(a)    Co-location of wireless communications facilities per BMC 20.46.140;

(b)    Community facility;

(c)    General office and business services;

(d)    General retail associated with an institution;

(e)    Higher education and colleges;

(f)    Medical offices and clinics;

(g)    Outdoor athletic fields and park playground and open spaces;

(h)    Parking as a principal use;

(i)    Public administration;

(j)    Residential uses of the following types:

(1)    Group residential facility - Class I;

(2)    Nursing convalescent home;

(3)    Senior housing complex;

(4)    Single-unit dwelling unit structure, attached or detached;

(5)    Multi-unit dwelling structure;

(6)    Townhouse;

(7)    Duplex;

(k)    Restaurants;

(l)    Schools and education uses;

(m)    Transportation facility;

(n)    Welfare and charitable services and facility;

(o)    Worship and religious facility. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5249 §14, 2014: Ord. 5222 §22, 2013: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.030 ACCESSORY USES.

Any subordinate use with a direct connection to or association with the core functions of a higher education college may be permitted by the Director as an accessory use. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.060 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.

Development shall be in accord with the following standards:

(a)    Minimum front yard setback: zero (0), except ten (10) feet where adjacent to any lot not within the institutional zone;

(b)     Minimum side yard setback: zero (0), except when adjacent to a residential zone where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b);

(c)     Minimum rear yard setback: zero (0), except when adjacent to a residential zone where a ten (10) to twenty (20) foot visual screen is required pursuant to BMC 20.50.050(b); 

(d)    Maximum height: eighty-five (85) feet, provided all upper level setback requirements are met;

(e)    Upper level setbacks: where adjacent to any lot not within the institutional (INST) zone, structures shall be set back one (1) additional foot for each additional foot of height above thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 5046 §36, 2008; Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.070 DESIGN STANDARDS.

The following design standards shall be applied to all new structures and redeveloped structures. Residential development of three (3) units or fewer are exempt from this section. When development involves the remodel or expansion of existing structures, the Director may modify these requirements to reasonably fit the scope and scale of the remodel or expansion.

(a)    Primary Design Features. The following criteria shall be applied to all primary building facades and facades facing public streets:

(1)    Top and Base. Buildings shall convey a visually distinct base and top. A "base" can be emphasized by a different masonry pattern, more architectural detail, visible plinth above which the wall rises, storefront, canopies, or a combination. The top edge is highlighted by a prominent cornice, projecting parapet or other architectural element that creates a shadow line.

(2)    Orientation. All properties adjacent to a public right-of-way shall orient structures toward the primary street, or internal campus. Properties located at intersections should orient their structures toward the intersecting corner.

(3)    Minimum Transparency. At least fifty (50) percent of all facades facing the public sidewalk, or sidewalks providing circulation within a site, measured to eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or surface grade, shall be comprised of transparent windows or doors.

(4)    Blank Facades. Building facades shall not present a blank facade to view from public rights-of-way, common parking areas, or residential properties. Such facades may be broken by windows, trellises, columns, variations in plane, or other devices that add variation and interest to the facade.

(5)    Mechanical Equipment Screening. Rooftop and ground-level mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from public streets. Screening materials shall be architecturally similar to the primary structure.

(b)    Secondary Design Features. Three (3) secondary design features are required from the following list:

(1)    Multiple Roof Lines. Structures shall have at least three (3) horizontal roof lines, as viewed from the front facade.

(2)    Modulation. The horizontal plane of a structure shall not extend for more than thirty (30) feet, as measured from any one (1) point of the structure, without a significant architectural variation of at least two (2) feet in depth.

(3)    Facade Materials. At least three (3) different facade materials shall be incorporated into the exterior appearance of the structure (wood, brick, stucco, tile, shingles, other).

(4)    Additional Transparency. An additional fifteen (15) percent transparency to what is required per subsection (a)(3) of this section.

(5)    Weather Protection. Recessed or protruding building features, of no less than four (4) feet in depth, which extend along at least fifty (50) percent of the front facade.

(6)    Main Entry. Pedestrian entrances are preferred from buildings facing the street. Entries shall be easily identifiable from the street or sidewalk; this can be accomplished through architectural or ornamental features.

(7)    Public Amenity. Outdoor eating area, artwork, street furniture, plantings in window boxes, public trash receptacles, or other alternative public amenity approved by the Director. Any proposed amenity shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure. Any approved amenity shall be maintained for the life of the project. (Ord. 5319 §18, 2017)


20.98.080 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.

Parking shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.48 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.090 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

Landscaping shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.50 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


20.98.100 SIGN STANDARDS.

Signage shall meet the standards of Chapter 20.52 BMC. (Ord. 5301 §3 (Exh. B) (part), 2016: Ord. 4950 §8 (Exh. A) (part), 2005)


Title 22 PUBLIC CORPORATIONS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES

Chapters:

22.01    PUBLIC CORPORATION


Chapter 22.01 PUBLIC CORPORATION

Sections:

22.01.010    AUTHORIZATION.

22.01.020    DEFINITIONS.

22.01.030    CORPORATE LIFE.

22.01.040    POWERS - GENERALLY.

22.01.050    POWERS - SPECIFIED.

22.01.060    ADDITIONAL POWERS.

22.01.070    LIMITATION OF POWERS.

22.01.080    PURVIEW OF AFFAIRS.

22.01.090    APPLICATION FOR CHARTER.

22.01.100    REVIEW OF APPLICATION.

22.01.110    ISSUANCE OF CHARTER.

22.01.120    EFFECT OF ISSUANCE OF THE CHARTER.

22.01.130    ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.

22.01.140    CHARTER CONTENTS.

22.01.150    LIMITS UPON NAME - SEAL.

22.01.160    MANDATORY STATEMENT - RESERVATION.

22.01.170    SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES - CONSTRAINT.

22.01.180    CORPORATE STRUCTURE - BASIC PATTERN.

22.01.190    OFFICERS - DIVISION OF DUTIES.

22.01.200    BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCURRENCE REQUIRED.

22.01.210    MEMBERSHIP CONCURRENCE REQUIRED.

22.01.220    RULES AND REGULATIONS.

22.01.230    PROPOSING CHARTER AMENDMENTS.

22.01.240    CORPORATE OFFICES AND OFFICERS.

22.01.250    CODE OF ETHICS - CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

22.01.260    DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.

22.01.270    COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS.

22.01.280    COMPOSITION OF THE MEMBERSHIP.

22.01.290    ACCESS TO RECORDS.

22.01.300    MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.

22.01.310    MEETINGS OF ANY MEMBERSHIP.

22.01.320    MEETINGS - CITY PARTICIPATION.

22.01.330    QUORUM.

22.01.340    VOTING - REPRESENTATION.

22.01.350    TENURE IN OFFICE.

22.01.360    DEPOSIT OF PUBLIC FUNDS.

22.01.370    PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS PROHIBITED.

22.01.380    SAFEGUARDING OF FUNDS.

22.01.390    ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF OFFICE AND RECORDS.

22.01.400    REPORTS AND INFORMATION.

22.01.410    AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS.

22.01.420    BONDS AND NOTES.

22.01.430    CHARTER AMENDMENT.

22.01.440    INTERVENTION.

22.01.450    TRUSTEESHIP.

22.01.460    TERMINATION.

22.01.470    DISSOLUTION - STATEMENT.

22.01.480    MERGER WITH PUBLIC CORPORATION.

22.01.490    TERMINATION - DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.

22.01.500    INSURANCE.

22.01.510    UNAUTHORIZED REPRESENTATION.

22.01.520    ANCILLARY AUTHORITY.

22.01.530    CONSTRUCTION.

22.01.540    WAIVER.

22.01.550    PROHIBITED CONDUCT.

22.01.560    PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.


22.01.010 AUTHORIZATION.

(a)    The city authorizes the establishment and chartering of one or more public corporations, commissions and/or authorities (in this chapter called "Public Corporations"), each as an independent legal entity, to: improve governmental efficiency and services and general living conditions within the city; administer and execute federal grants and programs, receive and administer federal funds; perform all manner and type of community services; provide and implement such municipal services and functions as the City Council may direct; and allow a character of community participation in appropriate municipal projects and activities that are, in practical effect, restricted by the organizational structure of city government, all as authorized by RCW 35.21.730 through 35.21.757.

(b)    Such public corporation shall have the power and authority, be limited by the restrictions and provisions; be organized in accordance with the process and with the structure, purposes and organization provided for by this ordinance and its charter. It shall also observe constitutional and City Charter limitations, incur indebtedness, and be subject to the supervening conditions as set forth in this ordinance.

(c)    All liabilities incurred by such public corporation, commission or authority shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets and credit of such public corporation, commission or authority and no creditor or other person shall have right of action against the City of Bremerton or any other city, town, county or governmental entity creating such corporation, commission or authority on account of any debts, obligations or liabilities of such public corporation, commission or authority. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.020 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, the term:

(a)    "Bonds" means any bonds, promissory notes, interim certificates, debentures, certificates of indebtedness or other obligations issued by the public corporation pursuant to its charter by this chapter.

(b)    "Charter" means the articles of organization of the public corporation irrespective of the name applied thereto and all amendments thereto.

(c)    "City" means the City of Bremerton.

(d)    "City Council" means the legislative body of the City of Bremerton.

(e)    "Mayor’s Designee" shall be person designated in writing by the Mayor who is authorized to act on his behalf under the terms of this ordinance and any charters granted under this ordinance.

(f)    "Membership" means the class of persons entitled to participate (whether in a voting or advisory capacity) in the internal processes of the public corporation in accordance with its charter or rules and regulations. It includes, but is not limited to, such designations as the membership, the electorate, the public, interested citizens, or residents within a district.

(g)    "Member" means a constituent of the Membership.

(h)    "Corporate" shall refer or pertain to a public corporation.

(i)    "Corporate office" means an office or official person of the public corporation, irrespective of designation, but excludes membership positions of the Board of Directors that do not hold a corporate office.

(j)    "Corporate officer" means an office or official person of the public corporation, irrespective of designation, but excludes membership positions of the Board of Directors that do not hold a corporate office.

(k)    "Corporate official" means an office or official person of the public corporation, irrespective of designation, and includes membership positions of the Board of Directors.

(l)    "Board of Directors" means a group of persons vested with the management of the affairs of the public corporation.

(m)    "Immediate family" means:

(1)    A spouse;

(2)    Any dependent parent, parent-in-law, child or son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or

(3)    Any parent, parent-in-law, child, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sibling, uncle, aunt, cousin, niece or nephew residing in the household of a corporate official or employee.

(n)    "Insolvent" or "Insolvency" means an inability of a public corporation to pay debts as they become due in the usual course of its affairs.

(o)    "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City of Bremerton.

(p)    "Public corporation" shall mean a corporation, commission, or authority organized under this ordinance.

(q)    "Real property" includes all lands, including improvements and fixtures thereon and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith, and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, therein, including terms for years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise and the indebtedness secured by such liens.

(r)    "Resolution" means an action of the Board of Directors with a quorum required by the charter or rules and regulations of a public corporation.

(s)    "Rules and regulations" means the code or codes of rules adopted for the regulation or management of the affairs of the public corporation irrespective of the name or names by which such rules and regulations are designated.

(t)    "State" (when used as a noun) shall mean the State of Washington. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.030 CORPORATE LIFE.

The charter of the public corporation shall establish the character or term of its existence. The charter may provide:

(a)    The public corporation shall have perpetual existence; or

(b)    The public corporation shall exist for stated period of years, until a fixed expiration date, or during a set time period; or

(c)    The public corporation shall cease to exist upon the occurrence of certain events or upon an expiration date measured from such events; or

The charter may combine any term or condition set forth in Subsection (b) with that set forth in Subsection (c). Should the charter fail to set forth the character or term of the public corporation’s existence, the existence of the public corporation shall expire five years after the date of the issuance of its charter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.040 POWERS - GENERALLY.

Except as otherwise limited by the State Constitution, the Bremerton City Charter, by statute, this chapter, or by the charter of the public corporation, a public corporation shall have the power to:

(a)    Own and sell real and personal property;

(b)    Contract and enter into partnership with individuals, associations and corporations, and the state and the United States of America;

(c)    Sue and be sued;

(d)    Lend and borrow funds;

(e)    Do anything a natural person may do;

(f)    Perform all manner and type of community services and activities utilizing federal, state, local government or private funds;

(g)    Administer and execute federal and state grants and programs;

(h)    Receive and administer federal, state and local government funds;

(i)    Provide and implement such municipal services and functions as the City Council may by ordinance direct;

(j)    Transfer, with or without considerations, and funds, real or personal property, property interest, or services received from the federal government, private sources or, if otherwise legal, from the state, a city or county; and

(k)    Receive and administer private funds, goods or services for any lawful public purpose. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.050 POWERS - SPECIFIED.

Except as otherwise limited by the State Constitution, by statute, the Bremerton City Charter, this chapter, or the public corporation’s charter, the powers granted a public corporation by Section .040 include, but are not limited to the power to:

(a)    Purchase, lease, exchange, mortgage, encumber, improve, use or otherwise transfer or grant security interests in real or personal property or any interests therein; grant or acquire options; and contract regarding the income or receipts from real property;

(b)    Issue negotiable bonds and notes in conformity with Section.420 and applicable provision of the Uniform Commercial Code, the Bremerton City Charter and state law in such principal amounts, as in the discretion of the public corporation, shall be necessary or appropriate to provide sufficient funds for achieving any corporate purposes or to secure financial assistance, including matching funds from the United States of America for corporate projects and activities;

(c)    Contract for lease, and accept transfers, gifts or loans of funds or property from the United States of America, the state, other government entities, the city, including property acquired by any such governmental unit through the exercise of its power of eminent domain and from corporations, associations, individuals or any other source and to comply with the terms and conditions thereof;

(d)    Manage, on behalf of the city, any property acquired by the city through gift, purchase, construction, lease, assignment, default or exercise of the city’s power of eminent domain;

(e)    Recommend to the Mayor and the City Council appropriate public improvements and expenditures in areas of the city in which a public corporation by its charter has a particular responsibility;

(f)    Recommend to the Mayor and the City Council property which if committed or transferred to the public corporation would materially advance the public purpose for which the public corporation was chartered;

(g)    Initiate, carry out and complete such improvements of benefit to the public as the City Council may by ordinance assign;

(h)    Recommend to the Mayor and the City Council such tax financing and security measures as the public corporation may deem appropriate to maximizing the public interest in any area in which a public corporation, by its charter, has a particular responsibility;

(i)    Lend its funds, property or credit or services for corporate purposes, or act as a surety or guarantor for corporate purposes;

(j)    Provide advisory, consultative, training, educational and community services or advice to individuals, associations, corporations, or governmental agencies, with or without charge;

(k)    Control the use and disposition of corporate property, assets and credit;

(l)    Invest and reinvest its funds;

(m)    Fix and collect charges for services rendered or to be rendered, and establish the consideration for property transferred;

(n)    Sponsor, lease, manage, construct, own and lease or otherwise participate in housing projects where such activity furthers the public purpose for which the public corporation is chartered;

(o)    Maintain books and records as appropriate for the conduct of its affairs; and

(p)    Conduct corporate affairs, carry on its operations, and use its property as allowed by law and consistent with this chapter, its charter and its rules and regulations; and to name corporate officials, designate agents and engage employees; prescribe their duties, qualifications and compensation; and secure the services of consultants for professional services; technical assistance or advice;

(q)    Identify and recommend to the Mayor and the City Council the acquisition by the city for transfer to or use by the public corporation of property and property rights which are within a community development project, and which if so acquired, whether through purchase or the exercise of eminent domain, and so transferred or used, would materially advance the public purposes for which the public corporation was chartered. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.060 ADDITIONAL POWERS.

Except as otherwise limited by this chapter or by its charter or by law, a public corporation shall have in addition the powers enumerated in Sections .040 and .050 the power and authority:

(a)    To have a corporate seal and to alter the same at pleasure;

(b)    To cease its activities and operations and surrender its charter through dissolution procedures provided in Section .470;

(c)    To exercise and enjoy such additional powers as may be authorized by law; and

(d)    To have and exercise all powers necessary or convenient to effect the purposes for which the public corporation was organized and to perform authorized corporate functions. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.070 LIMITATION OF POWERS.

(a)    A public corporation organized under this chapter shall have no power of eminent domain nor any power to levy taxes or special assessments.

(b)    No public corporation may incur or create any liability that permits recourse by any contracting party or member of the public to or upon any assets, services or credit of the city;

(c)    No funds, assets, or property of any public corporation shall be used for any partisan political activity or to further the election or defeat of any candidate for public office; nor shall any funds or substantial part of the activities of any public corporation be used for publicity or educational purposes designed to support or defeat legislation pending before the Congress of the United States, the state legislature or the City Council, provided, however, that members and officials of a public corporation may respond to requests by members of Congress, state legislators or the City Council for information, and appear before any such legislative body in connection with funding and other matters directly affecting the public corporation or its ability to carry out the purposes for which it is chartered. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.080 PURVIEW OF AFFAIRS.

(a)    All funds, assets or credit of the public corporation shall be applied toward or expended upon municipal and community services and projects and activities authorized by its charter. A public corporation organized under this chapter shall not issue shares of stock, pay dividends, make private distribution of assets, make loans to corporate officials, or engage in business for profit.

(b)    The limitation of Subsection (a) does not preclude the following transactions or activities, and a public corporation, unless restricted by its charter, may:

(1)    Compensate corporate officials or constituents a reasonable amount for services rendered, and reimburse reasonable expenses actually incurred in performing their duties.

(2)    Assist corporate officials or members as members of a general class of persons to be assisted by a project or activity of an approved program to the same extent as other members of the class and as long as no special privileges or treatment accrues to such corporate official or member by reason of his or her status or position in the public corporation;

(3)    Return to corporate officials or members fees, dues or service charges originally contributed by them and surplus to the purposes for which collected;

(4)    Defend any corporate official, or former corporate official (including employees) in any legal or administrative proceeding in which he or she is made a party by reason of his or her position or former corporate position, or at the public corporation’s option, indemnify such corporate official or former corporate official for expenses actually and necessarily incurred by him or her in connection with such defense, except as to matters involving willful misconduct in the performance of duty; and

(5)    Sell assets for consideration greater than their reasonable market value or acquisition costs, or charge for services more than the expense of providing them, or otherwise secure an increment in a transaction, or carry out any other transaction or activity, as long as such gain is not the public corporations general object or purpose and is applied to or expended upon municipal and community services and projects and activities as aforesaid. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.090 APPLICATION FOR CHARTER.

(a)    To initiate proceedings to charter a public corporation under this chapter, any person or group of persons shall apply in duplicate to the City Clerk therefor. The application shall set forth:

(1)    The proposed name of the public corporation;

(2)    The character or period of its duration;

(3)    The precise purposes or functions to be performed;

(4)    The charter requested;

(5)    The names and addresses of persons nominated as the initial corporate officials;

(6)    The funds and other assets necessary to undertake the activities or functions contemplated within the coming year; the anticipated sources of such funds and assets; and any other supporting data the applicants deem appropriate and necessary to evaluate their application; and

(7)    The name and address of each applicant.

The applicant(s) may amend, correct or supplement the application during review and processing thereof. No applicant shall be an official or employee of the city.

(b)    One copy of the application shall be filed with the City Clerk as a public record open to public inspection and one copy shall be forwarded to a responsible city official designated by the Mayor. To allow for public inspection and review, at least fourteen days shall elapse between filing of an application and issuance of a charter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.100 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.

The Mayor’s designee shall review all applications to determine the following matters, refer to the Mayor his findings, and make recommendations with respect to:

(a)    Whether chartering the public corporation will help to fulfill the purposes set forth in RCW 35.21.730 through 35.21.757;

(b)    Whether the requested character or duration of the public corporation is reasonably necessary for the activities or functions to be performed;

(c)    Whether changes, revision, or modifications should be made in the proposed charter to comply with this chapter, and to further the best interests of the city, all as a condition to approval of the application or issuance of the charter;

(d)    Whether the corporate officials nominated are qualified to hold such positions, dedicated to further the best interests of the program and purposes of the public corporation, and as a group have the necessary background and experience to conduct the affairs and operations contemplated by the public corporation;

(e)    Whether the charter should issue as requested, or with changes, revision or modification, or upon certain conditions, restrictions or the occurrence of certain events; or whether the application should be denied. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.110 ISSUANCE OF CHARTER.

(a)    After evaluating the application in accordance with Subsection.109, the Mayor will forward the application to the City Council for their evaluation and, if approved, authorize and direct issuance of the charter by the Mayor. The City Council will provide this direction in a City ordinance which will also provide any modifications or changes to the application and Mayoral recommendation.

(b)    A charter establishing a public corporation shall be issued in duplicate originals, each signed by the Mayor and bearing the City Seal attested by the City Clerk and filed as a public record; and a duplicate original shall be delivered to the applicant(s). The City Clerk shall give notice of the issuance of the charter to the Secretary of State and furnish a copy of the charter and this chapter upon request therefor. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.120 EFFECT OF ISSUANCE OF THE CHARTER.

The public corporation shall commence its existence effective upon filing of its charter as issued and attested, unless a different time is specified therein. Except as against the state or the city in a proceeding to cancel or revoke the charter, or to compel compliance with a representation made in the application, filing of an original charter and delivery of a duplicate original charter shall conclusively indicate that all conditions precedent have been fulfilled and that the public corporation has been established in compliance with the procedures of this chapter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.130 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.

Upon issuance of the charter, the applicant(s) shall call an organizational meeting of the persons nominated as corporate officials in the application as approved within thirty days, giving at least ten days’ advance notice to each, unless waived in writing, provided the organizational meeting may be postponed to a more appropriate time when the charter provides for a corporate existence contingent on certain events or occurrences or commencing at a future time. At such meeting the Board of Directors shall organize itself, may appoint interim officers and non-voting members of the Board of Directors to serve until the selection processes provided in or by the charter be complied with, select the temporary place of business, and assist in organizing the Membership. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.140 CHARTER CONTENTS.

(a)    The charter shall set forth the following:

(1)    The name of the public corporation and its corporate seal;

(2)    The character or period of duration of the public corporation as provided in Section 22.01.030;

(3)    This Statement in a prominent place; 

(Name of the public corporation) is organized pursuant to Ordinance of the City of Bremerton. All liabilities incurred by such public corporation, commission or authority shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets and credit of such public corporation, commission or authority; and no creditor or other person shall have any recourse to the assets, credit or services of the city creating the same on account of any debts, obligations or liabilities of such public corporation, commission or authority.

(4)    The purpose and scope of activities of the public corporation;

(5)    The powers of the public corporation and any limitations thereon as provided in Sections.040, .050 and .060;

(6)    The structure or fundamental organization of the public corporation;

(7)    The division of duties within the corporate structure as provided in Section .190;

(8)    The powers and duties of the Board of Directors;

(9)    The powers and duties of any membership with advisory or voting rights;

(10)    The method of amending its rules and regulations or adopting another set; and

(11)    The method of proposing amendments to its charter to the Mayor and the City Council.

(b)    The charter shall set forth the following matters in conformity with Sections .240 through .310 and .330 and .340 respectively, or, within stated guidelines, authorize the rules and regulations to define any or all of the following matters:

(1)    The corporate offices and tenure of officers: The number of positions, powers and duties and term of each corporate office; the manner of appointment, selections or election of office holders and the appointing, selecting or electing authority; performance of duties of the office upon illness, death, incapacity or absence of the corporate officer; the filling of vacancies; and any qualifications for the office and conditions upon exercising its powers;

(2)    The composition of the Board of Directors: its size and numbers; the term and qualifications for member positions; the organization and powers of its positions; the manner of appointment, selection or election and the appointing, selecting or electing authority; Board of Directors committees and duties and the filling of vacancies.

(3)    The composition of the Membership, if any: its character, powers and voting rights; division by classes and the powers of such classes; any referendum to or initiative by the Membership; eligibility of citizens to become a member and the method of acquiring such status; participation by persons in limited capacities, such as honorary or advisory positions or status, affiliation, and the rights and powers of persons in such limited capacity; termination of member status;

(4)    The maintenance of corporate records and public access thereto;

(5)    Regular and special meetings of the Board of Directors and notice requirements;

(6)    Regular and special meetings of any membership and notice requirements;

(7)    The quorum of the Board of Directors and of any membership necessary to conduct affairs;

(8)    The method of voting and for representation of persons absent from meetings, if allowed;

(9)    Suspension or removal of corporate officials from an office or position; and conditions which require such suspension;

(10)    Any other provision pertaining to the internal affairs of the public corporation as deemed appropriate. 

The provision of the charter insofar as consistent with federal and state law and with this chapter shall control the affairs and operations of the public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.150 LIMITS UPON NAME - SEAL.

The corporate name shall not appear deceptively similar to the name of any corporation, existing or organized under the laws of the state or authorized to transact business or conduct affairs in the state, or a corporate name reserved or registered as permitted by the laws of the state.

The corporate seal shall carry the name of the public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.160 MANDATORY STATEMENT - RESERVATION.

The City Council, by amendment to this chapter, may amend the statement required by Section 22.01.140(a)(3) from time to time to reflect any subsequent changes in state legislation which might affect the powers, structure or duties of public corporations created by this ordinance, and such an amendatory statement shall be attached as an amendment to the charter of the public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.170 SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES - CONSTRAINT.

(a)    Whenever the laws of the state or of the United States of America or a city ordinance shall require a license or permit to undertake certain activities or perform an act, the public corporation prior to undertaking the activity or performing the act, shall comply therewith to the same extent as any other agency, commission or board otherwise established by the city.

(b)    If authorized by its charter to do so, a public corporation may undertake projects and activities or perform acts outside the limits of the city in those areas of another jurisdiction whose governing body by agreement with the city consents thereto. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.180 CORPORATE STRUCTURE - BASIC PATTERN.

(a)    Power and responsibility within the corporate structure shall be distributed among the corporate officers, the Board of Directors and any membership.

(b)    The corporate officers shall manage the daily affairs and operations of the public corporation. If the charter so provides, corporate officers may be members of the Board of Directors or as a commission comprise the Board of Directors.

(c)    The Board of Directors shall oversee the activities of corporate officers, establish and/or implement policy, and participate in corporate activities as prescribed by the charter at least to the extent provided by Section.200.

(d)    The charter shall establish a membership with at least the powers set forth in Section .210 (a) through (d) unless the Mayor and City Council expressly determine that a membership with such powers would not be in the public interest and approves a charter without a membership, or a charter amendment to abolish or modify it. A charter that does not provide for a membership or that prescribes a membership with advisory capacity only shall repose stewardship for management and determination of all corporate affairs in the Board of Directors.

(e)    If a membership be provided, the Board of Directors or a committee thereof shall report to the Membership at a meeting held at least quarterly and receive such advice, counsel or directions as the charter shall designate. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.190 OFFICERS - DIVISION OF DUTIES.

(a)    A public corporation shall have two or more corporate officers. The same person shall not occupy both the chief executive office of the corporation and office responsible for the custody of funds and maintenance of accounts and finances.

(b)    Unless the charter provides otherwise, the chief executive officer shall be the agent of the public corporation for service of process; the rules and regulations may designate additional corporate officials as agents to receive or initiate process. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.200 BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCURRENCE REQUIRED.

General or particular authorization or concurrence of the Board of Directors by resolution shall be necessary for any of the following transactions:

(a)    Transfer or conveyance of an interest in real estate, other than a release of a lien or satisfaction of a mortgage after payment has been received and the execution of a lease for a current term less than one year;

(b)    The contracting of debts, issuances of notes, debentures, or bonds, and the mortgaging or pledging of corporate assets to secure the same;

(c)    The donation of money, property or other assets belonging to the public corporation;

(d)    An action by the public corporation as a surety or guarantor;

(e)    All transactions in which the consideration exchanged or received by the public corporation exceeds Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00), the performance by the public corporation shall extend over a period of one year from the date of execution of an agreement therefor, or the public corporation assumes duties to the city, the state, or the United States of America;

(f)    Any project or activity outside the limits of the City;

(g)    Adoption of an annual budget;

(h)    Certification of annual reports and statement to be filed with the City Clerk as true and correct in the opinion of the Board of Directors and of its members except as noted;

(i)    Proposed amendments to the charter; and

(j)    Such other transactions, duties and responsibilities as the charter shall repose in the Board of Directors or require Board of Directors participation by resolution. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.210 MEMBERSHIP CONCURRENCE REQUIRED.

If the charter provides for a membership with power to participate in determination of corporate policy in addition to advising, to vote upon corporate affairs or to elect some or all corporate officials, or to pass on action by referendum or commence action by initiative, then the concurrence of the Membership shall be necessary upon any of the following matters:

(a)    Proposed amendments to the charter;

(b)    Proposed amendments to the rules and regulations of the public corporation on matters within the power and responsibility of the Membership;

(c)    Fixing the compensation of corporate officials and nature and limit of expenses incurred by corporate officials that may be reimbursed, unless the charter sets the same;

(d)    The election or selection of an independent auditor; and

(e)    Such other matters as the charter may designate. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.220 RULES AND REGULATIONS.

(a)    The rules and regulations shall be subordinate to and consistent with the charter; and may be altered, amended or repealed from time to time as the charter shall prescribe, and shall set forth such matters designated in Section.140(b), as the charter shall authorize.

(b)    Adoption of or amendments to the rules and regulations shall not take effect until ten days after filing of the same with the City Clerk, unless such amendment(s) shall have been passed by unanimous vote of the Board of Directors and the Membership (if affected by the amendment), and an earlier effective date be set. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.230 PROPOSING CHARTER AMENDMENTS.

(a)    A public corporation may propose to the City Council, via the Mayor that its charter be amended by the City Council by a procedure outlined in its charter and in conformity with Section 22.01.330 at a regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors of which thirty (30) days advance notice was given; and where concurrence of the Membership be required by the charter or by Section 22.01.210, by or a vote of the members at a regular or special meeting at which consideration of the proposed amendments was scheduled and thirty (30) days advance notice given. Each method shall comply with procedures prescribed by the charter in accordance with Section.320.

(b)    Notice of a proposed charter amendment given to members of the Board of Directors and to members shall set forth the proposed amendment and a statement of its purpose and effect. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.240 CORPORATE OFFICES AND OFFICERS.

(a)    Corporate officers may be elected or appointed by the Board of Directors, by the Membership, by a nomination-selection process of both the Board of Directors and the Membership, or by any other process or combination of the above as the charter may set forth or as may be provided in the rules and regulations.

(b)    No term of office shall exceed four (4) years. Unless the charter so provides, indefinite terms conditioning tenure in office upon the continued confidence or pleasure of the Board of Directors and/or Membership shall not be allowed.

(c)    The charter or the rules and regulations shall require that any official responsible for accounts and finances shall file a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the public corporation before taking office, and may hold the corporate office only as long as such a bond continues in effect. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.250 CODE OF ETHICS - CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

Members of the Board of Directors, its officers and all employees of the public corporation shall be governed by this ordinance and amendments thereto, and state laws and city ordinances regarding ethical conduct and conflict of interest standards. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.260 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.

(a)    Neither the Board of Directors membership, nor Membership, nor any employees of the public corporation may directly or indirectly be based upon or limited by age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, political ideology or the physical handicap of a capable person.

(b)    To assure equality of employment opportunity, the public corporation:

(1)    Will not discriminate in employment because of age, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, political ideology or against a physically handicapped person capable of performing the work.

(2)    Will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their age, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. The public corporation will, in all solicitations or advertisement for employees placed by or on behalf of the public corporation, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, race, color, religion, sex or national origin. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.270 COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS.

(a)    The Board of Directors shall have three (3) or more members. No term of a position on the Board of Directors shall exceed four (4) years. If no duration of term be provided by the charter, the term of a position on the Board of Directors shall be two (2) years. 

(b)    All appointments to the Board of Directors shall require the concurrence of the City Council.

(c)    The charter may, but need not, establish different terms for various positions on the Board of Directors; stagger the terms; require special qualifications for certain positions; include corporate officers as ex-officio members or observers; provide for the election, selection, or appointment of all or some positions by the Membership, by other members of the Board of Directors, or by other appointing authorities; and establish advisory or honorary positions without voting powers or with limited voting powers.

(d)    If the charter provides for Board of Directors committees, the Board of Directors by resolution may designate and appoint one or more committees consisting of at least three (3) or more members to represent the Board of Directors. 

(e)    Procedures for the selection and establishment of the initial Board of Directors shall be contained in the charter of the public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.280 COMPOSITION OF THE MEMBERSHIP.

(a)    Insofar as such differences or provisions are related to the projects and activities to be undertaken by the public corporation, the charter may:

(1)    Divide the membership into classes by objective criteria, and assign differing powers or duties to each class;

(2)    Confer on certain classes of members advisory capacity only, while other classes of members may vote on specific matters or have general voting powers; or

(3)    Provide for limited membership in the Membership or establish dues or a membership fee.

(b)    The charter may provide for open participation; and the charter may provide for affiliation by persons not eligible or unwilling to assume status as a member.

(c)    Unless the charter provides otherwise, anyone sixteen (16) years of age or older shall be eligible for member status; and each member shall have the same and equal rights and vote that every other member enjoys.

(d)    Membership status shall be personal and may not be transferred by purchase or sale or assignment or by payment of any other consideration. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.290 ACCESS TO RECORDS.

(a)    A public corporation shall keep an official journal containing the minutes of proceedings at all meetings of the Board of Directors and any meetings of any membership and the resolutions of the Board of Directors.

(b)    Any citizen shall have access to records and information of the public corporation to the same degree as a citizen enjoys to records and information of any agency of the city.

(c)    The public corporation will provide access to all necessary records to the Bremerton City Auditor for functional and financial internal audits as the Bremerton City Audit Committee may direct from time to time. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.300 MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS.

(a)    The Board of Directors shall meet at intervals as provided in or by the charter; special meetings of the Board of Directors may be called as provided by the charter or in the rules and regulations.

(b)    The Board of Directors of a public corporation shall be the governing body of a public agency as defined in the "Open Public Meetings Act," RCW 42.30.020, and all meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held and conducted in accordance with RCW 42.30.010 et seq., and special meetings may be called therein provided. In addition, any member of the Board of Directors, upon five (5) days notice, may call a special meeting of the Board of Directors to consider matters appropriate to a regular meeting if twenty-five (25) days have elapsed since the previous Board of Directors meeting and no future Board of Directors meeting has been scheduled.

(c)    All meetings shall be open to the public, except the Board of Directors may hold an executive session to consider matters exempt from open meetings under RCW 42.30 and shall enter the cause therefor upon its official journal.

(d)    Any of the actions identified in Section.200(a) may be authorized by the Board of Directors without a meeting upon the unanimous written concurrence thereto of all members of the Board of Directors who are entitled to vote on the matter; and upon entry of such action together with the written concurrence upon the official journal the action shall have the force and effect as if taken at a meeting. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.310 MEETINGS OF ANY MEMBERSHIP.

(a)    Meetings of the Membership shall be held at least once every calendar quarter or at more frequent intervals as provided in the charter. Special meetings of the Membership may be called by the Board of Directors or by petition of the members as provided by the charter or the rules and regulations.

(b)    Notice of meeting, stating the place day and hour, shall be mailed to members entitled to be present at least ten days and not more than thirty (30) days before the meeting.

(c)    Any member or corporate official may call a special meeting of the Membership upon notice aforesaid, with the expense of notice to be borne by the public corporation to consider matters appropriate to a quarterly meeting if ninety (90) days have elapsed after the previous meeting and no meeting of the Membership shall have been scheduled within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.320 MEETINGS - CITY PARTICIPATION.

(a)    The failure to hold and conduct a regular meeting shall not work a forfeiture of dissolution of the public corporation, but upon notice from the Mayor or City Council, the public corporation shall promptly call and conduct a special meeting to consider matters appropriate to the regular meeting bypassed.

(b)    The Mayor and the City Council shall be given notice of any meetings of a membership or the Board of Directors and be entitled to appear in person or by representative. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.330 QUORUM.

The charter or the rules and regulations pursuant thereto shall establish the quorum necessary for action by the Board of Directors or Membership. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.340 VOTING - REPRESENTATION.

(a)    The charter or rules and regulations pursuant thereto shall provide for the manner of balloting and any representation of persons absent from meetings. For example, the charter may, but need not provide for or allow; balloting by mail; absentee ballots or written statements received by mail or delivery (before or after a meeting) to supplement balloting at a meeting; or voting as directed in a written proxy taking a position on particular issue, candidacy, or nomination.

(b)    No proxy or voting trusts or pooling arrangements shall be allowed delegating to the holder discretion in casting a ballot or to act for a principal on undisclosed or general matters to be raised at a meeting of the Board of Directors or of the Membership. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.350 TENURE IN OFFICE.

(a)    A corporate official shall serve for the term designated and until his successor shall have been elected or appointed and qualified.

(b)    Any corporate official may be removed from any corporate office or position in such a manner as the charter or rules and regulations pursuant thereto shall prescribe. Any position or corporate office may be abrogated or extinguished during an existing term. Upon removal from a corporate office or position or upon the abrogation or extinction thereof, such corporate official shall have no power of office, but the same shall be without prejudice to any vested contract right to compensation for services rendered or tendered. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.360 DEPOSIT OF PUBLIC FUNDS.

All money belonging to or collected for the use of the public corporation coming into the hands of any officer thereof, shall immediately be deposited with the treasurer or other legal depositary to the credit of such public corporation for the benefit of the funds to which they belong. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.370 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS PROHIBITED.

The making of profit out of public money or using the same for any purpose not authorized by law by any officer having the possession or control thereof is prohibited. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.380 SAFEGUARDING OF FUNDS.

The public corporation shall deposit all funds in a depository, and otherwise safeguard such funds pursuant to good business practices. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.390 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF OFFICE AND RECORDS.

The public corporation shall:

(a)    Maintain a principal office at a location within the limits of the city;

(b)    File and maintain current with the City Clerk a listing of all corporate officials, their positions and their home addresses, the address of its principal office and of all other offices used by it and current set of its rules and regulations; and

(c)    Place the statement set forth in Section 22.01.140(a)(3) or as amended pursuant to Section 22.01.160 in a prominent location in its principal office and at all other offices where the public may readily see it; and print or stamp said statement on all contracts, bonds, and other documents that may entail any debt or liability by the public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.400 REPORTS AND INFORMATION.

The public corporation shall:

(a)    File an annual report with the City Clerk containing an audited and certified statement of assets and liabilities and of income and expenditures during the previous year with a summary of projects and activities conducted;

(b)    Furnish the Mayor and City Council with such statements, records, reports, data and information, as the Mayor, City Council, or City Auditor may request pertaining to matters connected with any projects or activities of the public corporation; and

(c)    Answer fully and within a reasonable time any written inquiries by appropriate city officials in the course of their duties about its finances, organization or activities. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.410 AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS.

The public corporation shall, at any time during normal business hours and as often as the Mayor, the City Council, the City Auditor, the City Clerk or the State Auditor deem necessary, make available to the same all its financial records, and will permit the same to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts from such records, and to make audits of all contracts, invoices, materials, payrolls, records of personnel, conditions of employment and other data relating to all of the aforesaid matters. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.420 BONDS AND NOTES.

(a)    Bonds and notes issued by the public corporation may be secured by the full faith and credit of the public corporation or may be made payable solely out of certain revenues and receipts as may be designated in the proceedings under which the issuance of the bonds and notes are authorized. All bonds or notes shall carry in a prominent place thereof the statement set forth in Section 22.01.140(a)(3) or as amended pursuant to Section 22.01.160. All bonds and notes or liabilities occurring thereunder shall be satisfied exclusively from the assets or credit of such public corporation, and no creditor or other person shall have recourse to the assets, credit or services of the city thereby, unless the City Council shall by ordinance expressly guarantee such bonds or notes.

(b)    Bonds and notes of the public corporation may be sold at such price or prices, at public or private sale, in such manner and from time to time as may be determined by the public corporation. Bonds and notes may be made payable at such place or places whether within or without the state, may bear interest at such rate or rates, may be in such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, may be in bearer form or in registered form as to principal and interest or as to principal alone, reserve such rights to redeem at such price or prices and after such notice or notices and on such terms and conditions, all as the public corporation may determine and provide in the proceedings under which such bonds and notes shall be issued.

(c)    The public corporation may at the time of the issuance of such bonds and notes make such covenants with the purchasers and holders of said bonds and notes as it may deem necessary to secure and guarantee the payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, including but not limited to covenants to set aside adequate reserves to guarantee payment of principal and interest; to appoint a trustee or trustees to safeguard the expenditure of the proceeds of sale of such bonds and notes and/or take possession and use or operate and manage corporate assets securing the bonds and notes in event of default or insolvency of the public corporation. With such powers as may be contained in any covenants relating to the bonds and notes; and to limit the amount, time and/or conditions under which additional bonds and notes may be issued or debts incurred.

(d)    The public corporation may pay expenses, premiums and commissions which it may deem necessary in connection with the issuance and sale of its bonds and notes and take such other actions or make such commitments as necessary or convenient in the issuance and servicing of such bonds and notes as are consistent with this chapter although not enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.430 CHARTER AMENDMENT.

(a)    A public corporation proposing an amendment to its charter after approval in accordance with Section.230 shall file the same in duplicate with the City Clerk. One proposed amendment shall be filed as public record and the other forwarded to the Mayor or Mayor’s designee for review and recommendations. The Mayor may approve or disapprove recommendation. A charter amendment proposed by a public corporation shall take effect and become a part of the charter upon the concurrence of the City Council and the filing of the Mayor’s approval with the City Clerk.

(b)    When required by law, each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall propose to the Mayor an amendment to the public corporation’s charter that will conform with said law. Membership approval as provided in Section 22.01.230 shall not be required for any proposed charter amendment required by law. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.440 INTERVENTION.

(a)    When authorized by resolution of the City Council after a public hearing held with notice to the public corporation the Mayor or City Council as provided in said resolution may intervene, and exercise such control over a public corporation as is necessary and appropriate to correct any deficiency and/or to assure that the purposes of a program undertaken may be reasonable accomplished, including directing affirmative action, when:

(1)    The Board of Directors of the public corporation has requested such intervention by resolution;

(2)    The public corporation has failed to set forth the statement required by Section 22.01.390(c) and set forth in Section 22.01.140(a)(3) in written contracts, bonds or other documents;

(3)    The public corporation has represented to the public or to creditors that recourse may be had to the assets, property or credit of the city on account of acts or omissions of the public corporation, unless such secondary or direct liability be in fact assumed by the City Council;

(4)    The public corporation has failed to file an annual report as required by Section 22.01.400(a) after notice of such omission;

(5)    A deadlock has occurred in the Board of Directors, or the membership of the Board of Directors is insufficient to constitute a quorum for conduct of affairs so that the public corporation is unable to conduct its operations or perform its projects and activities;

(6)    The Board of Directors has continuously failed to conduct meetings as required by its charter, or the public corporation has neglected or refused to conduct a meeting after notice from the Mayor and/or City Council to do so pursuant to Section 22.01.320;

(7)    The Board of Directors has unreasonably impaired public participation in the conduct of projects and activities or oppressed or hindered any membership in its exercise of its powers and responsibilities;

(8)    The assets of the public corporation have been or are committed to be misapplied or wasted, or illegally expended; or

(9)    The public corporation has committed or is about to commit a material violation of this ordinance or its charter.

(b)    The Mayor or City Council may take such actions as necessary to achieve the object of the intervention stated in the resolution of the City Council and make corrections or revisions ancillary thereto, and shall accomplish the purposes of the intervention as expeditiously as reasonable; corporate officers shall not be displaced nor the conduct of their duties impaired more than necessary to accomplish the purposes of the intervention and the intervention shall cease as soon as the objectives stated in the resolution and corrections ancillary thereto have been accomplished. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.450 TRUSTEESHIP.

(a)    The city by resolution of the City Council after a public hearing held with notice to the public corporation may petition the Superior Court to impose a trusteeship upon a public corporation organized pursuant to this chapter and to appoint the trustees therefor under any of the following circumstances:

(1)    The Board of Directors of the public corporation has requested same by resolution;

(2)    The public corporation has filed a statement of dissolution preparatory to termination of its existence;

(3)    The public corporation becomes insolvent or otherwise unable to carry out its contractual obligations to creditors and other persons;

(4)    The charter was procured through fraud or misrepresentation of any material matter that has an effect upon the projects of activities to be undertaken;

(5)    The public corporation has filed an annual report with the City Clerk that is false or deceptively misleading on a material matter;

(6)    The public corporation is incompetent or ineligible to carry out the public purposes for which it was chartered;

(7)    The public corporation has misused, abused, or continuously exceeded the power or authority conferred by this chapter or its charter, or committed repeated violations of this chapter or its charter; or

(8)    The assets of the public corporation have been or are committed to be misapplied or wasted or illegally expended, or a material violation of this chapter has been committed or is about to be committed, and the City Council determines that intervention as provided in Section.440 would not be feasible under the circumstances.

(b)    The trustees appointed by the Superior Court shall take such actions as necessary during the trusteeship to achieve the object thereof as reasonable. The trustees shall have the power and authority to reorganize the public corporation and amend its charter and/or its rules and regulations; suspend and/or remove corporate officials, and manage the assets and affairs of the public corporation; and exercise any and all corporate powers as necessary or appropriate to fulfill outstanding agreements, to restore the capability of the public corporation to perform the functions and activities for which it was chartered, to reinstate its credit or creditability with its creditors or obligees; and, if so authorized by the Superior Court, to oversee its dissolution. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.460 TERMINATION.

The existence of the public corporation may be terminated by resolution of the City Council at or after a public hearing, held with notice to the public corporation and affording it a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present evidence, under any of the following circumstances:

(a)    The Board of Directors of the public corporation has requested the same by resolution;

(b)    The public corporation has discontinued its projects and activities for which chartered or remained inactive for a period of six (6) months in succession;

(c)    A judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction shall have become final, which judgment annuls the existence of the public corporation, or prohibits it from conducting all or the major portion of the activities for which chartered or permits recourse by creditors of the public corporation or other persons to the assets, property or credit of the city on account of any debts, obligations or liabilities of the public corporation;

(d)    Any one or more of the circumstances for imposition of a trusteeship stated in Section 22.01.450(a)(3) through (a)(8) inclusive, together with an affirmative finding by the City Council that a trusteeship would not be feasible under the circumstances or could not attain its objective; and that termination is warranted;

(e)    Repeal of enabling legislation authorizing public corporations, or amendment thereof or supplementary legislation thereto which singularly or cumulatively restricts all or the major portion of the activities for which the public corporation was chartered, or permits recourse by creditors of the public corporation or other persons to the assets, property or credit of the city on account of any debts, obligations, or liabilities of such public corporation; or

(f)    Continuous trusteeship of the public corporation for one year, or the imposition of a trusteeship for whatever cause(s) three (3) times in any one-year period. 

Subject to any limitations that may be imposed by the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, provision shall be made in any termination of the public corporation’s existence for causes designated in this section for payment of any obligations, bonds, notes or other contracts of indebtedness from the rights and assets of the public corporation so that such bonds and contracts be not impaired. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.470 DISSOLUTION - STATEMENT.

Upon enactment of a resolution by the City Council for dissolution of the public corporation or by the public corporation for its own dissolution other than for purposes of merger or reorganization in a plan approved by the Mayor and City Council, the public corporation shall file a dissolution statement signed by its chief executive officer setting forth:

(a)    The name and principal office of the public corporation;

(b)    The debts, obligations and liabilities of the public corporation, and the property and assets available to satisfy the same; the provisions to be made for satisfaction of outstanding liabilities and performance of executory contracts; and the estimated time of completion of its dissolution;

(c)    Any pending litigation or contingent liabilities;

(d)    The Board of Directors resolution providing for such dissolution and the date(s) and proceedings leading toward it adoption, whenever the dissolution be voluntary; and

(e)    A list of persons to be notified upon completion of the dissolution.

The Mayor shall review the statement filed and oversee the dissolution to protect the public interest and prevent impairment of obligation, or if so authorized by law, authorize or initiate proceedings in the Superior Court for the appointment and supervision of a receiver for such purposes. Upon satisfactory completion of dissolution proceedings, the Mayor shall indicate such dissolution by inscription of "Charter Canceled" on the original charter of the public corporation on file with the City Clerk and, when available, on the duplicate original of the public corporation, and the existence of the public corporation shall cease. The City Clerk shall give notice thereof to the Secretary of State and other persons requested by the public corporation in its dissolution statement. When applicable the Supreme Court of the State of Washington shall have jurisdiction to appoint and supervise receivers in accordance with RCW 35.21.750. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.480 MERGER WITH PUBLIC CORPORATION.

An application by a public corporation to merge with or into another public corporation organized under this chapter shall be processed in the same manner as a charter amendment by the public corporation and as an application for charter in accordance with Sections.090 and .100; and concurrence by City Council and approval by the mayor shall authorize the merger. In the event of such a merger, all of the rights, assets and property of the public corporation shall vest in the surviving public corporation or successor public corporation. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.490 TERMINATION - DISPOSITION OF ASSETS.

Upon termination of the existence of a public corporation, all of the rights, assets and property of the public corporation shall pass to and be distributed as provided by agreements with donors or other parties at the time of acquisition of the property regarding its disposition. Subject thereto, all of the rights, assets and property of a public corporation shall be tendered to the entity first listed below and, if not applicable or not accepted, to the next listed entity in succession:

(a)    To the surviving or successor public corporation in event of a merger as provided in Section 22.01.480;

(b)    To the city;

(c)    To some other local municipal corporation that performs similar activities or functions for which the assets were acquired or are devoted;

(d)    To the state for use in or application upon projects and activities or functions for which the assets were acquired or are devoted;

(e)    To the United States of America, any of its departments or agencies; a public authority created by the United States of America; or an organization acting as an authorized agent of the United States of America;

(f)    To a corporate fiduciary or other trustee, in trust for or use under the direction of any of the aforesaid entities for the purposes, projects and activities for which the assets were acquired or devoted;

(g)    To nonprofit organizations performing community service, charitable or educational activities similar to the projects and activities for which the assets were acquired; provided the City Council may in its discretion by resolution with respect to any particular dissolution:

(1)    Authorize the Mayor for and on behalf of the city to contract with the public corporation for the disposition of its rights, assets and property, and thereby designate the recipient and the terms and purposes of the transfer of assets and property; and

(2)    Establish procedures and terms and conditions for transfer and acceptance of the rights, assets and property of the public corporation to any of the aforesaid entities; and

(3)    Requires some or all of the aforesaid eligible entities identified in Subsections (b) through (e) to submit applications for transfer of such rights, assets and property of the public corporation setting forth the proposed uses thereof, and accept the application and contract with the entity or organization that would make the most appropriate use of such rights, assets and property in performing the projects and activities for which the public corporation was chartered.

All rights, property and assets of the public corporation upon transfer shall be vested in the entity receiving and accepting the same, together with any appurtenant obligations and liabilities. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.500 INSURANCE.

Each public corporation chartered pursuant to this chapter shall maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in the amount specified by the Mayor and City Council which is sufficient to cover potential claims for bodily injury, death or disability and for property damage which may arise from or be related to projects and activities of the city, naming the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.510 UNAUTHORIZED REPRESENTATION.

All persons who knowingly and intentionally assume to act for the public corporation without authority to do so shall be jointly and severally liable for the debts and liabilities incurred or arising as a result thereof. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.520 ANCILLARY AUTHORITY.

The Mayor and City Clerk are granted all such power and authority as reasonably necessary or convenient to enable them to administer this chapter efficiently and to perform the duties imposed in this chapter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.530 CONSTRUCTION.

This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.540 WAIVER.

When requested by a public corporation in order to secure or carry out federal grants or programs, the City Council may waive compliance by the public corporation with any particular provision of this chapter, other than Sections 22.01.010; 22.01.140(a)(3); 22.01.160; 22.01.170; 22.01.360 through 22.01.380; 22.01.390(c); 22.01.420; 22.01.440(a)(2), (a)(3) and (a)(8); and 22.01.450, which may be inconsistent with the terms and conditions of the federal grant or program insofar as necessary to enable the public corporation to secure and carry out such grant or program. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.550 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.

(a)    No current corporate official or employee shall:

(1)    Engage in any transaction or activity which is, or would to a reasonable person appear to be, in conflict with or incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties, or which impairs, or would to a reasonable person appear to impair, the officer’s or employee’s independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties;

(2)    Use his or her official position for a purpose that is, or would to a reasonable person appear to be primarily for the private benefit of the official or employee, rather than primarily for the benefit of the public corporation; or to achieve a private gain or an exception from duty or responsibility for the official or employee or any other person;

(3)    Solicit or receive any retainer, gift, loan, entertainment, favor or other thing of monetary value from any person where the retainer, gift, loan, entertainment, favor or other thing of monetary value has been solicited, received or given, or to a reasonable person would appear to have been special consideration or influence as to any action by such official or employee in his or her official capacity; provided that nothing shall prohibit contributions which are solicited or received and reported in accordance with applicable law;

(4)    Use or permit the use of any person, funds or property under his or her official control, direction, custody, or any corporate funds or corporate property, for a purpose which is or to a reasonable person would appear to be, for the private benefit of the official or employee or any other person or entity; provided, that nothing shall prevent the private use of corporate property which is available on equal terms to the public generally, or the use of corporate property in accordance with corporate policy for the conduct of official corporate business, if in fact the property is used appropriately;

(5)    Disclose or use any information gained by reason of his or her official position for the immediate or anticipated personal gain or benefit of the official, employee or any other person or entity; provided, that nothing shall prohibit the disclosure or use of information which is a matter of public knowledge, or which is available to the public on request;

(6)    Except in the course of official duties, assist any person in any corporate transaction where such corporate official or employee’s assistance is, or to a reasonable person would appear to be, enhanced by that official or employee’s position with the corporation; provided that this subsection shall not apply to any official or employee appearing on his or her own behalf or representing himself or herself as to any matter in which he or she has a proprietary interest, if not otherwise prohibited by law;

(7)    Have a financial or other private interest, direct or indirect, personally or through a member of his or her immediate family, in any contract or non-contractual transaction to which the corporation may be a party, and fail to disclose such interest prior to the formation of the contract, or prior to the time the corporation enters into the transaction; provided, that this paragraph shall not apply to any contract awarded through the public bid process in accordance with applicable law;

(8)    Be beneficially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract which may be made by, through or under the supervision of such officer, in whole or in part, or which may be made for the benefit of his office, or accept, directly or indirectly, any compensation, gratuity or reward in connection with such contract from any other person beneficially interested therein;

(9)    Fail to disqualify himself or herself from acting on any transaction which involves the corporation and any person who is, or at any time within the preceding twelve (12) month period has been a private client of his or hers, or of his or her firm or partnership. 

(b)    A corporate official or employee may perform official duties and participate in corporate affairs or activities when:

(1)    The proposed action or activities of the public corporation would not affect him or her in a manner different in kind from that of the public or community generally, or when the corporate official is a member of a substantial class of persons included in a service or assistance program and would not be affected in a manner different in kind from other member of the class; or

(2)    The charter or rules or regulations repose responsibility with the Board of Directors for an action that affects all Board of Directors members in their official capacity alike; or

(3)    After disclosure of his or her personal interest, the Board of Directors finds, by majority recorded vote following discussion in open meeting during which public comment is permitted, that the official’s participation would further the public interest notwithstanding the personal interest disclosed.

(c)    In all other instances, any corporate official who may have a direct or indirect financial interest in any matter coming before the Board of Directors, shall disclose to the Board of Directors the nature and extent of such interest, and refrain from voting, participating in Board of Directors deliberations as an official, or attempting to influence any other corporation official on the matter. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)


22.01.560 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

Violation of any provision of Section 550 constitutes an infraction for which a monetary fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), may be assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction. Violation may be proven by a preponderance of evidence and need not be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ord. 4328 (in part), 1991)



-----------------------------

The Bremerton Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 5397, passed June 3, 2020.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Bremerton Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: https://www.bremertonwa.gov/ City Telephone: (360) 473-5323

Code Publishing Company